Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


Harry Potter Series (PDFs)





Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


J.K. Rowling

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.1)



/



THE BOY WHO LIVED

Mr. and Mrs. Dursley, of number four, Privet Drive,were proud to say that they were perfectly normal,thank you very much. They were the last people you’dexpect to be involved in anything strange ormysterious, because they just didn’t hold with suchnonsense.

Mr. Dursley was the director of a firm calledGrunnings, which made drills. He was a big, beefyman with hardly any neck, although he did have avery large mustache. Mrs. Dursley was thin andblonde and had nearly twice the usual amount ofneck, which came in very useful as she spent somuch of her time craning over garden fences, spyingon the neighbors. The Dursleys had a small soncalled Dudley and in their opinion there was no finerboy anywhere.

The Dursleys had everything they wanted, but theyalso had a secret, and their greatest fear was thatsomebody would discover it. They didn’t think theycould bear it if anyone found out about the Potters.Mrs. Potter was Mrs. Dursley’s sister, but they hadn’t

Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

met for several years; in fact, Mrs. Dursley pretendedshe didn’t have a sister, because her sister and hergood-for-nothing husband were as unDursleyish as itwas possible to be. The Dursleys shuddered to thinkwhat the neighbors would say if the Potters arrived inthe street. The Dursleys knew that the Potters had asmall son, too, but they had never even seen him.

This boy was another good reason for keeping thePotters away; they didn’t want Dudley mixing with achild like that.

When Mr. and Mrs. Dursley woke up on the dull, grayTuesday our story starts, there was nothing about thecloudy sky outside to suggest that strange andmysterious things would soon be happening all overthe country. Mr. Dursley hummed as he picked outhis most boring tie for work, and Mrs. Dursleygossiped away happily as she wrestled a screamingDudley into his high chair.

None of them noticed a large, tawny owl flutter pastthe window.

At half past eight, Mr. Dursley picked up hisbriefcase, pecked Mrs. Dursley on the cheek, andtried to kiss Dudley good-bye but missed, becauseDudley was now having a tantrum and throwing hiscereal at the walls. “Little tyke,” chortled Mr. Dursleyas he left the house. He got into his car and backedout of number four’s drive.

It was on the corner of the street that he noticed thefirst sign of something peculiar — a cat reading amap. For a second, Mr. Dursley didn’t realize what hehad seen — then he jerked his head around to lookagain. There was a tabby cat standing on the cornerof Privet Drive, but there wasn’t a map in sight. Whatcould he have been thinking of? It must have been atrick of the light. Mr. Dursley blinked and stared atPage | 3 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

the cat. It stared back. As Mr. Dursley drove aroundthe corner and up the road, he watched the cat in hismirror. It was now reading the sign that said PrivetDrive — no, looking at the sign; cats couldn’t readmaps or signs. Mr. Dursley gave himself a little shakeand put the cat out of his mind. As he drove towardtown he thought of nothing except a large order ofdrills he was hoping to get that day.

But on the edge of town, drills were driven out of hismind by something else. As he sat in the usualmorning traffic jam, he couldn’t help noticing thatthere seemed to be a lot of strangely dressed peopleabout. People in cloaks. Mr. Dursley couldn’t bearpeople who dressed in funny clothes — the getupsyou saw on young people! He supposed this was somestupid new fashion. He drummed his fingers on thesteering wheel and his eyes fell on a huddle of theseweirdos standing quite close by. They were whisperingexcitedly together. Mr. Dursley was enraged to seethat a couple of them weren’t young at all; why, thatman had to be older than he was, and wearing anemerald-green cloak! The nerve of him! But then itstruck Mr. Dursley that this was probably some sillystunt — these people were obviously collecting forsomething ... yes, that would be it. The traffic movedon and a few minutes later, Mr. Dursley arrived in theGrunnings parking lot, his mind back on drills.

Mr. Dursley always sat with his back to the window inhis office on the ninth floor. If he hadn’t, he mighthave found it harder to concentrate on drills thatmorning. He didn’t see the owls swooping past inbroad daylight, though people down in the street did;they pointed and gazed open-mouthed as owl afterowl sped overhead. Most of them had never seen anowl even at nighttime. Mr. Dursley, however, had aperfectly normal, owl-free morning. He yelled at fivedifferent people. He made several important telephonePage | 4 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

calls and shouted a bit more. He was in a very goodmood until lunchtime, when he thought he’d stretchhis legs and walk across the road to buy himself abun from the bakery.

He’d forgotten all about the people in cloaks until hepassed a group of them next to the baker’s. He eyedthem angrily as he passed. He didn’t know why, butthey made him uneasy. This bunch were whisperingexcitedly, too, and he couldn’t see a single collectingtin. It was on his way back past them, clutching alarge doughnut in a bag, that he caught a few wordsof what they were saying.

“The Potters, that’s right, that’s what I heard —”

“— yes, their son, Harry —”

Mr. Dursley stopped dead. Fear flooded him. Helooked back at the whisperers as if he wanted to saysomething to them, but thought better of it.

He dashed back across the road, hurried up to hisoffice, snapped at his secretary not to disturb him,seized his telephone, and had almost finished dialinghis home number when he changed his mind. He putthe receiver back down and stroked his mustache,thinking ... no, he was being stupid. Potter wasn’tsuch an unusual name. He was sure there were lotsof people called Potter who had a son called Harry.Come to think of it, he wasn’t even sure his nephewwas called Harry. He’d never even seen the boy. Itmight have been Harvey. Or Harold. There was nopoint in worrying Mrs. Dursley; she always got soupset at any mention of her sister. He didn’t blameher — if he’d had a sister like that ... but all thesame, those people in cloaks ...

Page | 5 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

He found it a lot harder to concentrate on drills thatafternoon and when he left the building at five o’clock,he was still so worried that he walked straight intosomeone just outside the door.

“Sorry,” he grunted, as the tiny old man stumbledand almost fell. It was a few seconds before Mr.Dursley realized that the man was wearing a violetcloak. He didn’t seem at all upset at being almostknocked to the ground. On the contrary, his face splitinto a wide smile and he said in a squeaky voice thatmade passersby stare, “Don’t be sorry, my dear sir,for nothing could upset me today! Rejoice, for You-Know-Who has gone at last! Even Muggles likeyourself should be celebrating, this happy, happyday!”

And the old man hugged Mr. Dursley around themiddle and walked off.

Mr. Dursley stood rooted to the spot. He had beenhugged by a complete stranger. He also thought hehad been called a Muggle, whatever that was. He wasrattled. He hurried to his car and set off for home,hoping he was imagining things, which he had neverhoped before, because he didn’t approve ofimagination.

As he pulled into the driveway of number four, thefirst thing he saw — and it didn’t improve his mood —was the tabby cat he’d spotted that morning. It wasnow sitting on his garden wall. He was sure it was thesame one; it had the same markings around its eyes.

“Shoo!” said Mr. Dursley loudly.

The cat didn’t move. It just gave him a stern look.

Was this normal cat behavior? Mr. Dursley wondered.Trying to pull himself together, he let himself into the

Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

house. He was still determined not to mentionanything to his wife.

Mrs. Dursley had had a nice, normal day. She toldhim over dinner all about Mrs. Next Door’s problemswith her daughter and how Dudley had learned a newword (“Won’t!”). Mr. Dursley tried to act normally.When Dudley had been put to bed, he went into theliving room in time to catch the last report on theevening news:

“And finally, bird-watchers everywhere have reportedthat the nation’s owls have been behaving veryunusually today. Although owls normally hunt atnight and are hardly ever seen in daylight, there havebeen hundreds of sightings of these birds flying inevery direction since sunrise. Experts are unable toexplain why the owls have suddenly changed theirsleeping pattern.” The newscaster allowed himself agrin. “Most mysterious. And now, over to JimMcGuffin with the weather. Going to be any moreshowers of owls tonight, Jim?”

“Well, Ted,” said the weatherman, “I don’t know aboutthat, but it’s not only the owls that have been actingoddly today. Viewers as far apart as Kent, Yorkshire,and Dundee have been phoning in to tell me thatinstead of the rain I promised yesterday, they’ve had adownpour of shooting stars! Perhaps people havebeen celebrating Bonfire Night early — it’s not untilnext week, folks! But I can promise a wet nighttonight.”

Mr. Dursley sat frozen in his armchair. Shooting starsall over Britain? Owls flying by daylight? Mysteriouspeople in cloaks all over the place? And a whisper, awhisper about the Potters ...

Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Dursley came into the living room carrying twocups of tea. It was no good. He’d have to saysomething to her. He cleared his throat nervously. “Er— Petunia, dear — you haven’t heard from your sisterlately, have you?”

As he had expected, Mrs. Dursley looked shocked andangry. After all, they normally pretended she didn’thave a sister.

“No,” she said sharply. “Why?”

“Funny stuff on the news,” Mr. Dursley mumbled.“Owls ... shooting stars ... and there were a lot offunny-looking people in town today ...”

“So?” snapped Mrs. Dursley.

“Well, I just thought ... maybe ... it was something todo with ... you know ... her crowd.”

Mrs. Dursley sipped her tea through pursed lips. Mr.Dursley wondered whether he dared tell her he’dheard the name “Potter.” He decided he didn’t dare.Instead he said, as casually as he could, “Their son —he’d be about Dudley’s age now, wouldn’t he?”

“I suppose so,” said Mrs. Dursley stiffly.

“What’s his name again? Howard, isn’t it?”

“Harry. Nasty, common name, if you ask me.”

“Oh, yes,” said Mr. Dursley, his heart sinkinghorribly. “Yes, I quite agree.”

He didn’t say another word on the subject as theywent upstairs to bed. While Mrs. Dursley was in thebathroom, Mr. Dursley crept to the bedroom window

Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

and peered down into the front garden. The cat wasstill there. It was staring down Privet Drive as thoughit were waiting for something.

Was he imagining things? Could all this haveanything to do with the Potters? If it did ... if it got outthat they were related to a pair of — well, he didn’tthink he could bear it.

The Dursleys got into bed. Mrs. Dursley fell asleepquickly but Mr. Dursley lay awake, turning it all overin his mind. His last, comforting thought before he fellasleep was that even if the Potters were involved,there was no reason for them to come near him andMrs. Dursley. The Potters knew very well what he andPetunia thought about them and their kind. ... Hecouldn’t see how he and Petunia could get mixed upin anything that might be going on — he yawned andturned over — it couldn’t affect them. ...

How very wrong he was.

Mr. Dursley might have been drifting into an uneasysleep, but the cat on the wall outside was showing nosign of sleepiness. It was sitting as still as a statue,its eyes fixed unblinkingly on the far corner of PrivetDrive. It didn’t so much as quiver when a car doorslammed on the next street, nor when two owlsswooped overhead. In fact, it was nearly midnightbefore the cat moved at all.

A man appeared on the corner the cat had beenwatching, appeared so suddenly and silently you’dhave thought he’d just popped out of the ground. Thecat’s tail twitched and its eyes narrowed.

Nothing like this man had ever been seen on PrivetDrive. He was tall, thin, and very old, judging by thesilver of his hair and beard, which were both long

Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

enough to tuck into his belt. He was wearing longrobes, a purple cloak that swept the ground, andhigh-heeled, buckled boots. His blue eyes were light,bright, and sparkling behind half-moon spectaclesand his nose was very long and crooked, as though ithad been broken at least twice. This man’s name wasAlbus Dumbledore.

Albus Dumbledore didn’t seem to realize that he hadjust arrived in a street where everything from hisname to his boots was unwelcome. He was busyrummaging in his cloak, looking for something. Buthe did seem to realize he was being watched, becausehe looked up suddenly at the cat, which was stillstaring at him from the other end of the street. Forsome reason, the sight of the cat seemed to amusehim. He chuckled and muttered, “I should haveknown.”

He found what he was looking for in his insidepocket. It seemed to be a silver cigarette lighter. Heflicked it open, held it up in the air, and clicked it.The nearest street lamp went out with a little pop. Heclicked it again — the next lamp flickered intodarkness. Twelve times he clicked the Put-Outer,until the only lights left on the whole street were twotiny pinpricks in the distance, which were the eyes ofthe cat watching him. If anyone looked out of theirwindow now, even beady-eyed Mrs. Dursley, theywouldn’t be able to see anything that was happeningdown on the pavement. Dumbledore slipped the Put-Outer back inside his cloak and set off down thestreet toward number four, where he sat down on thewall next to the cat. He didn’t look at it, but after amoment he spoke to it.

“Fancy seeing you here, Professor McGonagall.”

Page | 10 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

He turned to smile at the tabby, but it had gone.Instead he was smiling at a rather severe-lookingwoman who was wearing square glasses exactly theshape of the markings the cat had had around itseyes. She, too, was wearing a cloak, an emerald one.Her black hair was drawn into a tight bun. Shelooked distinctly ruffled.

“How did you know it was me?” she asked.

“My dear Professor, I’ve never seen a cat sit so stiffly.”

“You’d be stiff if you’d been sitting on a brick wall allday,” said Professor McGonagall.

“All day? When you could have been celebrating? Imust have passed a dozen feasts and parties on myway here.”

Professor McGonagall sniffed angrily.

“Oh yes, everyone’s celebrating, all right,” she saidimpatiently. “You’d think they’d be a bit more careful,but no — even the Muggles have noticed something’sgoing on. It was on their news.” She jerked her headback at the Dursleys’ dark living-room window. “Iheard it. Flocks of owls ... shooting stars. ... Well,they’re not completely stupid. They were bound tonotice something. Shooting stars down in Kent — I’llbet that was Dedalus Diggle. He never had muchsense.”

“You can’t blame them,” said Dumbledore gently.“We’ve had precious little to celebrate for elevenyears.”

“I know that,” said Professor McGonagall irritably.

“But that’s no reason to lose our heads. People arebeing downright careless, out on the streets in broad

Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

daylight, not even dressed in Muggle clothes,swapping rumors.”

She threw a sharp, sideways glance at Dumbledorehere, as though hoping he was going to tell hersomething, but he didn’t, so she went on. “A finething it would be if, on the very day You-Know-Whoseems to have disappeared at last, the Muggles foundout about us all. I suppose he really has gone,Dumbledore?”

“It certainly seems so,” said Dumbledore. “We havemuch to be thankful for. Would you care for a lemondrop?”

“A what?”

“A lemon drop. They’re a kind of Muggle sweet I’mrather fond of.”

“No, thank you,” said Professor McGonagall coldly, asthough she didn’t think this was the moment forlemon drops. “As I say, even if You-Know-Who hasgone —”

“My dear Professor, surely a sensible person likeyourself can call him by his name? All this You-Know-Who’ nonsense — for eleven years I have beentrying to persuade people to call him by his propername: Voldemort.” Professor McGonagall flinched, butDumbledore, who was unsticking two lemon drops,seemed not to notice. “It all gets so confusing if wekeep saying You-Know-Who.’ I have never seen anyreason to be frightened of saying Voldemort’s name.”

“I know you haven’t,” said Professor McGonagall,sounding half exasperated, half admiring. “But you’redifferent. Everyone knows you’re the only one You-Know- oh, all right, Voldemort, was frightened of.”

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“You flatter me,” said Dumbledore calmly. “Voldemorthad powers I will never have.”

“Only because you’re too — well — noble to usethem.”

“It’s lucky it’s dark. I haven’t blushed so much sinceMadam Pomfrey told me she liked my new earmuffs.”

Professor McGonagall shot a sharp look atDumbledore and said, “The owls are nothing next tothe rumors that are flying around. You know whateveryone’s saying? About why he’s disappeared?

About what finally stopped him?”

It seemed that Professor McGonagall had reached thepoint she was most anxious to discuss, the realreason she had been waiting on a cold, hard wall allday, for neither as a cat nor as a woman had shefixed Dumbledore with such a piercing stare as shedid now. It was plain that whatever “everyone” wassaying, she was not going to believe it untilDumbledore told her it was true. Dumbledore,however, was choosing another lemon drop and didnot answer.

“What they’re saying,” she pressed on, “is that lastnight Voldemort turned up in Godric’s Hollow. Hewent to find the Potters. The rumor is that Lily andJames Potter are — are — that they’re — dead.”

Dumbledore bowed his head. Professor McGonagallgasped.

“Lily and James ... I can’t believe it ... I didn’t want tobelieve it ... Oh, Albus ...”

Dumbledore reached out and patted her on theshoulder. “I know ... I know ...” he said heavily.

Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Professor McGonagall’s voice trembled as she wenton. “That’s not all. They’re saying he tried to kill thePotters’ son, Harry. But — he couldn’t. He couldn’tkill that little boy. No one knows why, or how, butthey’re saying that when he couldn’t kill Harry Potter,Voldemort’s power somehow broke — and that’s whyhe’s gone.”

Dumbledore nodded glumly.

“It’s — it’s true?” faltered Professor McGonagall. “Afterall he’s done ... all the people he’s killed ... he couldn’tkill a little boy? It’s just astounding ... of all thethings to stop him ... but how in the name of heavendid Harry survive?”

“We can only guess,” said Dumbledore. “We maynever know.”

Professor McGonagall pulled out a lace handkerchiefand dabbed at her eyes beneath her spectacles.Dumbledore gave a great sniff as he took a goldenwatch from his pocket and examined it. It was a veryodd watch. It had twelve hands but no numbers;instead, little planets were moving around the edge. Itmust have made sense to Dumbledore, though,because he put it back in his pocket and said,“Hagrid’s late. I suppose it was he who told you I’d behere, by the way?”

“Yes,” said Professor McGonagall. “And I don’tsuppose you’re going to tell me why you’re here, of allplaces?”

“I’ve come to bring Harry to his aunt and uncle.They’re the only family he has left now.”

“You don’t mean — you can’t mean the people wholive here?” cried Professor McGonagall, jumping to her

Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

feet and pointing at number four. “Dumbledore — youcan’t. I’ve been watching them all day. You couldn’tfind two people who are less like us. And they’ve gotthis son — I saw him kicking his mother all the wayup the street, screaming for sweets. Harry Pottercome and live here!”

“It’s the best place for him,” said Dumbledore firmly.“His aunt and uncle will be able to explain everythingto him when he’s older. I’ve written them a letter.”

“A letter?” repeated Professor McGonagall faintly,sitting back down on the wall. “Really, Dumbledore,you think you can explain all this in a letter? Thesepeople will never understand him! He’ll be famous —a legend — I wouldn’t be surprised if today wasknown as Harry Potter Day in the future — there willbe books written about Harry — every child in ourworld will know his name!”

“Exactly,” said Dumbledore, looking very seriouslyover the top of his half-moon glasses. “It would beenough to turn any boy’s head. Famous before he canwalk and talk! Famous for something he won’t evenremember! Can’t you see how much better off he’ll be,growing up away from all that until he’s ready to takeit?”

Professor McGonagall opened her mouth, changed hermind, swallowed, and then said, “Yes — yes, you’reright, of course. But how is the boy getting here,Dumbledore?” She eyed his cloak suddenly as thoughshe thought he might be hiding Harry underneath it.

“Hagrid’s bringing him.”

“You think it — wise — to trust Hagrid withsomething as important as this?”

Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I would trust Hagrid with my life,” said Dumbledore.

“I’m not saying his heart isn’t in the right place,” saidProfessor McGonagall grudgingly, “but you can’tpretend he’s not careless. He does tend to — whatwas that?”

A low rumbling sound had broken the silence aroundthem. It grew steadily louder as they looked up anddown the street for some sign of a headlight; itswelled to a roar as they both looked up at the sky —and a huge motorcycle fell out of the air and landedon the road in front of them.

If the motorcycle was huge, it was nothing to the mansitting astride it. He was almost twice as tall as anormal man and at least five times as wide. He lookedsimply too big to be allowed, and so wild — longtangles of bushy black hair and beard hid most of hisface, he had hands the size of trash can lids, and hisfeet in their leather boots were like baby dolphins. Inhis vast, muscular arms he was holding a bundle ofblankets.

“Hagrid,” said Dumbledore, sounding relieved. “Atlast. And where did you get that motorcycle?”

“Borrowed it, Professor Dumbledore, sir,” said thegiant, climbing carefully off the motorcycle as hespoke. “Young Sirius Black lent it to me. I’ve got him,sir.”

“No problems, were there?”

“No, sir — house was almost destroyed, but I got himout all right before the Muggles started swarmin’around. He fell asleep as we was flyin’ over Bristol.”

Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore and Professor McGonagall bent forwardover the bundle of blankets. Inside, just visible, was ababy boy, fast asleep. Under a tuft of jet-black hairover his forehead they could see a curiously shapedcut, like a bolt of lightning.

“Is that where — ?” whispered Professor McGonagall.

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “Hell have that scar forever.”

“Couldn’t you do something about it, Dumbledore?”

“Even if I could, I wouldn’t. Scars can come in handy.

I have one myself above my left knee that is a perfectmap of the London Underground. Well — give himhere, Hagrid — we’d better get this over with.”

Dumbledore took Harry in his arms and turnedtoward the Dursleys’ house.

“Could I — could I say good-bye to him, sir?” askedHagrid. He bent his great, shaggy head over Harryand gave him what must have been a very scratchy,whiskery kiss. Then, suddenly, Hagrid let out a howllike a wounded dog.

“Shhh!” hissed Professor McGonagall, “you’ll wake theMuggles!”

“S-s-sorry,” sobbed Hagrid, taking out a large, spottedhandkerchief and burying his face in it. “But I c-c-can’t stand it — Lily an’ James dead — an’ poor littleHarry off ter live with Muggles —”

“Yes, yes, it’s all very sad, but get a grip on yourself,Hagrid, or we’ll be found,” Professor McGonagallwhispered, patting Hagrid gingerly on the arm asDumbledore stepped over the low garden wall andwalked to the front door. He laid Harry gently on thePage | 17 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

doorstep, took a letter out of his cloak, tucked itinside Harry’s blankets, and then came back to theother two. For a full minute the three of them stoodand looked at the little bundle; Hagrid’s shouldersshook, Professor McGonagall blinked furiously, andthe twinkling light that usually shone fromDumbledore’s eyes seemed to have gone out.

“Well,” said Dumbledore finally, “that’s that. We’ve nobusiness staying here. We may as well go and join thecelebrations.”

“Yeah,” said Hagrid in a very muffled voice, “I’d bestget this bike away. G’night, Professor McGonagall —Professor Dumbledore, sir.”

Wiping his streaming eyes on his jacket sleeve, Hagridswung himself onto the motorcycle and kicked theengine into life; with a roar it rose into the air and offinto the night.

“I shall see you soon, I expect, Professor McGonagall,”said Dumbledore, nodding to her. ProfessorMcGonagall blew her nose in reply.

Dumbledore turned and walked back down the street.On the corner he stopped and took out the silver Put-Outer. He clicked it once, and twelve balls of lightsped back to their street lamps so that Privet Driveglowed suddenly orange and he could make out atabby cat slinking around the corner at the other endof the street. He could just see the bundle of blanketson the step of number four.

“Good luck, Harry,” he murmured. He turned on hisheel and with a swish of his cloak, he was gone.

A breeze ruffled the neat hedges of Privet Drive, whichlay silent and tidy under the inky sky, the very last

Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

place you would expect astonishing things to happen.Harry Potter rolled over inside his blankets withoutwaking up. One small hand closed on the letterbeside him and he slept on, not knowing he wasspecial, not knowing he was famous, not knowing hewould be woken in a few hours’ time by Mrs.

Dursley’s scream as she opened the front door to putout the milk bottles, nor that he would spend the nextfew weeks being prodded and pinched by his cousinDudley. ... He couldn’t know that at this verymoment, people meeting in secret all over the countrywere holding up their glasses and saying in hushedvoices: “To Harry Potter — the boy who lived!”

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





THE VANASHIG GLASS

Nearly ten years had passed since the Dursleys hadwoken up to find their nephew on the front step, butPrivet Drive had hardly changed at all. The sun roseon the same tidy front gardens and lit up the brassnumber four on the Dursleys’ front door; it crept intotheir living room, which was almost exactly the sameas it had been on the night when Mr. Dursley hadseen that fateful news report about the owls. Only thephotographs on the mantelpiece really showed howmuch time had passed. Ten years ago, there had beenlots of pictures of what looked like a large pink beachball wearing different-colored bonnets — but DudleyDursley was no longer a baby, and now thephotographs showed a large blond boy riding his firstbicycle, on a carousel at the fair, playing a computergame with his father, being hugged and kissed by hismother. The room held no sign at all that another boylived in the house, too.

Yet Harry Potter was still there, asleep at the moment,but not for long. His Aunt Petunia was awake and it

Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling



was her shrill voice that made the first noise of theday.

“Up! Get up! Now!”

Harry woke with a start. His aunt rapped on the dooragain.

“Up!” she screeched. Harry heard her walking towardthe kitchen and then the sound of the frying panbeing put on the stove. He rolled onto his back andtried to remember the dream he had been having. Ithad been a good one. There had been a flyingmotorcycle in it. He had a funny feeling he’d had thesame dream before.

His aunt was back outside the door.

“Are you up yet?” she demanded.

“Nearly,” said Harry.

“Well, get a move on, I want you to look after thebacon. And don’t you dare let it burn, I wanteverything perfect on Duddy’s birthday.”

Harry groaned.

“What did you say?” his aunt snapped through thedoor.

“Nothing, nothing ...”

Dudley’s birthday — how could he have forgotten?Harry got slowly out of bed and started looking forsocks. He found a pair under his bed and, afterpulling a spider off one of them, put them on. Harrywas used to spiders, because the cupboard under thestairs was full of them, and that was where he slept.Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

When he was dressed he went down the hall into thekitchen. The table was almost hidden beneath allDudley’s birthday presents. It looked as thoughDudley had gotten the new computer he wanted, notto mention the second television and the racing bike.Exactly why Dudley wanted a racing bike was amystery to Harry, as Dudley was very fat and hatedexercise — unless of course it involved punchingsomebody. Dudley’s favorite punching bag was Harry,but he couldn’t often catch him. Harry didn’t look it,but he was very fast.

Perhaps it had something to do with living in a darkcupboard, but Harry had always been small andskinny for his age. He looked even smaller andskinnier than he really was because all he had towear were old clothes of Dudley’s, and Dudley wasabout four times bigger than he was. Harry had a thinface, knobbly knees, black hair, and bright greeneyes. He wore round glasses held together with a lotof Scotch tape because of all the times Dudley hadpunched him on the nose. The only thing Harry likedabout his own appearance was a very thin scar on hisforehead that was shaped like a bolt of lightning. Hehad had it as long as he could remember, and thefirst question he could ever remember asking hisAunt Petunia was how he had gotten it.

“In the car crash when your parents died,” she hadsaid. “And don’t ask questions.”

Don’t ask questions — that was the first rule for aquiet life with the Dursleys.

Uncle Vernon entered the kitchen as Harry wasturning over the bacon.

“Comb your hair!” he barked, by way of a morninggreeting.

Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

About once a week, Uncle Vernon looked over the topof his newspaper and shouted that Harry needed ahaircut. Harry must have had more haircuts than therest of the boys in his class put together, but it madeno difference, his hair simply grew that way — all overthe place.

Harry was frying eggs by the time Dudley arrived inthe kitchen with his mother. Dudley looked a lot likeUncle Vernon. He had a large pink face, not muchneck, small, watery blue eyes, and thick blond hairthat lay smoothly on his thick, fat head. Aunt Petuniaoften said that Dudley looked like a baby angel —Harry often said that Dudley looked like a pig in awig.

Harry put the plates of egg and bacon on the table,which was difficult as there wasn’t much room.Dudley, meanwhile, was counting his presents. Hisface fell.

“Thirty-six,” he said, looking up at his mother andfather. “That’s two less than last year.”

“Darling, you haven’t counted Auntie Marge’s present,see, it’s here under this big one from Mommy andDaddy.”

“All right, thirty-seven then,” said Dudley, going redin the face. Harry, who could see a huge Dudleytantrum coming on, began wolfing down his bacon asfast as possible in case Dudley turned the table over.

Aunt Petunia obviously scented danger, too, becauseshe said quickly, “And we’ll buy you another twopresents while we’re out today. How’s that, popkin?Two more presents. Is that all right?”

Page | 23 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Dudley thought for a moment. It looked like hardwork. Finally he said slowly, “So I’ll have thirty ...thirty ...”

“Thirty-nine, sweetums,” said Aunt Petunia.

“Oh.” Dudley sat down heavily and grabbed thenearest parcel. “All right then.”

Uncle Vernon chuckled.

“Little tyke wants his money’s worth, just like hisfather. ’Atta boy, Dudley!” He ruffled Dudley’s hair.

At that moment the telephone rang and Aunt Petuniawent to answer it while Harry and Uncle Vernonwatched Dudley unwrap the racing bike, a videocamera, a remote control airplane, sixteen newcomputer games, and a VCR. He was ripping thepaper off a gold wristwatch when Aunt Petunia cameback from the telephone looking both angry andworried.

“Bad news, Vernon,” she said. “Mrs. Figg’s broken herleg. She can’t take him.” She jerked her head inHarry’s direction.

Dudley’s mouth fell open in horror, but Harry’s heartgave a leap. Every year on Dudley’s birthday, hisparents took him and a friend out for the day, toadventure parks, hamburger restaurants, or themovies. Every year, Harry was left behind with Mrs.Figg, a mad old lady who lived two streets away.

Harry hated it there. The whole house smelled ofcabbage and Mrs. Figg made him look at photographsof all the cats she’d ever owned.

“Now what?” said Aunt Petunia, looking furiously atHarry as though he’d planned this. Harry knew he

Page | 24 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

ought to feel sorry that Mrs. Figg had broken her leg,but it wasn’t easy when he reminded himself it wouldbe a whole year before he had to look at Tibbies,Snowy, Mr. Paws, and Tufty again.

“We could phone Marge,” Uncle Vernon suggested.

“Don’t be silly, Vernon, she hates the boy.”

The Dursleys often spoke about Harry like this, asthough he wasn’t there — or rather, as though he wassomething very nasty that couldn’t understand them,like a slug.

“What about what’s-her-name, your friend —Yvonne?”

“On vacation in Majorca,” snapped Aunt Petunia.

“You could just leave me here,” Harry put in hopefully(he’d be able to watch what he wanted on televisionfor a change and maybe even have a go on Dudley’scomputer).

Aunt Petunia looked as though she’d just swallowed alemon.

“And come back and find the house in ruins?” shesnarled.

“I won’t blow up the house,” said Harry, but theyweren’t listening.

“I suppose we could take him to the zoo,” said AuntPetunia slowly, "... and leave him in the car. ...”

“That cars new, he’s not sitting in it alone. ...”

Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Dudley began to cry loudly. In fact, he wasn’t reallycrying — it had been years since he’d really cried —but he knew that if he screwed up his face andwailed, his mother would give him anything hewanted.

“Dinky Duddydums, don’t cry, Mummy won’t let himspoil your special day!” she cried, flinging her armsaround him.

“I ... don’t ... want ... him ... t-t-to come!” Dudleyyelled between huge, pretend sobs. “He always sp-spoils everything!” He shot Harry a nasty grin throughthe gap in his mothers arms.

Just then, the doorbell rang — “Oh, good Lord,they’re here!” said Aunt Petunia frantically — and amoment later, Dudley’s best friend, Piers Polkiss,walked in with his mother. Piers was a scrawny boywith a face like a rat. He was usually the one whoheld people’s arms behind their backs while Dudleyhit them. Dudley stopped pretending to cry at once.

Half an hour later, Harry, who couldn’t believe hisluck, was sitting in the back of the Dursleys’ car withPiers and Dudley, on the way to the zoo for the firsttime in his life. His aunt and uncle hadn’t been ableto think of anything else to do with him, but beforethey’d left, Uncle Vernon had taken Harry aside.

“I’m warning you,” he had said, putting his largepurple face right up close to Harry’s, “I’m warning younow, boy — any funny business, anything at all —and you’ll be in that cupboard from now untilChristmas.”

I’m not going to do anything,” said Harry, “honestly

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

But Uncle Vernon didn’t believe him. No one ever did.

The problem was, strange things often happenedaround Harry and it was just no good telling theDursleys he didn’t make them happen.

Once, Aunt Petunia, tired of Harry coming back fromthe barbers looking as though he hadn’t been at all,had taken a pair of kitchen scissors and cut his hairso short he was almost bald except for his bangs,which she left “to hide that horrible scar.” Dudley hadlaughed himself silly at Harry, who spent a sleeplessnight imagining school the next day, where he wasalready laughed at for his baggy clothes and tapedglasses. Next morning, however, he had gotten up tofind his hair exactly as it had been before AuntPetunia had sheared it off. He had been given a weekin his cupboard for this, even though he had tried toexplain that he couldn’t explain how it had grownback so quickly.

Another time, Aunt Petunia had been trying to forcehim into a revolting old sweater of Dudley’s (brownwith orange puff balls). The harder she tried to pull itover his head, the smaller it seemed to become, untilfinally it might have fitted a hand puppet, butcertainly wouldn’t fit Harry. Aunt Petunia had decidedit must have shrunk in the wash and, to his greatrelief, Harry wasn’t punished.

On the other hand, he’d gotten into terrible troublefor being found on the roof of the school kitchens.Dudley’s gang had been chasing him as usual when,as much to Harry’s surprise as anyone else’s, there hewas sitting on the chimney. The Dursleys hadreceived a very angry letter from Harry’s headmistresstelling them Harry had been climbing schoolbuildings. But all he’d tried to do (as he shouted atUncle Vernon through the locked door of hisPage | 27 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

cupboard) was jump behind the big trash cansoutside the kitchen doors. Harry supposed that thewind must have caught him in mid-jump.

But today, nothing was going to go wrong. It was evenworth being with Dudley and Piers to be spending theday somewhere that wasn’t school, his cupboard, orMrs. Figg’s cabbage-smelling living room.

While he drove, Uncle Vernon complained to AuntPetunia. He liked to complain about things: people atwork, Harry, the council, Harry, the bank, and Harrywere just a few of his favorite subjects. This morning,it was motorcycles.

"... roaring along like maniacs, the young hoodlums,”he said, as a motorcycle overtook them.

“I had a dream about a motorcycle,” said Harry,remembering suddenly. “It was flying.”

Uncle Vernon nearly crashed into the car in front. Heturned right around in his seat and yelled at Harry,his face like a gigantic beet with a mustache:“MOTORCYCLES DONT FLY!”

Dudley and Piers sniggered.

“I know they don’t,” said Harry. “It was only a dream.”

But he wished he hadn’t said anything. If there wasone thing the Dursleys hated even more than hisasking questions, it was his talking about anythingacting in a way it shouldn’t, no matter if it was in adream or even a cartoon — they seemed to think hemight get dangerous ideas.

It was a very sunny Saturday and the zoo wascrowded with families. The Dursleys bought Dudley

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

and Piers large chocolate ice creams at the entranceand then, because the smiling lady in the van hadasked Harry what he wanted before they could hurryhim away, they bought him a cheap lemon ice pop. Itwasn’t bad, either, Harry thought, licking it as theywatched a gorilla scratching its head who lookedremarkably like Dudley, except that it wasn’t blond.

Harry had the best morning he’d had in a long time.He was careful to walk a little way apart from theDursleys so that Dudley and Piers, who were startingto get bored with the animals by lunchtime, wouldn’tfall back on their favorite hobby of hitting him. Theyate in the zoo restaurant, and when Dudley had atantrum because his knickerbocker glory didn’t haveenough ice cream on top, Uncle Vernon bought himanother one and Harry was allowed to finish the first.

Harry felt, afterward, that he should have known itwas all too good to last.

After lunch they went to the reptile house. It was cooland dark in there, with lit windows all along thewalls. Behind the glass, all sorts of lizards and snakeswere crawling and slithering over bits of wood andstone. Dudley and Piers wanted to see huge,poisonous cobras and thick, man-crushing pythons.Dudley quickly found the largest snake in the place. Itcould have wrapped its body twice around UncleVernon’s car and crushed it into a trash can — but atthe moment it didn’t look in the mood. In fact, it wasfast asleep.

Dudley stood with his nose pressed against the glass,staring at the glistening brown coils.

“Make it move,” he whined at his father. Uncle Vernontapped on the glass, but the snake didn’t budge.

Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Do it again,” Dudley ordered. Uncle Vernon rappedthe glass smartly with his knuckles, but the snakejust snoozed on.

“This is boring,” Dudley moaned. He shuffled away.

Harry moved in front of the tank and looked intentlyat the snake. He wouldn’t have been surprised if ithad died of boredom itself — no company exceptstupid people drumming their fingers on the glasstrying to disturb it all day long. It was worse thanhaving a cupboard as a bedroom, where the onlyvisitor was Aunt Petunia hammering on the door towake you up; at least he got to visit the rest of thehouse.

The snake suddenly opened its beady eyes. Slowly,very slowly, it raised its head until its eyes were on alevel with Harry’s.

It winked.

Harry stared. Then he looked quickly around to see ifanyone was watching. They weren’t. He looked backat the snake and winked, too.

The snake jerked its head toward Uncle Vernon andDudley, then raised its eyes to the ceiling. It gaveHarry a look that said quite plainly:

“I get that all the time.”

“I know,” Harry murmured through the glass, thoughhe wasn’t sure the snake could hear him. “It must bereally annoying.”

The snake nodded vigorously.

“Where do you come from, anyway?” Harry asked.

Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

The snake jabbed its tail at a little sign next to theglass. Harry peered at it.

Boa Constrictor, Brazil.

“Was it nice there?”

The boa constrictor jabbed its tail at the sign againand Harry read on: This specimen was bred in thezoo. “Oh, I see — so you’ve never been to Brazil?”

As the snake shook its head, a deafening shoutbehind Harry made both of them jump. “DUDLEY!MR. DURSLEY! COME AND LOOK AT THIS SNAKE!YOU WONT BELIEVE WHAT IT’S DOING!”

Dudley came waddling toward them as fast as hecould.

“Out of the way, you,” he said, punching Harry in theribs. Caught by surprise, Harry fell hard on theconcrete floor. What came next happened so fast noone saw how it happened — one second, Piers andDudley were leaning right up close to the glass, thenext, they had leapt back with howls of horror.

Harry sat up and gasped; the glass front of the boaconstrictor’s tank had vanished. The great snake wasuncoiling itself rapidly, slithering out onto the floor.People throughout the reptile house screamed andstarted running for the exits.

As the snake slid swiftly past him, Harry could havesworn a low, hissing voice said, “Brazil, here I come.... Thanksss, amigo.”

The keeper of the reptile house was in shock.

Page | 31 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“But the glass,” he kept saying, “where did the glassgo?” "

The zoo director himself made Aunt Petunia a cup ofstrong, sweet tea while he apologized over and overagain. Piers and Dudley could only gibber. As far asHarry had seen, the snake hadn’t done anythingexcept snap playfully at their heels as it passed, butby the time they were all back in Uncle Vernon’s car,Dudley was telling them how it had nearly bitten offhis leg, while Piers was swearing it had tried tosqueeze him to death. But worst of all, for Harry atleast, was Piers calming down enough to say, “Harrywas talking to it, weren’t you, Harry?”

Uncle Vernon waited until Piers was safely out of thehouse before starting on Harry. He was so angry hecould hardly speak. He managed to say, “Go —cupboard — stay — no meals,” before he collapsedinto a chair, and Aunt Petunia had to run and gethim a large brandy.

Harry lay in his dark cupboard much later, wishinghe had a watch. He didn’t know what time it was andhe couldn’t be sure the Dursleys were asleep yet.

Until they were, he couldn’t risk sneaking to thekitchen for some food.

He’d lived with the Dursleys almost ten years, tenmiserable years, as long as he could remember, eversince he’d been a baby and his parents had died inthat car crash. He couldn’t remember being in the carwhen his parents had died. Sometimes, when hestrained his memory during long hours in hiscupboard, he came up with a strange vision: ablinding flash of green light and a burning pain on hisforehead. This, he supposed, was the crash, thoughhe couldn’t imagine where all the green light camefrom. He couldn’t remember his parents at all. HisPage | 32 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

aunt and uncle never spoke about them, and ofcourse he was forbidden to ask questions. There wereno photographs of them in the house.

When he had been younger, Harry had dreamed anddreamed of some unknown relation coming to takehim away, but it had never happened; the Dursleyswere his only family. Yet sometimes he thought (ormaybe hoped) that strangers in the street seemed toknow him. Very strange strangers they were, too. Atiny man in a violet top hat had bowed to him oncewhile out shopping with Aunt Petunia and Dudley.After asking Harry furiously if he knew the man, AuntPetunia had rushed them out of the shop withoutbuying anything. A wild-looking old woman dressedall in green had waved merrily at him once on a bus.

A bald man in a very long purple coat had actuallyshaken his hand in the street the other day and thenwalked away without a word. The weirdest thingabout all these people was the way they seemed tovanish the second Harry tried to get a closer look.

At school, Harry had no one. Everybody knew thatDudley’s gang hated that odd Harry Potter in hisbaggy old clothes and broken glasses, and nobodyliked to disagree with Dudley’s gang.

Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling



THE LETTERS FROM NO ONE

The escape of the Brazilian boa constrictor earnedHarry his longest-ever punishment. By the time hewas allowed out of his cupboard again, the summerholidays had started and Dudley had already brokenhis new video camera, crashed his remote controlairplane, and, first time out on his racing bike,knocked down old Mrs. Figg as she crossed PrivetDrive on her crutches.

Harry was glad school was over, but there was noescaping Dudley’s gang, who visited the house everysingle day. Piers, Dennis, Malcolm, and Gordon wereall big and stupid, but as Dudley was the biggest andstupidest of the lot, he was the leader. The rest ofthem were all quite happy to join in Dudley’s favoritesport: Harry Hunting.

This was why Harry spent as much time as possibleout of the house, wandering around and thinkingabout the end of the holidays, where he could see atiny ray of hope. When September came he would begoing off to secondary school and, for the first time inPage | 34 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

his life, he wouldn’t be with Dudley. Dudley had beenaccepted at Uncle Vernon’s old private school,Smeltings. Piers Polkiss was going there too. Harry,on the other hand, was going to Stonewall High, thelocal public school. Dudley thought this was veryfunny.

“They stuff people’s heads down the toilet the first dayat Stonewall,” he told Harry. “Want to come upstairsand practice?”

“No, thanks,” said Harry. “The poor toilet’s never hadanything as horrible as your head down it — it mightbe sick.” Then he ran, before Dudley could work outwhat he’d said.

One day in July, Aunt Petunia took Dudley to Londonto buy his Smeltings uniform, leaving Harry at Mrs.Figg’s. Mrs. Figg wasn’t as bad as usual. It turned outshe’d broken her leg tripping over one of her cats, andshe didn’t seem quite as fond of them as before. Shelet Harry watch television and gave him a bit ofchocolate cake that tasted as though she’d had it forseveral years.

That evening, Dudley paraded around the living roomfor the family in his brand-new uniform. Smeltingsboys wore maroon tailcoats, orange knickerbockers,and flat straw hats called boaters. They also carriedknobbly sticks, used for hitting each other while theteachers weren’t looking. This was supposed to begood training for later life.

As he looked at Dudley in his new knickerbockers,Uncle Vernon said gruffly that it was the proudestmoment of his life. Aunt Petunia burst into tears andsaid she couldn’t believe it was her Ickle Dudleykins,he looked so handsome and grown-up. Harry didn’t

Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

trust himself to speak. He thought two of his ribsmight already have cracked from trying not to laugh.

k k k

There was a horrible smell in the kitchen the nextmorning when Harry went in for breakfast. It seemedto be coming from a large metal tub in the sink. Hewent to have a look. The tub was full of what lookedlike dirty rags swimming in gray water.

“What’s this?” he asked Aunt Petunia. Her lipstightened as they always did if he dared to ask aquestion.

“Your new school uniform,” she said.

Harry looked in the bowl again.

“Oh,” he said, “I didn’t realize it had to be so wet.”

“Don’t be stupid,” snapped Aunt Petunia. “I’m dyeingsome of Dudley’s old things gray for you. It’ll look justlike everyone else’s when I’ve finished.”

Harry seriously doubted this, but thought it best notto argue. He sat down at the table and tried not tothink about how he was going to look on his first dayat Stonewall High — like he was wearing bits of oldelephant skin, probably.

Dudley and Uncle Vernon came in, both withwrinkled noses because of the smell from Harry’s newuniform. Uncle Vernon opened his newspaper asusual and Dudley banged his Smelting stick, whichhe carried everywhere, on the table.

They heard the click of the mail slot and flop of letterson the doormat.

Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Get the mail, Dudley,” said Uncle Vernon frombehind his paper.

“Make Harry get it.”

“Get the mail, Harry.”

“Make Dudley get it.”

“Poke him with your Smelting stick, Dudley.”

Harry dodged the Smelting stick and went to get themail. Three things lay on the doormat: a postcardfrom Uncle Vernon’s sister Marge, who wasvacationing on the Isle of Wight, a brown envelopethat looked like a bill, and — a letter for Harry.

Harry picked it up and stared at it, his heart twanginglike a giant elastic band. No one, ever, in his wholelife, had written to him. Who would? He had nofriends, no other relatives — he didn’t belong to thelibrary, so he’d never even got rude notes asking forbooks back. Yet here it was, a letter, addressed soplainly there could be no mistake:

Mr. H. Potter

The Cupboard under the Stairs4 Privet DriveLittle WhingingSurrey

The envelope was thick and heavy, made of yellowishparchment, and the address was written in emerald-green ink. There was no stamp.

Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Turning the envelope over, his hand trembling, Harrysaw a purple wax seal bearing a coat of arms; a lion,an eagle, a badger, and a snake surrounding a largeletter H.

“Hurry up, boy!” shouted Uncle Vernon from thekitchen. “What are you doing, checking for letterbombs?” He chuckled at his own joke.

Harry went back to the kitchen, still staring at hisletter. He handed Uncle Vernon the bill and thepostcard, sat down, and slowly began to open theyellow envelope.

Uncle Vernon ripped open the bill, snorted in disgust,and flipped over the postcard.

“Marge’s ill,” he informed Aunt Petunia. “Ate a funnywhelk ...”

“Dad!” said Dudley suddenly. “Dad, Harry’s gotsomething!”

Harry was on the point of unfolding his letter, whichwas written on the same heavy parchment as theenvelope, when it was jerked sharply out of his handby Uncle Vernon.

“That’s mine\” said Harry, trying to snatch it back.

“Who’d be writing to you?” sneered Uncle Vernon,shaking the letter open with one hand and glancing atit. His face went from red to green faster than a set oftraffic lights. And it didn’t stop there. Within secondsit was the grayish white of old porridge.

“P-P-Petunia!” he gasped.

Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Dudley tried to grab the letter to read it, but UncleVernon held it high out of his reach. Aunt Petuniatook it curiously and read the first line. For a momentit looked as though she might faint. She clutched herthroat and made a choking noise.

“Vernon! Oh my goodness — Vernon!”

They stared at each other, seeming to have forgottenthat Harry and Dudley were still in the room. Dudleywasn’t used to being ignored. He gave his father asharp tap on the head with his Smelting stick.

“I want to read that letter,” he said loudly.

“I want to read it,” said Harry furiously, “as it’s mine.”

“Get out, both of you,” croaked Uncle Vernon, stuffingthe letter back inside its envelope.

Harry didn’t move.

“I WANT MY LETTER!” he shouted.

“Let me see it!” demanded Dudley.

“OUT!” roared Uncle Vernon, and he took both Harryand Dudley by the scruffs of their necks and threwthem into the hall, slamming the kitchen door behindthem. Harry and Dudley promptly had a furious butsilent fight over who would listen at the keyhole;Dudley won, so Harry, his glasses dangling from oneear, lay flat on his stomach to listen at the crackbetween door and floor.

“Vernon,” Aunt Petunia was saying in a quiveringvoice, “look at the address — how could they possiblyknow where he sleeps? You don’t think they’rewatching the house?”

Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Watching — spying — might be following us,”muttered Uncle Vernon wildly.

“But what should we do, Vernon? Should we writeback? Tell them we don’t want —”

Harry could see Uncle Vernon’s shiny black shoespacing up and down the kitchen.

“No,” he said finally. “No, we’ll ignore it. If they don’tget an answer. ... Yes, that’s best ... we won’t doanything. ...”

“But —”

“I’m not having one in the house, Petunia! Didn’t weswear when we took him in we’d stamp out thatdangerous nonsense?”

That evening when he got back from work, UncleVernon did something he’d never done before; hevisited Harry in his cupboard.

“Where’s my letter?” said Harry, the moment UncleVernon had squeezed through the door. “Who’swriting to me?”

“No one. It was addressed to you by mistake,” saidUncle Vernon shortly. “I have burned it.”

“It was not a mistake,” said Harry angrily, “it had mycupboard on it.”

“SILENCE!” yelled Uncle Vernon, and a couple ofspiders fell from the ceiling. He took a few deepbreaths and then forced his face into a smile, whichlooked quite painful.

Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Er — yes, Harry — about this cupboard. Your auntand I have been thinking ... you’re really getting a bitbig for it ... we think it might be nice if you movedinto Dudley’s second bedroom.”

“Why?” said Harry.

“Don’t ask questions!” snapped his uncle. “Take thisstuff upstairs, now.”

The Dursleys’ house had four bedrooms: one forUncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia, one for visitors(usually Uncle Vernon’s sister, Marge), one whereDudley slept, and one where Dudley kept all the toysand things that wouldn’t fit into his first bedroom. Itonly took Harry one trip upstairs to move everythinghe owned from the cupboard to this room. He satdown on the bed and stared around him. Nearlyeverything in here was broken. The month-old videocamera was lying on top of a small, working tankDudley had once driven over the next door neighbor’sdog; in the corner was Dudley’s first-ever televisionset, which he’d put his foot through when his favoriteprogram had been canceled; there was a largebirdcage, which had once held a parrot that Dudleyhad swapped at school for a real air rifle, which wasup on a shelf with the end all bent because Dudleyhad sat on it. Other shelves were full of books. Theywere the only things in the room that looked asthough they’d never been touched.

From downstairs came the sound of Dudley bawlingat his mother, “I don’t want him in there ... I needthat room ... make him get out. ...”

Harry sighed and stretched out on the bed. Yesterdayhe’d have given anything to be up here. Today he’drather be back in his cupboard with that letter thanup here without it.

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Next morning at breakfast, everyone was rather quiet.Dudley was in shock. He’d screamed, whacked hisfather with his Smelting stick, been sick on purpose,kicked his mother, and thrown his tortoise throughthe greenhouse roof, and he still didn’t have his roomback. Harry was thinking about this time yesterdayand bitterly wishing he’d opened the letter in the hall.Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia kept looking at eachother darkly.

When the mail arrived, Uncle Vernon, who seemed tobe trying to be nice to Harry, made Dudley go and getit. They heard him banging things with his Smeltingstick all the way down the hall. Then he shouted,“There’s another one! ‘Mr. H. Potter, The SmallestBedroom, 4 Privet Drive —’ ”

With a strangled cry, Uncle Vernon leapt from hisseat and ran down the hall, Harry right behind him.Uncle Vernon had to wrestle Dudley to the ground toget the letter from him, which was made difficult bythe fact that Harry had grabbed Uncle Vernon aroundthe neck from behind. After a minute of confusedfighting, in which everyone got hit a lot by theSmelting stick, Uncle Vernon straightened up,gasping for breath, with Harry’s letter clutched in hishand.

“Go to your cupboard — I mean, your bedroom,” hewheezed at Harry. “Dudley — go —just go.”

Harry walked round and round his new room.Someone knew he had moved out of his cupboard andthey seemed to know he hadn’t received his firstletter. Surely that meant they’d try again? And thistime he’d make sure they didn’t fail. He had a plan.

The repaired alarm clock rang at six o’clock the nextmorning. Harry turned it off quickly and dressed

Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

silently. He mustn’t wake the Dursleys. He stoledownstairs without turning on any of the lights.

He was going to wait for the postman on the corner ofPrivet Drive and get the letters for number four first.His heart hammered as he crept across the dark halltoward the front door —

“AAAAARRRGH! ”

Harry leapt into the air; he’d trodden on somethingbig and squashy on the doormat — something alive\

Lights clicked on upstairs and to his horror Harryrealized that the big, squashy something had been hisuncle’s face. Uncle Vernon had been lying at the footof the front door in a sleeping bag, clearly makingsure that Harry didn’t do exactly what he’d beentrying to do. He shouted at Harry for about half anhour and then told him to go and make a cup of tea.Harry shuffled miserably off into the kitchen and bythe time he got back, the mail had arrived, right intoUncle Vernon’s lap. Harry could see three lettersaddressed in green ink.

“I want —” he began, but Uncle Vernon was tearingthe letters into pieces before his eyes.

Uncle Vernon didn’t go to work that day. He stayed athome and nailed up the mail slot.

“See,” he explained to Aunt Petunia through amouthful of nails, “if they can’t deliver them they’lljust give up.”

“I’m not sure that’ll work, Vernon.”

“Oh, these peoples minds work in strange ways,Petunia, they’re not like you and me,” said Uncle

Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

Vernon, trying to knock in a nail with the piece offruitcake Aunt Petunia had just brought him.

On Friday, no less than twelve letters arrived forHarry. As they couldn’t go through the mail slot theyhad been pushed under the door, slotted through thesides, and a few even forced through the smallwindow in the downstairs bathroom.

Uncle Vernon stayed at home again. After burning allthe letters, he got out a hammer and nails andboarded up the cracks around the front and backdoors so no one could go out. He hummed “TiptoeThrough the Tulips” as he worked, and jumped atsmall noises.

On Saturday, things began to get out of hand.Twenty-four letters to Harry found their way into thehouse, rolled up and hidden inside each of the twodozen eggs that their very confused milkman hadhanded Aunt Petunia through the living roomwindow. While Uncle Vernon made furious telephonecalls to the post office and the dairy trying to findsomeone to complain to, Aunt Petunia shredded theletters in her food processor.

“Who on earth wants to talk to you this badly?”Dudley asked Harry in amazement.

•k k k

On Sunday morning, Uncle Vernon sat down at thebreakfast table looking tired and rather ill, but happy.

“No post on Sundays,” he reminded them cheerfullyas he spread marmalade on his newspapers, “nodamn letters today —”

Page | 44 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Something came whizzing down the kitchen chimneyas he spoke and caught him sharply on the back ofthe head. Next moment, thirty or forty letters camepelting out of the fireplace like bullets. The Dursleysducked, but Harry leapt into the air trying to catchone —

“Out! OUT!”

Uncle Vernon seized Harry around the waist andthrew him into the hall. When Aunt Petunia andDudley had run out with their arms over their faces,Uncle Vernon slammed the door shut. They couldhear the letters still streaming into the room,bouncing off the walls and floor.

“That does it,” said Uncle Vernon, trying to speakcalmly but pulling great tufts out of his mustache atthe same time. “I want you all back here in fiveminutes ready to leave. We’re going away. Just packsome clothes. No arguments!”

He looked so dangerous with half his mustachemissing that no one dared argue. Ten minutes laterthey had wrenched their way through the boarded-updoors and were in the car, speeding toward thehighway. Dudley was sniffling in the back seat; hisfather had hit him round the head for holding themup while he tried to pack his television, VCR, andcomputer in his sports bag.

They drove. And they drove. Even Aunt Petunia didn’tdare ask where they were going. Every now and thenUncle Vernon would take a sharp turn and drive inthe opposite direction for a while.

“Shake ’em off ... shake ’em off,” he would mutterwhenever he did this.

Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

They didn’t stop to eat or drink all day. By nightfallDudley was howling. He’d never had such a bad dayin his life. He was hungry, he’d missed five televisionprograms he’d wanted to see, and he’d never gone solong without blowing up an alien on his computer.

Uncle Vernon stopped at last outside a gloomy-looking hotel on the outskirts of a big city. Dudleyand Harry shared a room with twin beds and damp,musty sheets. Dudley snored but Harry stayed awake,sitting on the windowsill, staring down at the lights ofpassing cars and wondering...

They ate stale cornflakes and cold tinned tomatoes ontoast for breakfast the next day. They had justfinished when the owner of the hotel came over totheir table.

“ ’Scuse me, but is one of you Mr. H. Potter? Only Igot about an ’undred of these at the front desk.”

She held up a letter so they could read the green inkaddress:

Mr. H. Potter

Room 17

Railview Hotel

Cokeworth

Harry made a grab for the letter but Uncle Vernonknocked his hand out of the way. The woman stared.

“I’ll take them,” said Uncle Vernon, standing upquickly and following her from the dining room.

•k k k

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Wouldn’t it be better just to go home, dear?” AuntPetunia suggested timidly, hours later, but UncleVernon didn’t seem to hear her. Exactly what he waslooking for, none of them knew. He drove them intothe middle of a forest, got out, looked around, shookhis head, got back in the car, and off they went again.The same thing happened in the middle of a plowedfield, halfway across a suspension bridge, and at thetop of a multilevel parking garage.

“Daddy’s gone mad, hasn’t he?” Dudley asked AuntPetunia dully late that afternoon. Uncle Vernon hadparked at the coast, locked them all inside the car,and disappeared.

It started to rain. Great drops beat on the roof of thecar. Dudley sniveled.

“It’s Monday,” he told his mother. “The GreatHumberto’s on tonight. I want to stay somewhere witha television.”

Monday. This reminded Harry of something. If it wasMonday — and you could usually count on Dudley toknow the days of the week, because of television —then tomorrow, Tuesday, was Harry’s eleventhbirthday. Of course, his birthdays were never exactlyfun — last year, the Dursleys had given him a coathanger and a pair of Uncle Vernon’s old socks. Still,you weren’t eleven every day.

Uncle Vernon was back and he was smiling. He wasalso carrying a long, thin package and didn’t answerAunt Petunia when she asked what he’d bought.

“Found the perfect place!” he said. “Come on!

Everyone out!”

Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

It was very cold outside the car. Uncle Vernon waspointing at what looked like a large rock way out atsea. Perched on top of the rock was the mostmiserable little shack you could imagine. One thingwas certain, there was no television in there.

“Storm forecast for tonight!” said Uncle Vernongleefully, clapping his hands together. “And thisgentleman’s kindly agreed to lend us his boat!”

A toothless old man came ambling up to them,pointing, with a rather wicked grin, at an old rowboatbobbing in the iron-gray water below them.

“I’ve already got us some rations,” said Uncle Vernon,“so all aboard!”

It was freezing in the boat. Icy sea spray and raincrept down their necks and a chilly wind whippedtheir faces. After what seemed like hours theyreached the rock, where Uncle Vernon, slipping andsliding, led the way to the broken-down house.

The inside was horrible; it smelled strongly ofseaweed, the wind whistled through the gaps in thewooden walls, and the fireplace was damp and empty.There were only two rooms.

Uncle Vernon’s rations turned out to be a bag of chipseach and four bananas. He tried to start a fire but theempty chip bags just smoked and shriveled up.

“Could do with some of those letters now, eh?” he saidcheerfully.

He was in a very good mood. Obviously he thoughtnobody stood a chance of reaching them here in astorm to deliver mail. Harry privately agreed, thoughthe thought didn’t cheer him up at all.

Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

As night fell, the promised storm blew up aroundthem. Spray from the high waves splattered the wallsof the hut and a fierce wind rattled the filthywindows. Aunt Petunia found a few moldy blankets inthe second room and made up a bed for Dudley onthe moth-eaten sofa. She and Uncle Vernon went offto the lumpy bed next door, and Harry was left to findthe softest bit of floor he could and to curl up underthe thinnest, most ragged blanket.

The storm raged more and more ferociously as thenight went on. Harry couldn’t sleep. He shivered andturned over, trying to get comfortable, his stomachrumbling with hunger. Dudley’s snores were drownedby the low rolls of thunder that started near midnight.The lighted dial of Dudley’s watch, which wasdangling over the edge of the sofa on his fat wrist, toldHarry he’d be eleven in ten minutes’ time. He lay andwatched his birthday tick nearer, wondering if theDursleys would remember at all, wondering where theletter writer was now.

Five minutes to go. Harry heard something creakoutside. He hoped the roof wasn’t going to fall in,although he might be warmer if it did. Four minutesto go. Maybe the house in Privet Drive would be sofull of letters when they got back that he’d be able tosteal one somehow.

Three minutes to go. Was that the sea, slapping hardon the rock like that? And (two minutes to go) whatwas that funny crunching noise? Was the rockcrumbling into the sea?

One minute to go and he’d be eleven. Thirty seconds... twenty ... ten ... nine — maybe he’d wake Dudleyup, just to annoy him — three ... two ... one ...

BOOM.

Page | 49 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

The whole shack shivered and Harry sat bolt upright,staring at the door. Someone was outside, knockingto come in.

Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





THE KEEPER OF THE KEYS

BOOM. They knocked again. Dudley jerked awake.

“Where’s the cannon?” he said stupidly.

There was a crash behind them and Uncle Vernoncame skidding into the room. He was holding a rifle inhis hands — now they knew what had been in thelong, thin package he had brought with them.

“Who’s there?” he shouted. “I warn you — I’m armed!”

There was a pause. Then —

SMASH!

The door was hit with such force that it swung cleanoff its hinges and with a deafening crash landed flaton the floor.

A giant of a man was standing in the doorway. Hisface was almost completely hidden by a long, shaggymane of hair and a wild, tangled beard, but you could

Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

make out his eyes, glinting like black beetles underall the hair.

The giant squeezed his way into the hut, stooping sothat his head just brushed the ceiling. He bent down,picked up the door, and fitted it easily back into itsframe. The noise of the storm outside dropped a little.He turned to look at them all.

“Couldn’t make us a cup o’ tea, could yeh? It’s notbeen an easy journey. ...”

He strode over to the sofa where Dudley sat frozenwith fear.

“Budge up, yeh great lump,” said the stranger.

Dudley squeaked and ran to hide behind his mother,who was crouching, terrified, behind Uncle Vernon.

“An’ here’s Harry!” said the giant.

Harry looked up into the fierce, wild, shadowy faceand saw that the beetle eyes were crinkled in a smile.

“Las’ time I saw you, you was only a baby,” said thegiant. “Yeh look a lot like yer dad, but yeh’ve got yermom’s eyes.”

Uncle Vernon made a funny rasping noise.

“I demand that you leave at once, sir!” he said. “Youare breaking and entering!”

“Ah, shut up, Dursley, yeh great prune,” said thegiant; he reached over the back of the sofa, jerked thegun out of Uncle Vernon’s hands, bent it into a knotas easily as if it had been made of rubber, and threwit into a corner of the room.

Page | 52 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Uncle Vernon made another funny noise, like amouse being trodden on.

“Anyway — Harry,” said the giant, turning his backon the Dursleys, “a very happy birthday to yeh. Gotsummat fer yeh here — I mighta sat on it at somepoint, but it’ll taste all right.”

From an inside pocket of his black overcoat he pulleda slightly squashed box. Harry opened it withtrembling fingers. Inside was a large, sticky chocolatecake with Happy Birthday Harry written on it in greenicing.

Harry looked up at the giant. He meant to say thankyou, but the words got lost on the way to his mouth,and what he said instead was, “Who are you?”

The giant chuckled.

“True, I haven’t introduced meself. Rubeus Hagrid,Keeper of Keys and Grounds at Hogwarts.”

He held out an enormous hand and shook Harry’swhole arm.

“What about that tea then, eh?” he said, rubbing hishands together. “I’d not say no ter summat stronger ifyeh’ve got it, mind.”

His eyes fell on the empty grate with the shriveledchip bags in it and he snorted. He bent down over thefireplace; they couldn’t see what he was doing butwhen he drew back a second later, there was aroaring fire there. It filled the whole damp hut withflickering light and Harry felt the warmth wash overhim as though he’d sunk into a hot bath.

Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

The giant sat back down on the sofa, which saggedunder his weight, and began taking all sorts of thingsout of the pockets of his coat: a copper kettle, asquashy package of sausages, a poker, a teapot,several chipped mugs, and a bottle of some amberliquid that he took a swig from before starting tomake tea. Soon the hut was full of the sound andsmell of sizzling sausage. Nobody said a thing whilethe giant was working, but as he slid the first six fat,juicy, slightly burnt sausages from the poker, Dudleyfidgeted a little. Uncle Vernon said sharply, “Don’ttouch anything he gives you, Dudley.”

The giant chuckled darkly.

“Yer great puddin’ of a son don’ need fattenin’anymore, Dursley, don’ worry.”

He passed the sausages to Harry, who was so hungryhe had never tasted anything so wonderful, but hestill couldn’t take his eyes off the giant. Finally, asnobody seemed about to explain anything, he said,“I’m sorry, but I still don’t really know who you are.”

The giant took a gulp of tea and wiped his mouth withthe back of his hand.

“Call me Hagrid,” he said, “everyone does. An’ like Itold yeh, I’m Keeper of Keys at Hogwarts — yeh’llknow all about Hogwarts, o’ course.”

“Er — no,” said Harry.

Hagrid looked shocked.

“Sorry,” Harry said quickly.

“Sorry?” barked Hagrid, turning to stare at theDursleys, who shrank back into the shadows. “It’s

Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

them as should be sorry! I knew yeh weren’t gettin’yer letters but I never thought yeh wouldn’t evenknow abou’ Hogwarts, fer cryin’ out loud! Did yehnever wonder where yer parents learned it all?”

“All what?” asked Harry.

“ALL WHAT?” Hagrid thundered. “Now wait jus’ onesecond!”

He had leapt to his feet. In his anger he seemed to fillthe whole hut. The Dursleys were cowering againstthe wall.

“Do you mean ter tell me,” he growled at the Dursleys,“that this boy — this boy! — knows nothin’ abou’ —about ANYTHING?”

Harry thought this was going a bit far. He had been toschool, after all, and his marks weren’t bad.

“I know some things,” he said. “I can, you know, domath and stuff.”

But Hagrid simply waved his hand and said, “Aboutour world, I mean. Your world. My world. Yer parents’world.”

“What world?”

Hagrid looked as if he was about to explode.“DURSLEY!” he boomed.

Uncle Vernon, who had gone very pale, whisperedsomething that sounded like “Mimblewimble.” Hagridstared wildly at Harry.

Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“But yeh must know about yer mom and dad,” hesaid. “I mean, they’re famous. You’re famous.”

“What? My — my mom and dad weren’t famous, werethey?”

“Yeh don’ know ... yeh don’ know ...” Hagrid ran hisfingers through his hair, fixing Harry with abewildered stare.

“Yeh don’ know what yeh are?” he said finally.

Uncle Vernon suddenly found his voice.

“Stop!” he commanded. “Stop right there, sir! I forbidyou to tell the boy anything!”

A braver man than Vernon Dursley would havequailed under the furious look Hagrid now gave him;when Hagrid spoke, his every syllable trembled withrage.

“You never told him? Never told him what was in theletter Dumbledore left fer him? I was there! I sawDumbledore leave it, Dursley! An’ you’ve kept it fromhim all these years?”

“Kept what from me?” said Harry eagerly.

“STOP! I FORBID YOU!” yelled Uncle Vernon in panic.

Aunt Petunia gave a gasp of horror.

“Ah, go boil yer heads, both of yeh,” said Hagrid.“Harry — yer a wizard.”

There was silence inside the hut. Only the sea andthe whistling wind could be heard.

Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I’m a what?” gasped Harry.

“A wizard, o’ course,” said Hagrid, sitting back downon the sofa, which groaned and sank even lower, “an’a thumpin’ good’un, I’d say, once yeh’ve been trainedup a bit. With a mum an’ dad like yours, what elsewould yeh be? An’ I reckon it’s abou’ time yeh readyer letter.”

Harry stretched out his hand at last to take theyellowish envelope, addressed in emerald green to Mr.H. Potter, The Floor, Hut-on-the-Rock, The Sea. Hepulled out the letter and read:

HOGWARTS SCHOOLo/WITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRY

Headmaster: ALBUS DUMBLEDORE

(Order of Merlin, First Class, Grand Sore., Chf.

Warlock, Supreme Mugwump, International Confed. ofWizards)

Dear Mr. Potter,

We are pleased to inform you that you have beenaccepted at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft andWizardry. Please find enclosed a list of all necessarybooks and equipment.

Term begins on September 1. We await your owl by nolater than July 31.

Yours sincerely,

Minerva McGonagall,

Deputy Headmistress

Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Questions exploded inside Harry’s head like fireworksand he couldn’t decide which to ask first. After a fewminutes he stammered, “What does it mean, theyawait my owl?”

“Gallopin’ Gorgons, that reminds me,” said Hagrid,clapping a hand to his forehead with enough force toknock over a cart horse, and from yet another pocketinside his overcoat he pulled an owl — a real, live,rather ruffled-looking owl — a long quill, and a roll ofparchment. With his tongue between his teeth hescribbled a note that Harry could read upside down:

Dear Professor Dumbledore,

Given Harry his letter.

Taking him to buy his things tomorrow.

Weather’s horrible. Hope you’re well.

Hagrid

Hagrid rolled up the note, gave it to the owl, whichclamped it in its beak, went to the door, and threwthe owl out into the storm. Then he came back andsat down as though this was as normal as talking onthe telephone.

Harry realized his mouth was open and closed itquickly.

“Where was I?” said Hagrid, but at that moment,

Uncle Vernon, still ashen-faced but looking veryangry, moved into the firelight.

“He’s not going,” he said.

Hagrid grunted.

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I’d like ter see a great Muggle like you stop him,” hesaid.

“A what?” said Harry, interested.

“A Muggle,” said Hagrid, “it’s what we call nonmagicfolk like them. An’ it’s your bad luck you grew up in afamily o’ the biggest Muggles I ever laid eyes on.”

“We swore when we took him in we’d put a stop tothat rubbish,” said Uncle Vernon, “swore we’d stampit out of him! Wizard indeed!”

“You knew?” said Harry. “You knew I’m a — awizard?”

“Knew!” shrieked Aunt Petunia suddenly. “Knew\ Ofcourse we knew! How could you not be, my drattedsister being what she was? Oh, she got a letter justlike that and disappeared off to that — that school —and came home every vacation with her pockets fullof frog spawn, turning teacups into rats. I was theonly one who saw her for what she was — a freak!

But for my mother and father, oh no, it was Lily thisand Lily that, they were proud of having a witch inthe family!”

She stopped to draw a deep breath and then wentranting on. It seemed she had been wanting to say allthis for years.

“Then she met that Potter at school and they left andgot married and had you, and of course I knew you’dbe just the same, just as strange, just as — as —abnormal— and then, if you please, she went and gotherself blown up and we got landed with you!”

Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry had gone very white. As soon as he found hisvoice he said, “Blown up? You told me they died in acar crash!”

“CAR CRASH!” roared Hagrid, jumping up so angrilythat the Dursleys scuttled back to their corner. “Howcould a car crash kill Lily an’ James Potter? It’s anoutrage! A scandal! Harry Potter not knowin’ his ownstory when every kid in our world knows his name!”

“But why? What happened?” Harry asked urgently.

The anger faded from Hagrid’s face. He lookedsuddenly anxious.

“I never expected this,” he said, in a low, worriedvoice. “I had no idea, when Dumbledore told me theremight be trouble gettin’ hold of yeh, how much yehdidn’t know. Ah, Harry, I don’ know if I’m the rightperson ter tell yeh — but someone’s gotta — yeh can’tgo off ter Hogwarts not knowin’.”

He threw a dirty look at the Dursleys.

“Well, it’s best yeh know as much as I can tell yeh —mind, I can’t tell yeh everythin’, it’s a great myst’ry,parts of it. ...”

He sat down, stared into the fire for a few seconds,and then said, “It begins, I suppose, with — with aperson called — but it’s incredible yeh don’t know hisname, everyone in our world knows —”

“Who?”

“Well — I don’ like sayin’ the name if I can help it. Noone does.”

“Why not?”

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Gulpin’ gargoyles, Harry, people are still scared.Blimey, this is difficult. See, there was this wizardwho went ... bad. As bad as you could go. Worse.Worse than worse. His name was ...”

Hagrid gulped, but no words came out.

“Could you write it down?” Harry suggested.

“Nah — can’t spell it. All right — Voldemort.” Hagridshuddered. “Don’ make me say it again. Anyway, this— this wizard, about twenty years ago now, startedlookin’ fer followers. Got ’em, too — some were afraid,some just wanted a bit o’ his power, ’cause he wasgettin’ himself power, all right. Dark days, Harry.Didn’t know who ter trust, didn’t dare get friendlywith strange wizards or witches ... terrible thingshappened. He was takin’ over. ’Course, some stood upto him — an’ he killed ’em. Horribly. One o’ the onlysafe places left was Hogwarts. Reckon Dumbledore’sthe only one You-Know-Who was afraid of. Didn’t daretry takin’ the school, not jus’ then, anyway.

“Now, yer mum an’ dad were as good a witch an’wizard as I ever knew. Head boy an’ girl at Hogwartsin their day! Suppose the myst’ry is why You-Know-Who never tried to get ’em on his side before ...probably knew they were too close ter Dumbledore terwant anythin’ ter do with the Dark Side.

“Maybe he thought he could persuade ’em ... maybehe just wanted ’em outta the way. All anyone knowsis, he turned up in the village where you was allliving, on Halloween ten years ago. You was just ayear old. He came ter yer house an’ — an’ —”

Hagrid suddenly pulled out a very dirty, spottedhandkerchief and blew his nose with a sound like afoghorn.

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Sorry,” he said. “But it’s that sad — knew yer muman’ dad, an’ nicer people yeh couldn’t find — anyway

“You-Know-Who killed ’em. An’ then — an’ this is thereal myst’ry of the thing — he tried to kill you, too.Wanted ter make a clean job of it, I suppose, ormaybe he just liked killin’ by then. But he couldn’t doit. Never wondered how you got that mark on yerforehead? That was no ordinary cut. That’s what yehget when a powerful, evil curse touches yeh — tookcare of yer mum an’ dad an’ yer house, even — but itdidn’t work on you, an’ that’s why yer famous, Harry.No one ever lived after he decided ter kill ’em, no oneexcept you, an’ he’d killed some o’ the best witchesan’ wizards of the age — the McKinnons, the Bones,the Prewetts — an’ you was only a baby, an’ youlived.”

Something very painful was going on in Harry’s mind.As Hagrid’s story came to a close, he saw again theblinding flash of green light, more clearly than he hadever remembered it before — and he rememberedsomething else, for the first time in his life: a high,cold, cruel laugh.

Hagrid was watching him sadly.

“Took yeh from the ruined house myself, onDumbledore’s orders. Brought yeh ter this lot ...”

“Load of old tosh,” said Uncle Vernon. Harry jumped;he had almost forgotten that the Dursleys were there.Uncle Vernon certainly seemed to have got back hiscourage. He was glaring at Hagrid and his fists wereclenched.

“Now, you listen here, boy,” he snarled, “I acceptthere’s something strange about you, probably

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

nothing a good beating wouldn’t have cured — and asfor all this about your parents, well, they wereweirdos, no denying it, and the world’s better offwithout them in my opinion — asked for all they got,getting mixed up with these wizarding types — justwhat I expected, always knew they’d come to a stickyend —”

But at that moment, Hagrid leapt from the sofa anddrew a battered pink umbrella from inside his coat.Pointing this at Uncle Vernon like a sword, he said,“I’m warning you, Dursley — I’m warning you — onemore word ...”

In danger of being speared on the end of an umbrellaby a bearded giant, Uncle Vernon’s courage failedagain; he flattened himself against the wall and fellsilent.

“That’s better,” said Hagrid, breathing heavily andsitting back down on the sofa, which this time saggedright down to the floor.

Harry, meanwhile, still had questions to ask,hundreds of them.

“But what happened to Vol-, sorry — I mean, You-Know-Who?”

“Good question, Harry. Disappeared. Vanished. Samenight he tried ter kill you. Makes yeh even morefamous. That’s the biggest myst’ry, see ... he wasgettin’ more an’ more powerful — why’d he go?

“Some say he died. Codswallop, in my opinion. Dunnoif he had enough human left in him to die. Some sayhe’s still out there, bidin’ his time, like, but I don’believe it. People who was on his side came back ter

Page | 63 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

ours. Some of ’em came outta kinda trances. Don’reckon they could’ve done if he was cornin’ back.

“Most of us reckon he’s still out there somewhere butlost his powers. Too weak to carry on. ’Causesomethin’ about you finished him, Harry. There wassomethin’ goin’ on that night he hadn’t counted on —/ dunno what it was, no one does — but somethin’about you stumped him, all right.”

Hagrid looked at Harry with warmth and respectblazing in his eyes, but Harry, instead of feelingpleased and proud, felt quite sure there had been ahorrible mistake. A wizard? Him? How could hepossibly be? He’d spent his life being clouted byDudley, and bullied by Aunt Petunia and UncleVernon; if he was really a wizard, why hadn’t theybeen turned into warty toads every time they’d triedto lock him in his cupboard? If he’d once defeated thegreatest sorcerer in the world, how come Dudley hadalways been able to kick him around like a football?

“Hagrid,” he said quietly, “I think you must havemade a mistake. I don’t think I can be a wizard.”

To his surprise, Hagrid chuckled.

“Not a wizard, eh? Never made things happen whenyou was scared or angry?”

Harry looked into the fire. Now he came to thinkabout it ... every odd thing that had ever made hisaunt and uncle furious with him had happened whenhe, Harry, had been upset or angry ... chased byDudley’s gang, he had somehow found himself out oftheir reach ... dreading going to school with thatridiculous haircut, he’d managed to make it growback ... and the very last time Dudley had hit him,

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

hadn’t he got his revenge, without even realizing hewas doing it? Hadn’t he set a boa constrictor on him?

Harry looked back at Hagrid, smiling, and saw thatHagrid was positively beaming at him.

“See?” said Hagrid. “Harry Potter, not a wizard — youwait, you’ll be right famous at Hogwarts.”

But Uncle Vernon wasn’t going to give in without afight.

“Haven’t I told you he’s not going?” he hissed. “He’sgoing to Stonewall High and he’ll be grateful for it. I’veread those letters and he needs all sorts of rubbish —spell books and wands and —”

“If he wants ter go, a great Muggle like you won’t stophim,” growled Hagrid. “Stop Lily an’ James Potter’sson goin’ ter Hogwarts! Yer mad. His name’s beendown ever since he was born. He’s off ter the finestschool of witchcraft and wizardry in the world. Sevenyears there and he won’t know himself. He’ll be withyoungsters of his own sort, fer a change, an’ he’ll beunder the greatest headmaster Hogwarts ever had,Albus Dumbled—”

“I AM NOT PAYING FOR SOME CRACKPOT OLDFOOL TO TEACH HIM MAGIC TRICKS!” yelled UncleVernon.

But he had finally gone too far. Hagrid seized hisumbrella and whirled it over his head, “NEVER —” hethundered, “— INSULT — ALBUS — DUMBLEDORE— IN — FRONT — OF — ME!”

He brought the umbrella swishing down through theair to point at Dudley — there was a flash of violetlight, a sound like a firecracker, a sharp squeal, and

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

the next second, Dudley was dancing on the spot withhis hands clasped over his fat bottom, howling inpain. When he turned his back on them, Harry saw acurly pig’s tail poking through a hole in his trousers.

Uncle Vernon roared. Pulling Aunt Petunia andDudley into the other room, he cast one last terrifiedlook at Hagrid and slammed the door behind them.

Hagrid looked down at his umbrella and stroked hisbeard.

“Shouldn’ta lost me temper,” he said ruefully, “but itdidn’t work anyway. Meant ter turn him into a pig,but I suppose he was so much like a pig anyway therewasn’t much left ter do.”

He cast a sideways look at Harry under his bushyeyebrows.

“Be grateful if yeh didn’t mention that ter anyone atHogwarts,” he said. “I’m — er — not supposed ter domagic, strictly speakin’. I was allowed ter do a bit terfollow yeh an’ get yer letters to yeh an’ stuff— one o’the reasons I was so keen ter take on the job —”

“Why aren’t you supposed to do magic?” asked Harry.

“Oh, well — I was at Hogwarts meself but I — er —got expelled, ter tell yeh the truth. In me third year.They snapped me wand in half an’ everything. ButDumbledore let me stay on as gamekeeper. Greatman, Dumbledore.”

“Why were you expelled?”

“It’s gettin’ late and we’ve got lots ter do tomorrow,”said Hagrid loudly. “Gotta get up ter town, get all yerbooks an’ that.”

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

He took off his thick black coat and threw it to Harry.

“You can kip under that,” he said. “Don’ mind if itwriggles a bit, I think I still got a couple o’ dormice inone o’ the pockets.”

Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling



DIAGON ALLY

Harry woke early the next morning. Although hecould tell it was daylight, he kept his eyes shut tight.

“It was a dream,” he told himself firmly. “I dreamed agiant called Hagrid came to tell me I was going to aschool for wizards. When I open my eyes I’ll be athome in my cupboard.”

There was suddenly a loud tapping noise.

And there’s Aunt Petunia knocking on the door, Harrythought, his heart sinking. But he still didn’t open hiseyes. It had been such a good dream.

Tap. Tap. Tap.

“All right,” Harry mumbled, “I’m getting up.”

He sat up and Hagrid’s heavy coat fell off him. Thehut was full of sunlight, the storm was over, Hagridhimself was asleep on the collapsed sofa, and there

Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

was an owl rapping its claw on the window, anewspaper held in its beak.

Harry scrambled to his feet, so happy he felt asthough a large balloon was swelling inside him. Hewent straight to the window and jerked it open. Theowl swooped in and dropped the newspaper on top ofHagrid, who didn’t wake up. The owl then flutteredonto the floor and began to attack Hagrid’s coat.

“Don’t do that.”

Harry tried to wave the owl out of the way, but itsnapped its beak fiercely at him and carried onsavaging the coat.

“Hagrid!” said Harry loudly. “There’s an owl —”

“Pay him,” Hagrid grunted into the sofa.

“What?”

“He wants payin’ fer deliverin’ the paper. Look in thepockets.”

Hagrid’s coat seemed to be made of nothing butpockets — bunches of keys, slug pellets, balls ofstring, peppermint humbugs, teabags ... finally, Harrypulled out a handful of strange-looking coins.

“Give him five Knuts,” said Hagrid sleepily.

“Knuts?”

“The little bronze ones.”

Harry counted out five little bronze coins, and the owlheld out his leg so Harry could put the money into a

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

small leather pouch tied to it. Then he flew offthrough the open window.

Hagrid yawned loudly, sat up, and stretched.

“Best be off, Harry, lots ter do today, gotta get up terLondon an’ buy all yer stuff fer school.”

Harry was turning over the wizard coins and lookingat them. He had just thought of something that madehim feel as though the happy balloon inside him hadgot a puncture.

“Urn — Hagrid?”

“Mm?” said Hagrid, who was pulling on his hugeboots.

“I haven’t got any money — and you heard UncleVernon last night ... he won’t pay for me to go andlearn magic.”

“Don’t worry about that,” said Hagrid, standing upand scratching his head. “D’yeh think yer parentsdidn’t leave yeh anything?”

“But if their house was destroyed —”

“They didn’ keep their gold in the house, boy! Nah,first stop fer us is Gringotts. Wizards’ bank. Have asausage, they’re not bad cold — an’ I wouldn’ say noteh a bit o’ yer birthday cake, neither.”

“Wizards have banks?”

“Just the one. Gringotts. Run by goblins.”

Harry dropped the bit of sausage he was holding.

Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Goblins?”

“Yeah — so yeh’d be mad ter try an’ rob it, I’ll tell yehthat. Never mess with goblins, Harry. Gringotts is thesafest place in the world fer anything yeh want terkeep safe — ’cept maybe Hogwarts. As a matter o’fact, I gotta visit Gringotts anyway Fer Dumbledore.Hogwarts business.” Hagrid drew himself up proudly.“He usually gets me ter do important stuff fer him.Fetchin’ you — gettin’ things from Gringotts — knowshe can trust me, see.

“Got everythin’? Come on, then.”

Harry followed Hagrid out onto the rock. The sky wasquite clear now and the sea gleamed in the sunlight.The boat Uncle Vernon had hired was still there, witha lot of water in the bottom after the storm.

“How did you get here?” Harry asked, looking aroundfor another boat.

“Flew,” said Hagrid.

“Flew?”

“Yeah — but we’ll go back in this. Not s’pposed teruse magic now I’ve got yeh.”

They settled down in the boat, Harry still staring atHagrid, trying to imagine him flying.

“Seems a shame ter row, though,” said Hagrid, givingHarry another of his sideways looks. “If I was ter — er— speed things up a bit, would yeh mind notmentionin’ it at Hogwarts?”

“Of course not,” said Harry, eager to see more magic.Hagrid pulled out the pink umbrella again, tapped it

Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

twice on the side of the boat, and they sped off towardland.

“Why would you be mad to try and rob Gringotts?”Harry asked.

“Spells — enchantments,” said Hagrid, unfolding hisnewspaper as he spoke. “They say there’s dragonsguardin’ the high-security vaults. And then yeh gottafind yer way — Gringotts is hundreds of miles underLondon, see. Deep under the Underground. Yeh’d dieof hunger tryin’ ter get out, even if yeh did manage terget yer hands on summat.”

Harry sat and thought about this while Hagrid readhis newspaper, the Daily Prophet Harry had learnedfrom Uncle Vernon that people liked to be left alonewhile they did this, but it was very difficult, he’dnever had so many questions in his life.

“Ministry o’ Magic messin’ things up as usual,” Hagridmuttered, turning the page.

“There’s a Ministry of Magic?” Harry asked, before hecould stop himself.

“ ’Course,” said Hagrid. “They wanted Dumbledore ferMinister, o’ course, but he’d never leave Hogwarts, soold Cornelius Fudge got the job. Bungler if ever therewas one. So he pelts Dumbledore with owls everymorning, askin’ fer advice.”

“But what does a Ministry of Magic do?”

“Well, their main job is to keep it from the Mugglesthat there’s still witches an’ wizards up an’ down thecountry.”

“Why?”

Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Why? Blimey, Harry, everyone’d be wantin’ magicsolutions to their problems. Nah, we’re best leftalone.”

At this moment the boat bumped gently into theharbor wall. Hagrid folded up his newspaper, andthey clambered up the stone steps onto the street.

Passersby stared a lot at Hagrid as they walkedthrough the little town to the station. Harry couldn’tblame them. Not only was Hagrid twice as tall asanyone else, he kept pointing at perfectly ordinarythings like parking meters and saying loudly, “Seethat, Harry? Things these Muggles dream up, eh?”

“Hagrid,” said Harry, panting a bit as he ran to keepup, “did you say there are dragons at Gringotts?”

“Well, so they say,” said Hagrid. “Crikey, I’d like adragon.”

“You’d like one?”

“Wanted one ever since I was a kid — here we go.”

They had reached the station. There was a train toLondon in five minutes’ time. Hagrid, who didn’tunderstand “Muggle money,” as he called it, gave thebills to Harry so he could buy their tickets.

People stared more than ever on the train. Hagridtook up two seats and sat knitting what looked like acanary-yellow circus tent.

“Still got yer letter, Harry?” he asked as he countedstitches.

Harry took the parchment envelope out of his pocket.

Page | 73 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Good,” said Hagrid. “There’s a list there of everythingyeh need.”

Harry unfolded a second piece of paper he hadn’tnoticed the night before, and read:

HOGWARTS SCHOOLo/WITCHCRAFT and WIZARDRY

UNIFORM

First-year students will require:

1. Three sets of plain work robes (black)

2. One plain pointed hat (black) for day wear

3. One pair of protective gloves (dragon hide orsimilar)

4. One winter cloak (black, silver fastenings)

Please note that all pupils’ clothes should carry nametags

COURSE BOOKS

All students should have a copy of each of thefollowing:

The Standard Book of Spells (Grade 1) by MirandaGoshawk

A History of Magic by Bathilda Bagshot

Magical Theory by Adalbert Waffling

A Beginners’ Guide to Transfiguration by EmericSwitch

Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

One Thousand Magical Herbs and Fungi by PhyllidaSpore

Magical Drafts and Potions by Arsenius Jigger

Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them by NewtScamander

The Dark Forces: A Guide to Self-Protection by QuentinTrimble

OTHER EQUIPMENT

1 wand

1 cauldron (pewter, standard size 2)

1 set glass or crystal phials1 telescope1 set brass scales

Students may also bring an owl OR a cat OR a toad

PARENTS ARE REMINDED THAT FIRST YEARS ARENOT ALLOWED THEIR OWN BROOMSTICKS

“Can we buy all this in London?” Harry wonderedaloud.

“If yeh know where to go,” said Hagrid.

Harry had never been to London before. AlthoughHagrid seemed to know where he was going, he wasobviously not used to getting there in an ordinaryway. He got stuck in the ticket barrier on theUnderground, and complained loudly that the seatswere too small and the trains too slow.

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t know how the Muggles manage withoutmagic,” he said as they climbed a broken-downescalator that led up to a bustling road lined withshops.

Hagrid was so huge that he parted the crowd easily;all Harry had to do was keep close behind him. Theypassed book shops and music stores, hamburgerrestaurants and cinemas, but nowhere that looked asif it could sell you a magic wand. This was just anordinary street full of ordinary people. Could therereally be piles of wizard gold buried miles beneaththem? Were there really shops that sold spell booksand broomsticks? Might this not all be some hugejoke that the Dursleys had cooked up? If Harry hadn’tknown that the Dursleys had no sense of humor, hemight have thought so; yet somehow, even thougheverything Hagrid had told him so far wasunbelievable, Harry couldn’t help trusting him.

“This is it,” said Hagrid, coming to a halt, “the LeakyCauldron. It’s a famous place.”

It was a tiny, grubby-looking pub. If Hagrid hadn’tpointed it out, Harry wouldn’t have noticed it wasthere. The people hurrying by didn’t glance at it. Theireyes slid from the big book shop on one side to therecord shop on the other as if they couldn’t see theLeaky Cauldron at all. In fact, Harry had the mostpeculiar feeling that only he and Hagrid could see it.Before he could mention this, Hagrid had steered himinside.

For a famous place, it was very dark and shabby. Afew old women were sitting in a corner, drinking tinyglasses of sherry. One of them was smoking a longpipe. A little man in a top hat was talking to the oldbartender, who was quite bald and looked like atoothless walnut. The low buzz of chatter stoppedPage | 76 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

when they walked in. Everyone seemed to knowHagrid; they waved and smiled at him, and thebartender reached for a glass, saying, “The usual,Hagrid?”

“Can’t, Tom, I’m on Hogwarts business,” said Hagrid,clapping his great hand on Harry’s shoulder andmaking Harry’s knees buckle.

“Good Lord,” said the bartender, peering at Harry, “isthis — can this be — ?”

The Leaky Cauldron had suddenly gone completelystill and silent.

“Bless my soul,” whispered the old bartender, “HarryPotter ... what an honor.”

He hurried out from behind the bar, rushed towardHarry and seized his hand, tears in his eyes.

“Welcome back, Mr. Potter, welcome back.”

Harry didn’t know what to say. Everyone was lookingat him. The old woman with the pipe was puffing on itwithout realizing it had gone out. Hagrid wasbeaming.

Then there was a great scraping of chairs and thenext moment, Harry found himself shaking handswith everyone in the Leaky Cauldron.

“Doris Crockford, Mr. Potter, can’t believe I’m meetingyou at last.”

“So proud, Mr. Potter, I’m just so proud.”

“Always wanted to shake your hand — I’m all of aflutter.”

Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Delighted, Mr. Potter, just can’t tell you, Diggle’s thename, Dedalus Diggle.”

“I’ve seen you before!” said Harry, as Dedalus Diggle’stop hat fell off in his excitement. “You bowed to meonce in a shop.”

“He remembers!” cried Dedalus Diggle, lookingaround at everyone. “Did you hear that? Heremembers me!”

Harry shook hands again and again — DorisCrockford kept coming back for more.

A pale young man made his way forward, verynervously. One of his eyes was twitching.

“Professor Quirrell!” said Hagrid. “Harry, ProfessorQuirrell will be one of your teachers at Hogwarts.”

“P-P-Potter,” stammered Professor Quirrell, graspingHarry’s hand, “c-can’t t-tell you how p-pleased I am tomeet you.”

“What sort of magic do you teach, Professor Quirrell?”

“D-Defense Against the D-D-Dark Arts,” mutteredProfessor Quirrell, as though he’d rather not thinkabout it. “N-not that you n-need it, eh, P-P-Potter?”

He laughed nervously. “You’ll be g-getting all yourequipment, I suppose? I’ve g-got to p-pick up a new b-book on vampires, m-myself.” He looked terrified atthe very thought.

But the others wouldn’t let Professor Quirrell keepHarry to himself. It took almost ten minutes to getaway from them all. At last, Hagrid managed to makehimself heard over the babble.

Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Must get on — lots ter buy. Come on, Harry.”

Doris Crockford shook Harry’s hand one last time,and Hagrid led them through the bar and out into asmall, walled courtyard, where there was nothing buta trash can and a few weeds.

Hagrid grinned at Harry.

“Told yeh, didn’t I? Told yeh you was famous. EvenProfessor Quirrell was tremblin’ ter meet yeh — mindyou, he’s usually tremblin’.”

“Is he always that nervous?”

“Oh, yeah. Poor bloke. Brilliant mind. He was finewhile he was studyin’ outta books but then he took ayear off ter get some firsthand experience. ... They sayhe met vampires in the Black Forest, and there was anasty bit o’ trouble with a hag — never been the samesince. Scared of the students, scared of his ownsubject — now, where’s me umbrella?”

Vampires? Hags? Harry’s head was swimming.

Hagrid, meanwhile, was counting bricks in the wallabove the trash can.

“Three up ... two across ...” he muttered. “Right,stand back, Harry.”

He tapped the wall three times with the point of hisumbrella.

The brick he had touched quivered — it wriggled — inthe middle, a small hole appeared — it grew widerand wider — a second later they were facing anarchway large enough even for Hagrid, an archwayonto a cobbled street that twisted and turned out ofsight.

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Welcome,” said Hagrid, “to Diagon Alley.”

He grinned at Harry’s amazement. They steppedthrough the archway. Harry looked quickly over hisshoulder and saw the archway shrink instantly backinto solid wall.

The sun shone brightly on a stack of cauldronsoutside the nearest shop. Cauldrons — All Sizes —Copper, Brass, Pewter, Silver — Self-Stirring —Collapsible, said a sign hanging over them.

“Yeah, you’ll be needin’ one,” said Hagrid, “but wegotta get yer money first.”

Harry wished he had about eight more eyes. Heturned his head in every direction as they walked upthe street, trying to look at everything at once: theshops, the things outside them, the people doing theirshopping. A plump woman outside an Apothecarywas shaking her head as they passed, saying,

“Dragon liver, sixteen Sickles an ounce, they’re mad.”

A low, soft hooting came from a dark shop with a signsaying Eeylops Owl Emporium — Tawny, Screech,Barn, Brown, and Snowy. Several boys of aboutHarry’s age had their noses pressed against a windowwith broomsticks in it. “Look,” Harry heard one ofthem say, “the new Nimbus Two Thousand — fastestever —” There were shops selling robes, shops sellingtelescopes and strange silver instruments Harry hadnever seen before, windows stacked with barrels ofbat spleens and eels’ eyes, tottering piles of spellbooks, quills, and rolls of parchment, potion bottles,globes of the moon. ...

“Gringotts,” said Hagrid.

Page | 80 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

They had reached a snowy white building thattowered over the other little shops. Standing besideits burnished bronze doors, wearing a uniform ofscarlet and gold, was —

“Yeah, that’s a goblin,” said Hagrid quietly as theywalked up the white stone steps toward him. Thegoblin was about a head shorter than Harry. He had aswarthy, clever face, a pointed beard and, Harrynoticed, very long fingers and feet. He bowed as theywalked inside. Now they were facing a second pair ofdoors, silver this time, with words engraved uponthem:

Enter, stranger, but take heed

Of what awaits the sin of greed,

For those who take, but do not earn,

Must pay most dearly in their turn.

So if you seek beneath our floors

A treasure that was never yours,

Thief, you have been warned, beware

Of finding more than treasure there.

“Like I said, yeh’d be mad ter try an’ rob it,” saidHagrid.

A pair of goblins bowed them through the silver doorsand they were in a vast marble hall. About a hundredmore goblins were sitting on high stools behind a longcounter, scribbling in large ledgers, weighing coins inbrass scales, examining precious stones througheyeglasses. There were too many doors to countPage | 81 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

leading off the hall, and yet more goblins wereshowing people in and out of these. Hagrid and Harrymade for the counter.

“Morning,” said Hagrid to a free goblin. “We’ve cometer take some money outta Mr. Harry Potter’s safe.”

“You have his key, sir?”

“Got it here somewhere,” said Hagrid, and he startedemptying his pockets onto the counter, scattering ahandful of moldy dog biscuits over the goblins book ofnumbers. The goblin wrinkled his nose. Harrywatched the goblin on their right weighing a pile ofrubies as big as glowing coals.

“Got it,” said Hagrid at last, holding up a tiny goldenkey.

The goblin looked at it closely.

“That seems to be in order.”

“An’ I’ve also got a letter here from ProfessorDumbledore,” said Hagrid importantly, throwing outhis chest. “It’s about the You-Know-What in vaultseven hundred and thirteen.”

The goblin read the letter carefully.

“Very well,” he said, handing it back to Hagrid, “I willhave someone take you down to both vaults.Griphook!”

Griphook was yet another goblin. Once Hagrid hadcrammed all the dog biscuits back inside his pockets,he and Harry followed Griphook toward one of thedoors leading off the hall.

Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“What’s the You-Know-What in vault seven hundredand thirteen?” Harry asked.

“Can’t tell yeh that,” said Hagrid mysteriously. “Verysecret. Hogwarts business. Dumbledore’s trusted me.More’n my job’s worth ter tell yeh that.”

Griphook held the door open for them. Harry, whohad expected more marble, was surprised. They werein a narrow stone passageway lit with flamingtorches. It sloped steeply downward and there werelittle railway tracks on the floor. Griphook whistledand a small cart came hurtling up the tracks towardthem. They climbed in — Hagrid with some difficulty— and were off.

At first they just hurtled through a maze of twistingpassages. Harry tried to remember, left, right, right,left, middle fork, right, left, but it was impossible. Therattling cart seemed to know its own way, becauseGriphook wasn’t steering.

Harry’s eyes stung as the cold air rushed past them,but he kept them wide open. Once, he thought he sawa burst of fire at the end of a passage and twistedaround to see if it was a dragon, but too late — theyplunged even deeper, passing an underground lakewhere huge stalactites and stalagmites grew from theceiling and floor.

“I never know,” Harry called to Hagrid over the noiseof the cart, “what’s the difference between astalagmite and a stalactite?”

“Stalagmite’s got an ‘m’ in it,” said Hagrid. “An’ don’ask me questions just now, I think I’m gonna besick.”

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

He did look very green, and when the cart stopped atlast beside a small door in the passage wall, Hagridgot out and had to lean against the wall to stop hisknees from trembling.

Griphook unlocked the door. A lot of green smokecame billowing out, and as it cleared, Harry gasped.Inside were mounds of gold coins. Columns of silver.Heaps of little bronze Knuts.

“All yours,” smiled Hagrid.

All Harry’s — it was incredible. The Dursleys couldn’thave known about this or they’d have had it from himfaster than blinking. How often had they complainedhow much Harry cost them to keep? And all the timethere had been a small fortune belonging to him,buried deep under London.

Hagrid helped Harry pile some of it into a bag.

“The gold ones are Galleons,” he explained.

“Seventeen silver Sickles to a Galleon and twenty-nineKnuts to a Sickle, it’s easy enough. Right, that shouldbe enough fer a couple o’ terms, we’ll keep the restsafe for yeh.” He turned to Griphook. “Vault sevenhundred and thirteen now, please, and can we gomore slowly?”

“One speed only,” said Griphook.

They were going even deeper now and gatheringspeed. The air became colder and colder as theyhurtled round tight corners. They went rattling overan underground ravine, and Harry leaned over theside to try to see what was down at the dark bottom,but Hagrid groaned and pulled him back by the scruffof his neck.

Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Vault seven hundred and thirteen had no keyhole.

“Stand back,” said Griphook importantly. He strokedthe door gently with one of his long fingers and itsimply melted away.

“If anyone but a Gringotts goblin tried that, they’d besucked through the door and trapped in there,” saidGriphook.

“How often do you check to see if anyone’s inside?”Harry asked.

“About once every ten years,” said Griphook with arather nasty grin.

Something really extraordinary had to be inside thistop security vault, Harry was sure, and he leanedforward eagerly, expecting to see fabulous jewels atthe very least — but at first he thought it was empty.Then he noticed a grubby little package wrapped upin brown paper lying on the floor. Hagrid picked it upand tucked it deep inside his coat. Harry longed toknow what it was, but knew better than to ask.

“Come on, back in this infernal cart, and don’t talk tome on the way back, it’s best if I keep me mouthshut,” said Hagrid.

One wild cart ride later they stood blinking in thesunlight outside Gringotts. Harry didn’t know whereto run first now that he had a bag full of money. Hedidn’t have to know how many Galleons there were toa pound to know that he was holding more moneythan he’d had in his whole life — more money thaneven Dudley had ever had.

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Might as well get yer uniform,” said Hagrid, noddingtoward Madam Malkin’s Robes for All Occasions.“Listen, Harry, would yeh mind if I slipped off fer apick-me-up in the Leaky Cauldron? I hate themGringotts carts.” He did still look a bit sick, so Harryentered Madam Malkin’s shop alone, feeling nervous.

Madam Malkin was a squat, smiling witch dressed allin mauve.

“Hogwarts, dear?” she said, when Harry started tospeak. “Got the lot here — another young man beingfitted up just now, in fact.”

In the back of the shop, a boy with a pale, pointedface was standing on a footstool while a second witchpinned up his long black robes. Madam Malkin stoodHarry on a stool next to him, slipped a long robe overhis head, and began to pin it to the right length.

“Hello,” said the boy, “Hogwarts, too?”

“Yes,” said Harry.

“My father’s next door buying my books and mother’sup the street looking at wands,” said the boy. He hada bored, drawling voice. “Then I’m going to drag themoff to look at racing brooms. I don’t see why first yearscan’t have their own. I think I’ll bully father intogetting me one and I’ll smuggle it in somehow.”

Harry was strongly reminded of Dudley.

“Have you got your own broom?” the boy went on.

“No,” said Harry.

“Play Quidditch at all?”

Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“No,” Harry said again, wondering what on earthQuidditch could be.

“I do — Father says it’s a crime if I’m not picked toplay for my House, and I must say, I agree. Knowwhat House you 11 be in yet?”

“No,” said Harry, feeling more stupid by the minute.

“Well, no one really knows until they get there, dothey, but I know I’ll be in Slytherin, all our familyhave been — imagine being in Hufflepuff, I think I’dleave, wouldn’t you?”

“Mmm,” said Harry, wishing he could say something abit more interesting.

“I say, look at that man!” said the boy suddenly,nodding toward the front window. Hagrid wasstanding there, grinning at Harry and pointing at twolarge ice creams to show he couldn’t come in.

“That’s Hagrid,” said Harry, pleased to knowsomething the boy didn’t. “He works at Hogwarts.”

“Oh,” said the boy, “I’ve heard of him. He’s a sort ofservant, isn’t he?”

“He’s the gamekeeper,” said Harry. He was liking theboy less and less every second.

“Yes, exactly. I heard he’s a sort of savage — lives in ahut on the school grounds and every now and then hegets drunk, tries to do magic, and ends up setting fireto his bed.”

“I think he’s brilliant,” said Harry coldly.

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Do you?” said the boy, with a slight sneer. “Why is hewith you? Where are your parents?”

“They’re dead,” said Harry shortly. He didn’t feelmuch like going into the matter with this boy.

“Oh, sorry,” said the other, not sounding sorry at all.“But they were our kind, weren’t they?”

“They were a witch and wizard, if that’s what youmean.”

“I really don’t think they should let the other sort in,do you? They’re just not the same, they’ve never beenbrought up to know our ways. Some of them havenever even heard of Hogwarts until they get the letter,imagine. I think they should keep it in the oldwizarding families. What’s your surname, anyway?”

But before Harry could answer, Madam Malkin said,“That’s you done, my dear,” and Harry, not sorry foran excuse to stop talking to the boy, hopped downfrom the footstool.

“Well, I’ll see you at Hogwarts, I suppose,” said thedrawling boy.

Harry was rather quiet as he ate the ice cream Hagridhad bought him (chocolate and raspberry withchopped nuts).

“What’s up?” said Hagrid.

“Nothing,” Harry lied. They stopped to buy parchmentand quills. Harry cheered up a bit when he found abottle of ink that changed color as you wrote. Whenthey had left the shop, he said, “Hagrid, what’sQuidditch?”

Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Blimey, Harry, I keep forgettin’ how little yeh know —not knowin’ about Quidditch!”

“Don’t make me feel worse,” said Harry. He toldHagrid about the pale boy in Madam Malkin’s.

“— and he said people from Muggle families shouldn’teven be allowed in —”

“Yer not from a Muggle family. If he’d known who yehwere — he’s grown up knowin’ yer name if hisparents are wizardin’ folk. You saw what everyone inthe Leaky Cauldron was like when they saw yeh.Anyway, what does he know about it, some o’ the bestI ever saw were the only ones with magic in ’em in along line o’ Muggles — look at yer mum! Look whatshe had fer a sister!”

“So what is Quidditch?”

“It’s our sport. Wizard sport. It’s like — like soccer inthe Muggle world — everyone follows Quidditch —played up in the air on broomsticks and there’s fourballs — sorta hard ter explain the rules.”

“And what are Slytherin and Hufflepuff?”

“School Houses. There’s four. Everyone saysHufflepuff are a lot o’ duffers, but —”

“I bet I’m in Hufflepuff,” said Harry gloomily.

“Better Hufflepuff than Slytherin,” said Hagrid darkly.“There’s not a single witch or wizard who went badwho wasn’t in Slytherin. You-Know-Who was one.”

“Vol-, sorry — You-Know-Who was at Hogwarts?”

“Years an’ years ago,” said Hagrid.

Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

They bought Harry’s school books in a shop calledFlourish and Blotts where the shelves were stacked tothe ceiling with books as large as paving stonesbound in leather; books the size of postage stamps incovers of silk; books full of peculiar symbols and afew books with nothing in them at all. Even Dudley,who never read anything, would have been wild to gethis hands on some of these. Hagrid almost had todrag Harry away from Curses and Counter-curses(Bewitch Your Friends and Befuddle Your Enemieswith the Latest Revenges: Hair Loss, Jelly-Legs,Tongue-Tying and Much, Much More) by ProfessorVindictus Viridian.

“I was trying to find out how to curse Dudley.”

“I’m not sayin’ that’s not a good idea, but yer not teruse magic in the Muggle world except in very specialcircumstances,” said Hagrid. “An’ anyway, yehcouldn’ work any of them curses yet, yeh’ll need a lotmore study before yeh get ter that level.”

Hagrid wouldn’t let Harry buy a solid gold cauldron,either (“It says pewter on yer list”), but they got a niceset of scales for weighing potion ingredients and acollapsible brass telescope. Then they visited theApothecary, which was fascinating enough to makeup for its horrible smell, a mixture of bad eggs androtted cabbages. Barrels of slimy stuff stood on thefloor; jars of herbs, dried roots, and bright powderslined the walls; bundles of feathers, strings of fangs,and snarled claws hung from the ceiling. WhileHagrid asked the man behind the counter for asupply of some basic potion ingredients for Harry,Harry himself examined silver unicorn horns attwenty-one Galleons each and minuscule, glittery-black beetle eyes (five Knuts a scoop).

Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Outside the Apothecary, Hagrid checked Harry’s listagain.

“Just yer wand left — oh yeah, an’ I still haven’t gotyeh a birthday present.”

Harry felt himself go red.

“You don’t have to —”

“I know I don’t have to. Tell yeh what, I’ll get yeranimal. Not a toad, toads went outta fashion yearsago, yeh’d be laughed at — an’ I don’ like cats, theymake me sneeze. I’ll get yer an owl. All the kids wantowls, they’re dead useful, carry yer mail an’everythin’.”

Twenty minutes later, they left Eeylops OwlEmporium, which had been dark and full of rustlingand flickering, jewel-bright eyes. Harry now carried alarge cage that held a beautiful snowy owl, fast asleepwith her head under her wing. He couldn’t stopstammering his thanks, sounding just like ProfessorQuirrell.

“Don’ mention it,” said Hagrid gruffly. “Don’ expectyou’ve had a lotta presents from them Dursleys. JustOllivanders left now — only place fer wands,Ollivanders, and yeh gotta have the best wand.”

A magic wand ... this was what Harry had been reallylooking forward to.

The last shop was narrow and shabby. Peeling goldletters over the door read Ollivanders: Makers of FineWands since 382b.c. A single wand lay on a fadedpurple cushion in the dusty window.

Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

A tinkling bell rang somewhere in the depths of theshop as they stepped inside. It was a tiny place,empty except for a single, spindly chair that Hagridsat on to wait. Harry felt strangely as though he hadentered a very strict library; he swallowed a lot of newquestions that had just occurred to him and lookedinstead at the thousands of narrow boxes piled neatlyright up to the ceiling. For some reason, the back ofhis neck prickled. The very dust and silence in hereseemed to tingle with some secret magic.

“Good afternoon,” said a soft voice. Harry jumped.Hagrid must have jumped, too, because there was aloud crunching noise and he got quickly off thespindly chair.

An old man was standing before them, his wide, paleeyes shining like moons through the gloom of theshop.

“Hello,” said Harry awkwardly.

“Ah yes,” said the man. “Yes, yes. I thought I’d beseeing you soon. Harry Potter.” It wasn’t a question.“You have your mother’s eyes. It seems only yesterdayshe was in here herself, buying her first wand. Tenand a quarter inches long, swishy, made of willow.Nice wand for charm work.”

Mr. Ollivander moved closer to Harry. Harry wishedhe would blink. Those silvery eyes were a bit creepy.

“Your father, on the other hand, favored a mahoganywand. Eleven inches. Pliable. A little more power andexcellent for transfiguration. Well, I say your fatherfavored it — it’s really the wand that chooses thewizard, of course.”

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Mr. Ollivander had come so close that he and Harrywere almost nose to nose. Harry could see himselfreflected in those misty eyes.

“And that’s where ...”

Mr. Ollivander touched the lightning scar on Harry’sforehead with a long, white finger.

“I’m sorry to say I sold the wand that did it,” he saidsoftly. “Thirteen-and-a-half inches. Yew. Powerfulwand, very powerful, and in the wrong hands ... well,if I’d known what that wand was going out into theworld to do. ...”

He shook his head and then, to Harry’s relief, spottedHagrid.

“Rubeus! Rubeus Hagrid! How nice to see you again.

... Oak, sixteen inches, rather bendy, wasn’t it?”

“It was, sir, yes,” said Hagrid.

“Good wand, that one. But I suppose they snapped itin half when you got expelled?” said Mr. Ollivander,suddenly stern.

“Er — yes, they did, yes,” said Hagrid, shuffling hisfeet. “I’ve still got the pieces, though,” he addedbrightly.

“But you don’t use them?” said Mr. Ollivandersharply.

“Oh, no, sir,” said Hagrid quickly. Harry noticed hegripped his pink umbrella very tightly as he spoke.

“Hmmm,” said Mr. Ollivander, giving Hagrid apiercing look. “Well, now — Mr. Potter. Let me see.”

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

He pulled a long tape measure with silver markingsout of his pocket. “Which is your wand arm?”

“Er — well, I’m right-handed,” said Harry.

“Hold out your arm. That’s it.” He measured Harryfrom shoulder to finger, then wrist to elbow, shoulderto floor, knee to armpit and round his head. As hemeasured, he said, “Every Ollivander wand has a coreof a powerful magical substance, Mr. Potter. We useunicorn hairs, phoenix tail feathers, and theheartstrings of dragons. No two Ollivander wands arethe same, just as no two unicorns, dragons, orphoenixes are quite the same. And of course, you willnever get such good results with another wizard’swand.”

Harry suddenly realized that the tape measure, whichwas measuring between his nostrils, was doing thison its own. Mr. Ollivander was flitting around theshelves, taking down boxes.

“That will do,” he said, and the tape measurecrumpled into a heap on the floor. “Right then, Mr.Potter. Try this one. Beech-wood and dragonheartstring. Nine inches. Nice and flexible. Just takeit and give it a wave.”

Harry took the wand and (feeling foolish) waved itaround a bit, but Mr. Ollivander snatched it out of hishand almost at once.

“Maple and phoenix feather. Seven inches. Quitewhippy. Try —”

Harry tried — but he had hardly raised the wandwhen it, too, was snatched back by Mr. Ollivander.

Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“No, no — here, ebony and unicorn hair, eight and ahalf inches, springy. Go on, go on, try it out.”

Harry tried. And tried. He had no idea what Mr.Ollivander was waiting for. The pile of tried wandswas mounting higher and higher on the spindly chair,but the more wands Mr. Ollivander pulled from theshelves, the happier he seemed to become.

“Tricky customer, eh? Not to worry, well find theperfect match here somewhere — I wonder, now —yes, why not — unusual combination — holly andphoenix feather, eleven inches, nice and supple.”

Harry took the wand. He felt a sudden warmth in hisfingers. He raised the wand above his head, brought itswishing down through the dusty air and a stream ofred and gold sparks shot from the end like a firework,throwing dancing spots of light on to the walls. Hagridwhooped and clapped and Mr. Ollivander cried, “Oh,bravo! Yes, indeed, oh, very good. Well, well, well ...how curious ... how very curious ...”

He put Harry’s wand back into its box and wrapped itin brown paper, still muttering, “Curious ... curious

“Sorry,” said Harry, “but what’s curious?”

Mr. Ollivander fixed Harry with his pale stare.

“I remember every wand I’ve ever sold, Mr. Potter.Every single wand. It so happens that the phoenixwhose tail feather is in your wand, gave anotherfeather —just one other. It is very curious indeedthat you should be destined for this wand when itsbrother — why, its brother gave you that scar.”

Harry swallowed.

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, thirteen-and-a-half inches. Yew. Curious indeedhow these things happen. The wand chooses thewizard, remember. ... I think we must expect greatthings from you, Mr. Potter. ... After all, He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named did great things — terrible, yes,but great.”

Harry shivered. He wasn’t sure he liked Mr.

Ollivander too much. He paid seven gold Galleons forhis wand, and Mr. Ollivander bowed them from hisshop.

The late afternoon sun hung low in the sky as Harryand Hagrid made their way back down Diagon Alley,back through the wall, back through the LeakyCauldron, now empty. Harry didn’t speak at all asthey walked down the road; he didn’t even notice howmuch people were gawking at them on theUnderground, laden as they were with all their funny-shaped packages, with the snowy owl asleep in itscage on Harry’s lap. Up another escalator, out intoPaddington station; Harry only realized where theywere when Hagrid tapped him on the shoulder.

“Got time fer a bite to eat before yer train leaves,” hesaid.

He bought Harry a hamburger and they sat down onplastic seats to eat them. Harry kept looking around.Everything looked so strange, somehow.

“You all right, Harry? Yer very quiet,” said Hagrid.

Harry wasn’t sure he could explain. He’d just had thebest birthday of his life — and yet — he chewed hishamburger, trying to find the words.

“Everyone thinks I’m special,” he said at last. “Allthose people in the Leaky Cauldron, Professor

Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Quirrell, Mr. Ollivander ... but I don’t know anythingabout magic at all. How can they expect great things?I’m famous and I can’t even remember what I’mfamous for. I don’t know what happened when Vol-,sorry — I mean, the night my parents died.”

Hagrid leaned across the table. Behind the wild beardand eyebrows he wore a very kind smile.

“Don’you worry, Harry. You’ll learn fast enough.Everyone starts at the beginning at Hogwarts, you’llbe just fine. Just be yerself. I know it’s hard. Yeh’vebeen singled out, an’ that’s always hard. But yeh’llhave a great time at Hogwarts — I did — still do,’smatter of fact.”

Hagrid helped Harry on to the train that would takehim back to the Dursleys, then handed him anenvelope.

“Yer ticket fer Hogwarts,” he said. “First o’ September— King’s Cross — it’s all on yer ticket. Any problemswith the Dursleys, send me a letter with yer owl, she’llknow where to find me. ... See yeh soon, Harry.”

The train pulled out of the station. Harry wanted towatch Hagrid until he was out of sight; he rose in hisseat and pressed his nose against the window, but heblinked and Hagrid had gone.

Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





THE JOURNEY FROM PLATFORMNINE AND THREE-QUARTERS

Harry’s last month with the Dursleys wasn’t fun.True, Dudley was now so scared of Harry he wouldn’tstay in the same room, while Aunt Petunia and UncleVernon didn’t shut Harry in his cupboard, force himto do anything, or shout at him — in fact, they didn’tspeak to him at all. Half terrified, half furious, theyacted as though any chair with Harry in it wereempty. Although this was an improvement in manyways, it did become a bit depressing after a while.

Harry kept to his room, with his new owl forcompany. He had decided to call her Hedwig, a namehe had found in A History of Magic. His school bookswere very interesting. He lay on his bed reading lateinto the night, Hedwig swooping in and out of theopen window as she pleased. It was lucky that AuntPetunia didn’t come in to vacuum anymore, becauseHedwig kept bringing back dead mice. Every nightbefore he went to sleep, Harry ticked off another day

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

on the piece of paper he had pinned to the wall,counting down to September the first.

On the last day of August he thought he’d betterspeak to his aunt and uncle about getting to King’sCross station the next day, so he went down to theliving room where they were watching a quiz show ontelevision. He cleared his throat to let them know hewas there, and Dudley screamed and ran from theroom.

“Er — Uncle Vernon?”

Uncle Vernon grunted to show he was listening.

“Er — I need to be at King’s Cross tomorrow to — togo to Hogwarts.”

Uncle Vernon grunted again.

“Would it be all right if you gave me a lift?”

Grunt. Harry supposed that meant yes.

“Thank you.”

He was about to go back upstairs when Uncle Vernonactually spoke.

“Funny way to get to a wizards’ school, the train.Magic carpets all got punctures, have they?”

Harry didn’t say anything.

“Where is this school, anyway?”

“I don’t know,” said Harry, realizing this for the firsttime. He pulled the ticket Hagrid had given him out ofhis pocket.

Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I just take the train from platform nine and three-quarters at eleven o’clock,” he read.

His aunt and uncle stared.

“Platform what?”

“Nine and three-quarters.”

“Don’t talk rubbish,” said Uncle Vernon. “There is noplatform nine and three-quarters.”

“It’s on my ticket.”

“Barking,” said Uncle Vernon, “howling mad, the lot ofthem. You 11 see. You just wait. All right, we’ll takeyou to King’s Cross. We’re going up to Londontomorrow anyway, or I wouldn’t bother.”

“Why are you going to London?” Harry asked, tryingto keep things friendly.

“Taking Dudley to the hospital,” growled UncleVernon. “Got to have that ruddy tail removed beforehe goes to Smeltings.”

Harry woke at five o’clock the next morning and wastoo excited and nervous to go back to sleep. He got upand pulled on his jeans because he didn’t want towalk into the station in his wizard’s robes — he’dchange on the train. He checked his Hogwarts list yetagain to make sure he had everything he needed, sawthat Hedwig was shut safely in her cage, and thenpaced the room, waiting for the Dursleys to get up.Two hours later, Harry’s huge, heavy trunk had beenloaded into the Dursleys’ car, Aunt Petunia hadtalked Dudley into sitting next to Harry, and they hadset off.

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

They reached King’s Cross at half past ten. UncleVernon dumped Harry’s trunk onto a cart andwheeled it into the station for him. Harry thought thiswas strangely kind until Uncle Vernon stopped dead,facing the platforms with a nasty grin on his face.

“Well, there you are, boy. Platform nine — platformten. Your platform should be somewhere in themiddle, but they don’t seem to have built it yet, dothey?”

He was quite right, of course. There was a big plasticnumber nine over one platform and a big plasticnumber ten over the one next to it, and in the middle,nothing at all.

“Have a good term,” said Uncle Vernon with an evennastier smile. He left without another word. Harryturned and saw the Dursleys drive away. All three ofthem were laughing. Harry’s mouth went rather dry.What on earth was he going to do? He was starting toattract a lot of funny looks, because of Hedwig. He’dhave to ask someone.

He stopped a passing guard, but didn’t dare mentionplatform nine and three-quarters. The guard hadnever heard of Hogwarts and when Harry couldn’teven tell him what part of the country it was in, hestarted to get annoyed, as though Harry was beingstupid on purpose. Getting desperate, Harry asked forthe train that left at eleven o’clock, but the guard saidthere wasn’t one. In the end the guard strode away,muttering about time wasters. Harry was now tryinghard not to panic. According to the large clock overthe arrivals board, he had ten minutes left to get onthe train to Hogwarts and he had no idea how to do it;he was stranded in the middle of a station with atrunk he could hardly lift, a pocket full of wizardmoney, and a large owl.

Page | 101 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid must have forgotten to tell him something youhad to do, like tapping the third brick on the left toget into Diagon Alley. He wondered if he should getout his wand and start tapping the ticket inspector’sstand between platforms nine and ten.

At that moment a group of people passed just behindhim and he caught a few words of what they weresaying.

“— packed with Muggles, of course —”

Harry swung round. The speaker was a plumpwoman who was talking to four boys, all with flamingred hair. Each of them was pushing a trunk likeHarry’s in front of him — and they had an owl.

Heart hammering, Harry pushed his cart after them.They stopped and so did he, just near enough to hearwhat they were saying.

“Now, what’s the platform number?” said the boys’mother.

“Nine and three-quarters!” piped a small girl, also red-headed, who was holding her hand, “Mom, can’t I go

“You’re not old enough, Ginny, now be quiet. All right,Percy, you go first.”

What looked like the oldest boy marched towardplatforms nine and ten. Harry watched, careful not toblink in case he missed it — but just as the boyreached the dividing barrier between the twoplatforms, a large crowd of tourists came swarming infront of him and by the time the last backpack hadcleared away, the boy had vanished.

Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Fred, you next,” the plump woman said.

“I’m not Fred, I’m George,” said the boy. “Honestly,woman, you call yourself our mother? Can’t you tellI’m George?”

“Sorry, George, dear.”

“Only joking, I am Fred,” said the boy, and off hewent. His twin called after him to hurry up, and hemust have done so, because a second later, he hadgone — but how had he done it?

Now the third brother was walking briskly toward thebarrier — he was almost there — and then, quitesuddenly, he wasn’t anywhere.

There was nothing else for it.

“Excuse me,” Harry said to the plump woman.

“Hello, dear,” she said. “First time at Hogwarts? Ron’snew, too.”

She pointed at the last and youngest of her sons. Hewas tall, thin, and gangling, with freckles, big handsand feet, and a long nose.

“Yes,” said Harry. “The thing is — the thing is, I don’tknow how to —”

“How to get onto the platform?” she said kindly, andHarry nodded.

“Not to worry,” she said. “All you have to do is walkstraight at the barrier between platforms nine andten. Don’t stop and don’t be scared you’ll crash intoit, that’s very important. Best do it at a bit of a run ifyou’re nervous. Go on, go now before Ron.”

Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Er — okay,” said Harry.

He pushed his trolley around and stared at thebarrier. It looked very solid.

He started to walk toward it. People jostled him ontheir way to platforms nine and ten. Harry walkedmore quickly. He was going to smash right into thatbarrier and then he’d be in trouble — leaning forwardon his cart, he broke into a heavy run — the barrierwas coming nearer and nearer — he wouldn’t be ableto stop — the cart was out of control — he was a footaway — he closed his eyes ready for the crash —

It didn’t come ... he kept on running ... he opened hiseyes.

A scarlet steam engine was waiting next to a platformpacked with people. A sign overhead said HogwartsExpress, eleven o’clock. Harry looked behind him andsaw a wrought-iron archway where the barrier hadbeen, with the words Platform Nine and Three-Quarters on it. He had done it.

Smoke from the engine drifted over the heads of thechattering crowd, while cats of every color woundhere and there between their legs. Owls hooted to oneanother in a disgruntled sort of way over the babbleand the scraping of heavy trunks.

The first few carriages were already packed withstudents, some hanging out of the window to talk totheir families, some fighting over seats. Harry pushedhis cart off down the platform in search of an emptyseat. He passed a round-faced boy who was saying,“Gran, I’ve lost my toad again.”

“Oh, Neville,” he heard the old woman sigh.

Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

A boy with dreadlocks was surrounded by a smallcrowd.

“Give us a look, Lee, go on.”

The boy lifted the lid of a box in his arms, and thepeople around him shrieked and yelled as somethinginside poked out a long, hairy leg.

Harry pressed on through the crowd until he foundan empty compartment near the end of the train. Heput Hedwig inside first and then started to shove andheave his trunk toward the train door. He tried to liftit up the steps but could hardly raise one end andtwice he dropped it painfully on his foot.

“Want a hand?” It was one of the red-haired twinshe’d followed through the barrier.

“Yes, please,” Harry panted.

“Oy, Fred! C’mere and help!”

With the twins’ help, Harry’s trunk was at last tuckedaway in a corner of the compartment.

“Thanks,” said Harry, pushing his sweaty hair out ofhis eyes.

“What’s that?” said one of the twins suddenly,pointing at Harry’s lightning scar.

“Blimey,” said the other twin. “Are you — ?”

“He is,” said the first twin. “Aren’t you?” he added toHarry.

“What?” said Harry.

Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Harry Potter,” chorused the twins.

“Oh, him,” said Harry. “I mean, yes, I am.”

The two boys gawked at him, and Harry felt himselfturning red. Then, to his relief, a voice came floatingin through the train’s open door.

“Fred? George? Are you there?”

“Coming, Mom.”

With a last look at Harry, the twins hopped off thetrain.

Harry sat down next to the window where, halfhidden, he could watch the red-haired family on theplatform and hear what they were saying. Theirmother had just taken out her handkerchief.

“Ron, you’ve got something on your nose.”

The youngest boy tried to jerk out of the way, but shegrabbed him and began rubbing the end of his nose.

“Mom— geroff.” He wriggled free.

“Aaah, has ickle Ronnie got somefink on his nosie?”said one of the twins.

“Shut up,” said Ron.

“Where’s Percy?” said their mother.

“He’s coming now.”

The oldest boy came striding into sight. He hadalready changed into his billowing black Hogwarts

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

robes, and Harry noticed a shiny red and gold badgeon his chest with the letter P on it.

“Can’t stay long, Mother,” he said. “I’m up front, theprefects have got two compartments to themselves —”

“Oh, are you a prefect, Percy?” said one of the twins,with an air of great surprise. “You should have saidsomething, we had no idea.”

“Hang on, I think I remember him saying somethingabout it,” said the other twin. “Once —”

“Or twice —”

“A minute —”

“All summer —”

“Oh, shut up,” said Percy the Prefect.

“How come Percy gets new robes, anyway?” said oneof the twins.

“Because he’s a prefect,” said their mother fondly. “Allright, dear, well, have a good term — send me an owlwhen you get there.”

She kissed Percy on the cheek and he left. Then sheturned to the twins.

“Now, you two — this year, you behave yourselves. If Iget one more owl telling me you’ve — you’ve blown upa toilet or —”

“Blown up a toilet? We’ve never blown up a toilet.”“Great idea though, thanks, Mom.”

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“It’s not funny. And look after Ron.”

“Don’t worry, ickle Ronniekins is safe with us.”

“Shut up,” said Ron again. He was almost as tall asthe twins already and his nose was still pink wherehis mother had rubbed it.

“Hey, Mom, guess what? Guess who we just met onthe train?”

Harry leaned back quickly so they couldn’t see himlooking.

“You know that black-haired boy who was near us inthe station? Know who he is?”

“Who?”

“Harry Potted”

Harry heard the little girl’s voice.

“Oh, Mom, can I go on the train and see him, Mom,oh please. ...”

“You’ve already seen him, Ginny, and the poor boyisn’t something you goggle at in a zoo. Is he really,Fred? How do you know?”

“Asked him. Saw his scar. It’s really there — likelightning.”

“Poor dear— no wonder he was alone, I wondered. Hewas ever so polite when he asked how to get onto theplatform.”

“Never mind that, do you think he remembers whatYou-Know-Who looks like?”

Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Their mother suddenly became very stern.

“I forbid you to ask him, Fred. No, don’t you dare. Asthough he needs reminding of that on his first day atschool.”

“All right, keep your hair on.”

A whistle sounded.

“Hurry up!” their mother said, and the three boysclambered onto the train. They leaned out of thewindow for her to kiss them good-bye, and theiryounger sister began to cry.

“Don’t, Ginny, we’ll send you loads of owls.”

“Well send you a Hogwarts toilet seat.”

“ Georg e\”

“Only joking, Mom.”

The train began to move. Harry saw the boys’ motherwaving and their sister, half laughing, half crying,running to keep up with the train until it gathered toomuch speed, then she fell back and waved.

Harry watched the girl and her mother disappear asthe train rounded the corner. Houses flashed past thewindow. Harry felt a great leap of excitement. Hedidn’t know what he was going to — but it had to bebetter than what he was leaving behind.

The door of the compartment slid open and theyoungest redheaded boy came in.

“Anyone sitting there?” he asked, pointing at the seatopposite Harry. “Everywhere else is full.”

Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry shook his head and the boy sat down. Heglanced at Harry and then looked quickly out of thewindow, pretending he hadn’t looked. Harry saw hestill had a black mark on his nose.

“Hey, Ron.”

The twins were back.

“Listen, we’re going down the middle of the train —

Lee Jordan’s got a giant tarantula down there.”

“Right,” mumbled Ron.

“Harry,” said the other twin, “did we introduceourselves? Fred and George Weasley. And this is Ron,our brother. See you later, then.”

“Bye,” said Harry and Ron. The twins slid thecompartment door shut behind them.

“Are you really Harry Potter?” Ron blurted out.

Harry nodded.

“Oh — well, I thought it might be one of Fred andGeorge’s jokes,” said Ron. “And have you really got —you know ...”

He pointed at Harry’s forehead.

Harry pulled back his bangs to show the lightningscar. Ron stared.

“So that’s where You-Know-Who — ?”

“Yes,” said Harry, “but I can’t remember it.”

“Nothing?” said Ron eagerly.

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Well — I remember a lot of green light, but nothingelse.”

“Wow,” said Ron. He sat and stared at Harry for a fewmoments, then, as though he had suddenly realizedwhat he was doing, he looked quickly out of thewindow again.

“Are all your family wizards?” asked Harry, who foundRon just as interesting as Ron found him.

“Er — yes, I think so,” said Ron. “I think Mom’s got asecond cousin who’s an accountant, but we never talkabout him.”

“So you must know loads of magic already.”

The Weasleys were clearly one of those old wizardingfamilies the pale boy in Diagon Alley had talkedabout.

“I heard you went to live with Muggles,” said Ron.“What are they like?”

“Horrible — well, not all of them. My aunt and uncleand cousin are, though. Wish I’d had three wizardbrothers.”

“Five,” said Ron. For some reason, he was lookinggloomy. “I’m the sixth in our family to go to Hogwarts.You could say I’ve got a lot to live up to. Bill andCharlie have already left — Bill was head boy andCharlie was captain of Quidditch. Now Percy’s aprefect. Fred and George mess around a lot, but theystill get really good marks and everyone thinks they’rereally funny. Everyone expects me to do as well as theothers, but if I do, it’s no big deal, because they did itfirst. You never get anything new, either, with five

Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

brothers. I’ve got Bill’s old robes, Charlie’s old wand,and Percy’s old rat.”

Ron reached inside his jacket and pulled out a fatgray rat, which was asleep.

“His name’s Scabbers and he’s useless, he hardly everwakes up. Percy got an owl from my dad for beingmade a prefect, but they couldn’t aff— I mean, I gotScabbers instead.”

Ron’s ears went pink. He seemed to think he’d saidtoo much, because he went back to staring out of thewindow.

Harry didn’t think there was anything wrong with notbeing able to afford an owl. After all, he’d never hadany money in his life until a month ago, and he toldRon so, all about having to wear Dudley’s old clothesand never getting proper birthday presents. Thisseemed to cheer Ron up.

"... and until Hagrid told me, I didn’t know anythingabout being a wizard or about my parents orVoldemort —”

Ron gasped.

“What?” said Harry.

“You said You-Know-Who’s name\” said Ron, soundingboth shocked and impressed. “I’d have thought you,of all people —”

“I’m not trying to be brave or anything, saying thename,” said Harry, “I just never knew you shouldn’t.See what I mean? I’ve got loads to learn. ... I bet,” headded, voicing for the first time something that had

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

been worrying him a lot lately, “I bet I’m the worst inthe class.”

“You won’t be. There’s loads of people who come fromMuggle families and they learn quick enough.”

While they had been talking, the train had carriedthem out of London. Now they were speeding pastfields full of cows and sheep. They were quiet for atime, watching the fields and lanes flick past.

Around half past twelve there was a great clatteringoutside in the corridor and a smiling, dimpled womanslid back their door and said, “Anything off the cart,dears?”

Harry, who hadn’t had any breakfast, leapt to his feet,but Ron’s ears went pink again and he muttered thathe’d brought sandwiches. Harry went out into thecorridor.

He had never had any money for candy with theDursleys, and now that he had pockets rattling withgold and silver he was ready to buy as many MarsBars as he could carry — but the woman didn’t haveMars Bars. What she did have were Bertie Bott’sEvery Flavor Beans, Drooble’s Best Blowing Gum,Chocolate Frogs, Pumpkin Pasties, Cauldron Cakes,Licorice Wands, and a number of other strange thingsHarry had never seen in his life. Not wanting to missanything, he got some of everything and paid thewoman eleven silver Sickles and seven bronze Knuts.

Ron stared as Harry brought it all back in to thecompartment and tipped it onto an empty seat.

“Hungry, are you?”

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Starving,” said Harry, taking a large bite out of apumpkin pasty.

Ron had taken out a lumpy package and unwrappedit. There were four sandwiches inside. He pulled oneof them apart and said, “She always forgets I don’tlike corned beef.”

“Swap you for one of these,” said Harry, holding up apasty. “Go on —”

“You don’t want this, it’s all dry,” said Ron. “Shehasn’t got much time,” he added quickly, “you know,with five of us.”

“Go on, have a pasty,” said Harry, who had never hadanything to share before or, indeed, anyone to shareit with. It was a nice feeling, sitting there with Ron,eating their way through all Harry’s pasties, cakes,and candies (the sandwiches lay forgotten).

“What are these?” Harry asked Ron, holding up apack of Chocolate Frogs. “They’re not really frogs, arethey?” He was starting to feel that nothing wouldsurprise him.

“No,” said Ron. “But see what the card is. I’m missingAgrippa.”

“What?”

“Oh, of course, you wouldn’t know — Chocolate Frogshave cards inside them, you know, to collect —famous witches and wizards. I’ve got about fivehundred, but I haven’t got Agrippa or Ptolemy.”

Harry unwrapped his Chocolate Frog and picked upthe card. It showed a man’s face. He wore half-moonglasses, had a long, crooked nose, and flowing silver

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

hair, beard, and mustache. Underneath the picturewas the name Albus Dumbledore.

“So this is Dumbledore!” said Harry.

“Don’t tell me you’d never heard of Dumbledore!” saidRon. “Can I have a frog? I might get Agrippa — thanks

Harry turned over his card and read:

ALBUS DUMBLEDORE

CURRENTLY HEADMASTER OF HOGWARTS

Considered by many the greatest wizard of moderntimes, Dumbledore is particularly famous for hisdefeat of the Dark wizard Grindelwald in 1945, for thediscovery of the twelve uses of dragon’s blood, and hiswork on alchemy with his partner, Nicolas Flamel.Professor Dumbledore enjoys chamber music and tenpin bowling.

Harry turned the card back over and saw, to hisastonishment, that Dumbledore’s face haddisappeared.

“He’s gone!”

“Well, you can’t expect him to hang around all day,”said Ron. “He’ll be back. No, I’ve got Morgana againand I’ve got about six of her ... do you want it? Youcan start collecting.”

Ron’s eyes strayed to the pile of Chocolate Frogswaiting to be unwrapped.

“Help yourself,” said Harry. “But in, you know, theMuggle world, people just stay put in photos.”

Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Do they? What, they don’t move at all?” Ron soundedamazed. “Weird).”

Harry stared as Dumbledore sidled back into thepicture on his card and gave him a small smile. Ronwas more interested in eating the frogs than lookingat the Famous Witches and Wizards cards, but Harrycouldn’t keep his eyes off them. Soon he had not onlyDumbledore and Morgana, but Hengist of Woodcraft,Alberic Grunnion, Circe, Paracelsus, and Merlin. Hefinally tore his eyes away from the druidess Cliodna,who was scratching her nose, to open a bag of BertieBott’s Every Flavor Beans.

“You want to be careful with those,” Ron warnedHarry. “When they say every flavor, they mean everyflavor — you know, you get all the ordinary ones likechocolate and peppermint and marmalade, but thenyou can get spinach and liver and tripe. Georgereckons he had a booger-flavored one once.”

Ron picked up a green bean, looked at it carefully,and bit into a corner.

“Bleaaargh — see? Sprouts.”

They had a good time eating the Every Flavor Beans.Harry got toast, coconut, baked bean, strawberry,curry, grass, coffee, sardine, and was even braveenough to nibble the end off a funny gray one Ronwouldn’t touch, which turned out to be pepper.

The countryside now flying past the window wasbecoming wilder. The neat fields had gone. Now therewere woods, twisting rivers, and dark green hills.

There was a knock on the door of their compartmentand the round-faced boy Harry had passed on

Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

platform nine and three-quarters came in. He lookedtearful.

“Sorry,” he said, “but have you seen a toad at all?”

When they shook their heads, he wailed, “I’ve losthim! He keeps getting away from me!”

“Hell turn up,” said Harry.

“Yes,” said the boy miserably. “Well, if you see him ...”He left.

“Don’t know why he’s so bothered,” said Ron. “If I’dbrought a toad I’d lose it as quick as I could. Mindyou, I brought Scabbers, so I can’t talk.”

The rat was still snoozing on Ron’s lap.

“He might have died and you wouldn’t know thedifference,” said Ron in disgust. “I tried to turn himyellow yesterday to make him more interesting, butthe spell didn’t work. I’ll show you, look ...”

He rummaged around in his trunk and pulled out avery battered-looking wand. It was chipped in placesand something white was glinting at the end.

“Unicorn hair’s nearly poking out. Anyway —”

He had just raised his wand when the compartmentdoor slid open again. The toadless boy was back, butthis time he had a girl with him. She was alreadywearing her new Hogwarts robes.

“Has anyone seen a toad? Neville’s lost one,” she said.She had a bossy sort of voice, lots of bushy brownhair, and rather large front teeth.

Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“We’ve already told him we haven’t seen it,” said Ron,but the girl wasn’t listening, she was looking at thewand in his hand.

“Oh, are you doing magic? Let’s see it, then.”

She sat down. Ron looked taken aback.

“Er — all right.”

He cleared his throat.

“Sunshine, daisies, butter mellow,

Turn this stupid, fat rat yellow.”

He waved his wand, but nothing happened. Scabbersstayed gray and fast asleep.

“Are you sure that’s a real spell?” said the girl. “Well,it’s not very good, is it? I’ve tried a few simple spellsjust for practice and it’s all worked for me. Nobody inmy family’s magic at all, it was ever such a surprisewhen I got my letter, but I was ever so pleased, ofcourse, I mean, it’s the very best school of witchcraftthere is, I’ve heard — I’ve learned all our course booksby heart, of course, I just hope it will be enough — I’mHermione Granger, by the way, who are you?”

She said all this very fast.

Harry looked at Ron, and was relieved to see by hisstunned face that he hadn’t learned all the coursebooks by heart either.

“I’m Ron Weasley,” Ron muttered.

“Harry Potter,” said Harry.

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Are you really?” said Hermione. “I know all aboutyou, of course — I got a few extra books forbackground reading, and you’re in Modern MagicalHistory and The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts andGreat Wizarding Events of the Twentieth Century.”

“Am I?” said Harry, feeling dazed.

“Goodness, didn’t you know, I’d have found outeverything I could if it was me,” said Hermione. “Doeither of you know what House you’ll be in? I’ve beenasking around, and I hope I’m in Gryffindor, it soundsby far the best; I hear Dumbledore himself was in it,but I suppose Ravenclaw wouldn’t be too bad. ...Anyway, we’d better go and look for Neville’s toad.

You two had better change, you know, I expect we’llbe there soon.”

And she left, taking the toadless boy with her.

“Whatever House I’m in, I hope she’s not in it,” saidRon. He threw his wand back into his trunk. “Stupidspell — George gave it to me, bet he knew it was adud.”

“What House are your brothers in?” asked Harry.

“Gryffindor,” said Ron. Gloom seemed to be settlingon him again. “Mom and Dad were in it, too. I don’tknow what they’ll say if I’m not. I don’t supposeRavenclaw would be too bad, but imagine if they putme in Slytherin.”

“That’s the House Vol-, I mean, You-Know-Who wasin?”

“Yeah,” said Ron. He flopped back into his seat,looking depressed.

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“You know, I think the ends of Scabbers’whiskers area bit lighter,” said Harry, trying to take Ron’s mind offHouses. “So what do your oldest brothers do now thatthey’ve left, anyway?”

Harry was wondering what a wizard did once he’dfinished school.

“Charlie’s in Romania studying dragons, and Bill’s inAfrica doing something for Gringotts,” said Ron. “Didyou hear about Gringotts? It’s been all over the DailyProphet, but I don’t suppose you get that with theMuggles — someone tried to rob a high securityvault.”

Harry stared.

“Really? What happened to them?”

“Nothing, that’s why it’s such big news. They haven’tbeen caught. My dad says it must’ve been a powerfulDark wizard to get round Gringotts, but they don’tthink they took anything, that’s what’s odd. ’Course,everyone gets scared when something like thishappens in case You-Know-Who’s behind it.”

Harry turned this news over in his mind. He wasstarting to get a prickle of fear every time You-Know-Who was mentioned. He supposed this was all part ofentering the magical world, but it had been a lot morecomfortable saying “Voldemort” without worrying.

“What’s your Quidditch team?” Ron asked.

“Er — I don’t know any,” Harry confessed.

“What!” Ron looked dumbfounded. “Oh, you wait, it’sthe best game in the world —” And he was off,explaining all about the four balls and the positions of

Page | 120 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

the seven players, describing famous games he’d beento with his brothers and the broomstick he’d like toget if he had the money. He was just taking Harrythrough the finer points of the game when thecompartment door slid open yet again, but it wasn’tNeville the toadless boy, or Hermione Granger thistime.

Three boys entered, and Harry recognized the middleone at once: It was the pale boy from Madam Malkin’srobe shop. He was looking at Harry with a lot moreinterest than he’d shown back in Diagon Alley.

“Is it true?” he said. “They’re saying all down the trainthat Harry Potter’s in this compartment. So it’s you, isit?”

“Yes,” said Harry. He was looking at the other boys.Both of them were thickset and looked extremelymean. Standing on either side of the pale boy, theylooked like bodyguards.

“Oh, this is Crabbe and this is Goyle,” said the paleboy carelessly, noticing where Harry was looking.

“And my names Malfoy, Draco Malfoy.”

Ron gave a slight cough, which might have beenhiding a snigger. Draco Malfoy looked at him.

“Think my name’s funny, do you? No need to ask whoyou are. My father told me all the Weasleys have redhair, freckles, and more children than they canafford.”

He turned back to Harry. “You’ll soon find out somewizarding families are much better than others,

Potter. You don’t want to go making friends with thewrong sort. I can help you there.”

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

He held out his hand to shake Harry’s, but Harrydidn’t take it.

“I think I can tell who the wrong sort are for myself,thanks,” he said coolly.

Draco Malfoy didn’t go red, but a pink tinge appearedin his pale cheeks.

“I’d be careful if I were you, Potter,” he said slowly.“Unless you’re a bit politer you’ll go the same way asyour parents. They didn’t know what was good forthem, either. You hang around with riffraff like theWeasleys and that Hagrid, and it’ll rub off on you.”

Both Harry and Ron stood up.

“Say that again,” Ron said, his face as red as his hair.

“Oh, you’re going to fight us, are you?” Malfoysneered.

“Unless you get out now,” said Harry, more bravelythan he felt, because Crabbe and Goyle were a lotbigger than him or Ron.

“But we don’t feel like leaving, do we, boys? We’veeaten all our food and you still seem to have some.”

Goyle reached toward the Chocolate Frogs next toRon — Ron leapt forward, but before he’d so much astouched Goyle, Goyle let out a horrible yell.

Scabbers the rat was hanging off his finger, sharplittle teeth sunk deep into Goyle’s knuckle — Crabbeand Malfoy backed away as Goyle swung Scabbersround and round, howling, and when Scabbers finallyflew off and hit the window, all three of themdisappeared at once. Perhaps they thought there werePage | 122 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

more rats lurking among the sweets, or perhapsthey’d heard footsteps, because a second later,Hermione Granger had come in.

“What has been going on?” she said, looking at thesweets all over the floor and Ron picking up Scabbersby his tail.

“I think he’s been knocked out,” Ron said to Harry.

He looked closer at Scabbers. “No — I don’t believe it— he’s gone back to sleep.”

And so he had.

“You’ve met Malfoy before?”

Harry explained about their meeting in Diagon Alley.

“I’ve heard of his family,” said Ron darkly. “They weresome of the first to come back to our side after You-Know-Who disappeared. Said they’d been bewitched.My dad doesn’t believe it. He says Malfoy’s fatherdidn’t need an excuse to go over to the Dark Side.” Heturned to Hermione. “Can we help you withsomething?”

“You’d better hurry up and put your robes on, I’vejust been up to the front to ask the conductor, and hesays we’re nearly there. You haven’t been fighting,have you? You’ll be in trouble before we even getthere!”

“Scabbers has been fighting, not us,” said Ron,scowling at her. “Would you mind leaving while wechange?”

“All right — I only came in here because peopleoutside are behaving very childishly, racing up anddown the corridors,” said Hermione in a sniffy voice.

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“And you’ve got dirt on your nose, by the way, did youknow?”

Ron glared at her as she left. Harry peered out of thewindow. It was getting dark. He could see mountainsand forests under a deep purple sky. The train didseem to be slowing down.

He and Ron took off their jackets and pulled on theirlong black robes. Ron’s were a bit short for him, youcould see his sneakers underneath them.

A voice echoed through the train: “We will be reachingHogwarts in five minutes’ time. Please leave yourluggage on the train, it will be taken to the schoolseparately.”

Harry’s stomach lurched with nerves and Ron, hesaw, looked pale under his freckles. They crammedtheir pockets with the last of the sweets and joinedthe crowd thronging the corridor.

The train slowed right down and finally stopped.People pushed their way toward the door and out onto a tiny, dark platform. Harry shivered in the coldnight air. Then a lamp came bobbing over the headsof the students, and Harry heard a familiar voice:“Firs’years! Firs’years over here! All right there,Harry?”

Hagrid’s big hairy face beamed over the sea of heads.

“C’mon, follow me — any more firs’ years? Mind yerstep, now! Firs’ years follow me!”

Slipping and stumbling, they followed Hagrid downwhat seemed to be a steep, narrow path. It was sodark on either side of them that Harry thought theremust be thick trees there. Nobody spoke much.

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Neville, the boy who kept losing his toad, sniffed onceor twice.

“Yeh’ll get yer firs’ sight o’ Hogwarts in a sec,” Hagridcalled over his shoulder, “jus’ round this bend here.”

There was a loud “Oooooh!”

The narrow path had opened suddenly onto the edgeof a great black lake. Perched atop a high mountainon the other side, its windows sparkling in the starrysky, was a vast castle with many turrets and towers.

“No more’n four to a boat!” Hagrid called, pointing toa fleet of little boats sitting in the water by the shore.Harry and Ron were followed into their boat by Nevilleand Hermione.

“Everyone in?” shouted Hagrid, who had a boat tohimself. “Right then — FORWARD!”

And the fleet of little boats moved off all at once,gliding across the lake, which was as smooth asglass. Everyone was silent, staring up at the greatcastle overhead. It towered over them as they sailednearer and nearer to the cliff on which it stood.

“Heads down!” yelled Hagrid as the first boats reachedthe cliff; they all bent their heads and the little boatscarried them through a curtain of ivy that hid a wideopening in the cliff face. They were carried along adark tunnel, which seemed to be taking them rightunderneath the castle, until they reached a kind ofunderground harbor, where they clambered out ontorocks and pebbles.

“Oy, you there! Is this your toad?” said Hagrid, whowas checking the boats as people climbed out ofthem.

Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Trevor!” cried Neville blissfully, holding out hishands. Then they clambered up a passageway in therock after Hagrid’s lamp, coming out at last ontosmooth, damp grass right in the shadow of the castle.

They walked up a flight of stone steps and crowdedaround the huge, oak front door.

“Everyone here? You there, still got yer toad?”

Hagrid raised a gigantic fist and knocked three timeson the castle door.

Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling



THE SORTING HAT

The door swung open at once. A tall, black-hairedwitch in emerald-green robes stood there. She had avery stern face and Harry’s first thought was that thiswas not someone to cross.

“The firs’ years, Professor McGonagall,” said Hagrid.

“Thank you, Hagrid. I will take them from here.”

She pulled the door wide. The entrance hall was sobig you could have fit the whole of the Dursleys’house in it. The stone walls were lit with flamingtorches like the ones at Gringotts, the ceiling was toohigh to make out, and a magnificent marble staircasefacing them led to the upper floors.

They followed Professor McGonagall across theflagged stone floor. Harry could hear the drone ofhundreds of voices from a doorway to the right — therest of the school must already be here — butProfessor McGonagall showed the first years into asmall, empty chamber off the hall. They crowded in,Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

standing rather closer together than they wouldusually have done, peering about nervously.

“Welcome to Hogwarts,” said Professor McGonagall.“The start-of-term banquet will begin shortly, butbefore you take your seats in the Great Hall, you willbe sorted into your Houses. The Sorting is a veryimportant ceremony because, while you are here,your House will be something like your family withinHogwarts. You will have classes with the rest of yourHouse, sleep in your House dormitory, and spend freetime in your House common room.

“The four Houses are called Gryffindor, Hufflepuff,Ravenclaw, and Slytherin. Each House has its ownnoble history and each has produced outstandingwitches and wizards. While you are at Hogwarts, yourtriumphs will earn your House points, while any rule-breaking will lose House points. At the end of theyear, the House with the most points is awarded theHouse cup, a great honor. I hope each of you will be acredit to whichever House becomes yours.

“The Sorting Ceremony will take place in a fewminutes in front of the rest of the school. I suggestyou all smarten yourselves up as much as you canwhile you are waiting.”

Her eyes lingered for a moment on Neville’s cloak,which was fastened under his left ear, and on Ron’ssmudged nose. Harry nervously tried to flatten hishair.

“I shall return when we are ready for you,” saidProfessor McGonagall. “Please wait quietly.”

She left the chamber. Harry swallowed.

Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“How exactly do they sort us into Houses?” he askedRon.

“Some sort of test, I think. Fred said it hurts a lot, butI think he was joking.”

Harry’s heart gave a horrible jolt. A test? In front ofthe whole school? But he didn’t know any magic yet— what on earth would he have to do? He hadn’texpected something like this the moment theyarrived. He looked around anxiously and saw thateveryone else looked terrified, too. No one was talkingmuch except Hermione Granger, who was whisperingvery fast about all the spells she’d learned andwondering which one she’d need. Harry tried hard notto listen to her. He’d never been more nervous, never,not even when he’d had to take a school report hometo the Dursleys saying that he’d somehow turned histeachers wig blue. He kept his eyes fixed on the door.Any second now, Professor McGonagall would comeback and lead him to his doom.

Then something happened that made him jump abouta foot in the air — several people behind himscreamed.

“What the — ?”

He gasped. So did the people around him. Abouttwenty ghosts had just streamed through the backwall. Pearly-white and slightly transparent, theyglided across the room talking to one another andhardly glancing at the first years. They seemed to bearguing. What looked like a fat little monk wassaying: “Forgive and forget, I say, we ought to givehim a second chance —”

“My dear Friar, haven’t we given Peeves all thechances he deserves? He gives us all a bad name and

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

you know, he’s not really even a ghost — I say, whatare you all doing here?”

A ghost wearing a ruff and tights had suddenlynoticed the first years.

Nobody answered.

“New students!” said the Fat Friar, smiling around atthem. “About to be Sorted, I suppose?”

A few people nodded mutely.

“Hope to see you in Hufflepuff!” said the Friar. “My oldHouse, you know.”

“Move along now,” said a sharp voice. “The SortingCeremony’s about to start.”

Professor McGonagall had returned. One by one, theghosts floated away through the opposite wall.

“Now, form a line,” Professor McGonagall told the firstyears, “and follow me.”

Feeling oddly as though his legs had turned to lead,Harry got into line behind a boy with sandy hair, withRon behind him, and they walked out of the chamber,back across the hall, and through a pair of doubledoors into the Great Hall.

Harry had never even imagined such a strange andsplendid place. It was lit by thousands and thousandsof candles that were floating in midair over four longtables, where the rest of the students were sitting.These tables were laid with glittering golden platesand goblets. At the top of the hall was another longtable where the teachers were sitting. ProfessorMcGonagall led the first years up here, so that theyPage | 130 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

came to a halt in a line facing the other students,with the teachers behind them. The hundreds of facesstaring at them looked like pale lanterns in theflickering candlelight. Dotted here and there amongthe students, the ghosts shone misty silver. Mainly toavoid all the staring eyes, Harry looked upward andsaw a velvety black ceiling dotted with stars. He heardHermione whisper, “It’s bewitched to look like the skyoutside. I read about it in Hogwarts, A History.”

It was hard to believe there was a ceiling there at all,and that the Great Hall didn’t simply open on to theheavens.

Harry quickly looked down again as ProfessorMcGonagall silently placed a four-legged stool in frontof the first years. On top of the stool she put a pointedwizard’s hat. This hat was patched and frayed andextremely dirty. Aunt Petunia wouldn’t have let it inthe house.

Maybe they had to try and get a rabbit out of it, Harrythought wildly, that seemed the sort of thing —noticing that everyone in the hall was now staring atthe hat, he stared at it, too. For a few seconds, therewas complete silence. Then the hat twitched. A ripnear the brim opened wide like a mouth — and thehat began to sing:

“Oh, you may not think I’m pretty,

But don’t judge on what you see,

I’ll eat myself if you can find

A smarter hat than me.

You can keep your bowlers black,

Page | 131 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Your top hats sleek and tall,

For I’m the Hogwarts Sorting HatAnd I can cap them all.

There’s nothing hidden in your headThe Sorting Hat can’t see,

So try me on and I will tell youWhere you ought to be.

You might belong in Gryffindor,

Where dwell the brave at heart,

Their daring, nerve, and chivalrySet Gryffindors apart;

You might belong in Hufflepuff,

Where they are just and loyal,

Those patient Hufflepuffs are trueAnd unafraid of toil;

Or yet in wise old Ravenclaw,

If you’ve a ready mind,

Where those of wit and learning,

Will always find their kind;

Or perhaps in Slytherin

Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

You’ll make your real friends,

Those cunning folk use any meansTo achieve their ends.

So put me on! Don’t be afraidl\

And don’t get in a flap\

You’re in safe hands (though I have none)

For I’m a Thinking Cap\”

The whole hall burst into applause as the hat finishedits song. It bowed to each of the four tables and thenbecame quite still again.

“So we’ve just got to try on the hat!” Ron whispered toHarry. “I’ll kill Fred, he was going on about wrestlinga troll.”

Harry smiled weakly. Yes, trying on the hat was a lotbetter than having to do a spell, but he did wish theycould have tried it on without everyone watching. Thehat seemed to be asking rather a lot; Harry didn’t feelbrave or quick-witted or any of it at the moment. Ifonly the hat had mentioned a House for people whofelt a bit queasy, that would have been the one forhim.

Professor McGonagall now stepped forward holding along roll of parchment.

“When I call your name, you will put on the hat andsit on the stool to be sorted,” she said. “Abbott,Hannah!”

Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

A pink-faced girl with blonde pigtails stumbled out ofline, put on the hat, which fell right down over hereyes, and sat down. A moment’s pause —

“HUFFLEPUFF!” shouted the hat.

The table on the right cheered and clapped asHannah went to sit down at the Hufflepuff table.

Harry saw the ghost of the Fat Friar waving merrily ather.

“Bones, Susan!”

“HUFFLEPUFF!” shouted the hat again, and Susanscuttled off to sit next to Hannah.

“Boot, Terry!”

“RAVENCLAW!”

The table second from the left clapped this time;several Ravenclaws stood up to shake hands withTerry as he joined them.

“Brocklehurst, Mandy” went to Ravenclaw too, but“Brown, Lavender” became the first new Gryffindor,and the table on the far left exploded with cheers;Harry could see Ron’s twin brothers catcalling.

“Bulstrode, Millicent” then became a Slytherin.Perhaps it was Harry’s imagination, after all he’dheard about Slytherin, but he thought they lookedlike an unpleasant lot.

He was starting to feel definitely sick now. Heremembered being picked for teams during gym at hisold school. He had always been last to be chosen, notbecause he was no good, but because no one wantedDudley to think they liked him.

Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Finch-Fletchley, Justin!”

“HUFFLEPUFF!”

Sometimes, Harry noticed, the hat shouted out theHouse at once, but at others it took a little while todecide. “Finnigan, Seamus,” the sandy-haired boynext to Harry in the line, sat on the stool for almost awhole minute before the hat declared him aGryffindor.

“Granger, Hermione!”

Hermione almost ran to the stool and jammed the hateagerly on her head.

“GRYFFINDOR!” shouted the hat. Ron groaned.

A horrible thought struck Harry, as horrible thoughtsalways do when you’re very nervous. What if hewasn’t chosen at all? What if he just sat there withthe hat over his eyes for ages, until ProfessorMcGonagall jerked it off his head and said there hadobviously been a mistake and he’d better get back onthe train?

When Neville Longbottom, the boy who kept losing histoad, was called, he fell over on his way to the stool.The hat took a long time to decide with Neville. Whenit finally shouted, “GRYFFINDOR,” Neville ran off stillwearing it, and had to jog back amid gales of laughterto give it to “MacDougal, Morag.”

Malfoy swaggered forward when his name was calledand got his wish at once: the hat had barely touchedhis head when it screamed, “SLYTHERIN!”

Malfoy went to join his friends Crabbe and Goyle,looking pleased with himself.

Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

There weren’t many people left now.

“Moon” , “Nott” ... , “Parkinson” ... , then a pair oftwin girls, “Path” and “Path” ... , then “Perks, Sally-Anne” ... , and then, at last —

“Potter, Harry!”

As Harry stepped forward, whispers suddenly brokeout like little hissing fires all over the hall.

“Potter, did she say?”

“The Harry Potter?”

The last thing Harry saw before the hat dropped overhis eyes was the hall full of people craning to get agood look at him. Next second he was looking at theblack inside of the hat. He waited.

“Hmm,” said a small voice in his ear. “Difficult. Verydifficult. Plenty of courage, I see. Not a bad mindeither. There’s talent, oh my goodness, yes — and anice thirst to prove yourself, now that’s interesting. ...So where shall I put you?”

Harry gripped the edges of the stool and thought, NotSlytherin, not Slytherin.

“Not Slytherin, eh?” said the small voice. “Are yousure? You could be great, you know, it’s all here inyour head, and Slytherin will help you on the way togreatness, no doubt about that — no? Well, if you’resure — better be GRYFFINDOR!”

Harry heard the hat shout the last word to the wholehall. He took off the hat and walked shakily towardthe Gryffindor table. He was so relieved to have beenchosen and not put in Slytherin, he hardly noticed

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

that he was getting the loudest cheer yet. Percy thePrefect got up and shook his hand vigorously, whilethe Weasley twins yelled, “We got Potter! We gotPotter!” Harry sat down opposite the ghost in the ruffhe’d seen earlier. The ghost patted his arm, givingHarry the sudden, horrible feeling he’d just plunged itinto a bucket of ice-cold water.

He could see the High Table properly now. At the endnearest him sat Hagrid, who caught his eye and gavehim the thumbs up. Harry grinned back. And there,in the center of the High Table, in a large gold chair,sat Albus Dumbledore. Harry recognized him at oncefrom the card he’d gotten out of the Chocolate Frog onthe train. Dumbledore’s silver hair was the only thingin the whole hall that shone as brightly as the ghosts.Harry spotted Professor Quirrell, too, the nervousyoung man from the Leaky Cauldron. He was lookingvery peculiar in a large purple turban.

And now there were only four people left to be sorted.“Thomas, Dean,” a Black boy even taller than Ron,joined Harry at the Gryffindor table. “Turpin, Lisa,”became a Ravenclaw and then it was Ron’s turn. Hewas pale green by now. Harry crossed his fingersunder the table and a second later the hat hadshouted, “GRYFFINDOR!”

Harry clapped loudly with the rest as Ron collapsedinto the chair next to him.

“Well done, Ron, excellent,” said Percy Weasleypompously across Harry as “Zabini, Blaise,” wasmade a Slytherin. Professor McGonagall rolled up herscroll and took the Sorting Hat away.

Harry looked down at his empty gold plate. He hadonly just realized how hungry he was. The pumpkinpasties seemed ages ago.

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Albus Dumbledore had gotten to his feet. He wasbeaming at the students, his arms opened wide, as ifnothing could have pleased him more than to seethem all there.

“Welcome!” he said. “Welcome to a new year atHogwarts! Before we begin our banquet, I would liketo say a few words. And here they are: Nitwit!

Blubber! Oddment! Tweak!

“Thank you!”

He sat back down. Everybody clapped and cheered.Harry didn’t know whether to laugh or not.

“Is he — a bit mad?” he asked Percy uncertainly.

“Mad?” said Percy airily. “He’s a genius! Best wizardin the world! But he is a bit mad, yes. Potatoes,Harry?”

Harry’s mouth fell open. The dishes in front of himwere now piled with food. He had never seen so manythings he liked to eat on one table: roast beef, roastchicken, pork chops and lamb chops, sausages,bacon and steak, boiled potatoes, roast potatoes,fries, Yorkshire pudding, peas, carrots, gravy,ketchup, and, for some strange reason, pepperminthumbugs.

The Dursleys had never exactly starved Harry, buthe’d never been allowed to eat as much as he liked.Dudley had always taken anything that Harry reallywanted, even if it made him sick. Harry piled his platewith a bit of everything except the peppermints andbegan to eat. It was all delicious.

“That does look good,” said the ghost in the ruff sadly,watching Harry cut up his steak.

Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Can’t you — ?”

“I haven’t eaten for nearly five hundred years,” saidthe ghost. “I don’t need to, of course, but one doesmiss it. I don’t think I’ve introduced myself? SirNicholas de Mimsy-Porpington at your service.Resident ghost of Gryffindor Tower.”

“I know who you are!” said Ron suddenly. “Mybrothers told me about you — you’re Nearly HeadlessNick!”

“I would prefer you to call me Sir Nicholas de Mimsy—” the ghost began stiffly, but sandy-haired SeamusFinnigan interrupted.

“Nearly Headless? How can you be nearly headless?”

Sir Nicholas looked extremely miffed, as if their littlechat wasn’t going at all the way he wanted.

“Like this,” he said irritably. He seized his left ear andpulled. His whole head swung off his neck and fellonto his shoulder as if it was on a hinge. Someonehad obviously tried to behead him, but not done itproperly. Looking pleased at the stunned looks ontheir faces, Nearly Headless Nick flipped his headback onto his neck, coughed, and said, “So — newGryffindors! I hope you’re going to help us win theHouse Championship this year? Gryffindors havenever gone so long without winning. Slytherins havegot the cup six years in a row! The Bloody Baron’sbecoming almost unbearable — he’s the Slytheringhost.”

Harry looked over at the Slytherin table and saw ahorrible ghost sitting there, with blank staring eyes, agaunt face, and robes stained with silver blood. Hewas right next to Malfoy who, Harry was pleased to

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

see, didn’t look too pleased with the seatingarrangements.

“How did he get covered in blood?” asked Seamuswith great interest.

“I’ve never asked,” said Nearly Headless Nickdelicately.

When everyone had eaten as much as they could, theremains of the food faded from the plates, leavingthem sparkling clean as before. A moment later thedesserts appeared. Blocks of ice cream in every flavoryou could think of, apple pies, treacle tarts, chocolateeclairs and jam doughnuts, trifle, strawberries, Jell-0, rice pudding ...

As Harry helped himself to a treacle tart, the talkturned to their families.

“I’m half-and-half,” said Seamus. “Me dad’s a Muggle.Mom didn’t tell him she was a witch ’til after theywere married. Bit of a nasty shock for him.”

The others laughed.

“What about you, Neville?” said Ron.

“Well, my gran brought me up and she’s a witch,”said Neville, “but the family thought I was all-Mugglefor ages. My Great Uncle Algie kept trying to catch meoff my guard and force some magic out of me — hepushed me off the end of Blackpool pier once, I nearlydrowned — but nothing happened until I was eight.Great Uncle Algie came round for dinner, and he washanging me out of an upstairs window by the ankleswhen my Great Auntie Enid offered him a meringueand he accidentally let go. But I bounced — all theway down the garden and into the road. They were allPage | 140 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

really pleased, Gran was crying, she was so happy.And you should have seen their faces when I got inhere — they thought I might not be magic enough tocome, you see. Great Uncle Algie was so pleased hebought me my toad.”

On Harry’s other side, Percy Weasley and Hermionewere talking about lessons (“I do hope they start rightaway, there’s so much to learn, I’m particularlyinterested in Transfiguration, you know, turningsomething into something else, of course, it’ssupposed to be very difficult —“You’ll be startingsmall, just matches into needles and that sort ofthing —”).

Harry, who was starting to feel warm and sleepy,looked up at the High Table again. Hagrid wasdrinking deeply from his goblet. Professor McGonagallwas talking to Professor Dumbledore. ProfessorQuirrell, in his absurd turban, was talking to ateacher with greasy black hair, a hooked nose, andsallow skin.

It happened very suddenly. The hook-nosed teacherlooked past Quirrell’s turban straight into Harry’seyes — and a sharp, hot pain shot across the scar onHarry’s forehead.

“Ouch!” Harry clapped a hand to his head.

“What is it?” asked Percy.

“N-nothing.”

The pain had gone as quickly as it had come. Harderto shake off was the feeling Harry had gotten from theteacher’s look — a feeling that he didn’t like Harry atall.

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Who’s that teacher talking to Professor Quirrell?” heasked Percy.

“Oh, you know Quirrell already, do you? No wonderhe’s looking so nervous, that’s Professor Snape. Heteaches Potions, but he doesn’t want to — everyoneknows he’s after Quirrell’s job. Knows an awful lotabout the Dark Arts, Snape.”

Harry watched Snape for a while, but Snape didn’tlook at him again.

At last, the desserts too disappeared, and ProfessorDumbledore got to his feet again. The hall fell silent.

“Ahem —just a few more words now that we are allfed and watered. I have a few start-of-term notices togive you.

“First years should note that the forest on thegrounds is forbidden to all pupils. And a few of ourolder students would do well to remember that aswell.”

Dumbledore’s twinkling eyes flashed in the directionof the Weasley twins.

“I have also been asked by Mr. Filch, the caretaker, toremind you all that no magic should be used betweenclasses in the corridors.

“Quidditch trials will be held in the second week ofthe term. Anyone interested in playing for their Houseteams should contact Madam Hooch.

“And finally, I must tell you that this year, the third-floor corridor on the right-hand side is out of boundsto everyone who does not wish to die a very painfuldeath.”

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

Harry laughed, but he was one of the few who did.

“He’s not serious?” he muttered to Percy.

“Must be,” said Percy, frowning at Dumbledore. “It’sodd, because he usually gives us a reason why we’renot allowed to go somewhere — the forest’s full ofdangerous beasts, everyone knows that. I do think hemight have told us prefects, at least.”

“And now, before we go to bed, let us sing the schoolsong!” cried Dumbledore. Harry noticed that the otherteachers’ smiles had become rather fixed.

Dumbledore gave his wand a little flick, as if he wastrying to get a fly off the end, and a long goldenribbon flew out of it, which rose high above the tablesand twisted itself, snakelike, into words.

“Everyone pick their favorite tune,” said Dumbledore,“and off we go!”

And the school bellowed:

“Hogwarts, Hogwarts, Hoggy Warty Hogwarts,

Teach us something please,

Whether we be old and baldOr young with scabby knees,

Our heads could do with fillingWith some interesting stuff,

For now they’re bare and full of air,

Dead flies and bits of fluff,

Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

So teach us things worth knowing,

Bring back what we’ve forgot,

Just do your best, we’ll do the rest,

And learn until our brains all rot.”

Everybody finished the song at different times. At last,only the Weasley twins were left singing along to avery slow funeral march. Dumbledore conducted theirlast few lines with his wand and when they hadfinished, he was one of those who clapped loudest.

“Ah, music,” he said, wiping his eyes. “A magicbeyond all we do here! And now, bedtime. Off youtrot!”

The Gryffindor first years followed Percy through thechattering crowds, out of the Great Hall, and up themarble staircase. Harry’s legs were like lead again,but only because he was so tired and full of food. Hewas too sleepy even to be surprised that the people inthe portraits along the corridors whispered andpointed as they passed, or that twice Percy led themthrough doorways hidden behind sliding panels andhanging tapestries. They climbed more staircases,yawning and dragging their feet, and Harry was justwondering how much farther they had to go whenthey came to a sudden halt.

A bundle of walking sticks was floating in midairahead of them, and as Percy took a step toward themthey started throwing themselves at him.

“Peeves,” Percy whispered to the first years. “Apoltergeist.” He raised his voice, “Peeves — showyourself.”

Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

A loud, rude sound, like the air being let out of aballoon, answered.

“Do you want me to go to the Bloody Baron?”

There was a pop, and a little man with wicked, darkeyes and a wide mouth appeared, floating cross-legged in the air, clutching the walking sticks.

“Oooooooh!” he said, with an evil cackle. “IckleFirsties! What fun!”

He swooped suddenly at them. They all ducked.

“Go away, Peeves, or the Baron’ll hear about this, Imean it!” barked Percy.

Peeves stuck out his tongue and vanished, droppingthe walking sticks on Neville’s head. They heard himzooming away, rattling coats of armor as he passed.

“You want to watch out for Peeves,” said Percy, asthey set off again. “The Bloody Baron’s the only onewho can control him, he won’t even listen to usprefects. Here we are.”

At the very end of the corridor hung a portrait of avery fat woman in a pink silk dress.

“Password?” she said.

“Caput Draconis,” said Percy, and the portrait swungforward to reveal a round hole in the wall. They allscrambled through it — Neville needed a leg up —and found themselves in the Gryffindor commonroom, a cozy, round room full of squashy armchairs.

Percy directed the girls through one door to theirdormitory and the boys through another. At the top of

Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

a spiral staircase — they were obviously in one of thetowers — they found their beds at last: five four-posters hung with deep red, velvet curtains. Theirtrunks had already been brought up. Too tired to talkmuch, they pulled on their pajamas and fell into bed.

“Great food, isn’t it?” Ron muttered to Harry throughthe hangings. “Get off Scabbers! He’s chewing mysheets.”

Harry was going to ask Ron if he’d had any of thetreacle tart, but he fell asleep almost at once.

Perhaps Harry had eaten a bit too much, because hehad a very strange dream. He was wearing ProfessorQuirrell’s turban, which kept talking to him, tellinghim he must transfer to Slytherin at once, because itwas his destiny. Harry told the turban he didn’t wantto be in Slytherin; it got heavier and heavier; he triedto pull it off but it tightened painfully — and therewas Malfoy, laughing at him as he struggled with it —then Malfoy turned into the hook-nosed teacher,Snape, whose laugh became high and cold — therewas a burst of green light and Harry woke, sweatingand shaking.

He rolled over and fell asleep again, and when hewoke next day, he didn’t remember the dream at all.

Page | 146 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





THE POTIONS MASTER

“There, look.”

“Where?”

“Next to the tall kid with the red hair.”

“Wearing the glasses?”

“Did you see his face?”

“Did you see his scar?”

Whispers followed Harry from the moment he left hisdormitory the next day. People lining up outsideclassrooms stood on tiptoe to get a look at him, ordoubled back to pass him in the corridors again,staring. Harry wished they wouldn’t, because he wastrying to concentrate on finding his way to classes.

There were a hundred and forty-two staircases atHogwarts: wide, sweeping ones; narrow, rickety ones;some that led somewhere different on a Friday; some

Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

with a vanishing step halfway up that you had toremember to jump. Then there were doors thatwouldn’t open unless you asked politely, or tickledthem in exactly the right place, and doors that weren’treally doors at all, but solid walls just pretending. Itwas also very hard to remember where anything was,because it all seemed to move around a lot. Thepeople in the portraits kept going to visit each other,and Harry was sure the coats of armor could walk.

The ghosts didn’t help, either. It was always a nastyshock when one of them glided suddenly through adoor you were trying to open. Nearly Headless Nickwas always happy to point new Gryffindors in theright direction, but Peeves the Poltergeist was worthtwo locked doors and a trick staircase if you met himwhen you were late for class. He would dropwastepaper baskets on your head, pull rugs fromunder your feet, pelt you with bits of chalk, or sneakup behind you, invisible, grab your nose, and screech,“GOT YOUR CONK!”

Even worse than Peeves, if that was possible, was thecaretaker, Argus Filch. Harry and Ron managed to geton the wrong side of him on their very first morning.Filch found them trying to force their way through adoor that unluckily turned out to be the entrance tothe out-of-bounds corridor on the third floor. Hewouldn’t believe they were lost, was sure they weretrying to break into it on purpose, and wasthreatening to lock them in the dungeons when theywere rescued by Professor Quirrell, who was passing.

Filch owned a cat called Mrs. Norris, a scrawny, dust-colored creature with bulging, lamplike eyes just likeFilch’s. She patrolled the corridors alone. Break a rulein front of her, put just one toe out of line, and she’dwhisk off for Filch, who’d appear, wheezing, twoseconds later. Filch knew the secret passageways ofPage | 148 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

the school better than anyone (except perhaps theWeasley twins) and could pop up as suddenly as anyof the ghosts. The students all hated him, and it wasthe dearest ambition of many to give Mrs. Norris agood kick.

And then, once you had managed to find them, therewere the classes themselves. There was a lot more tomagic, as Harry quickly found out, than waving yourwand and saying a few funny words.

They had to study the night skies through theirtelescopes every Wednesday at midnight and learnthe names of different stars and the movements of theplanets. Three times a week they went out to thegreenhouses behind the castle to study Herbology,with a dumpy little witch called Professor Sprout,where they learned how to take care of all the strangeplants and fungi, and found out what they were usedfor.

Easily the most boring class was History of Magic,which was the only one taught by a ghost. ProfessorBinns had been very old indeed when he had fallenasleep in front of the staff room fire and got up nextmorning to teach, leaving his body behind him. Binnsdroned on and on while they scribbled down namesand dates, and got Emeric the Evil and Uric theOddball mixed up.

Professor Flitwick, the Charms teacher, was a tinylittle wizard who had to stand on a pile of books tosee over his desk. At the start of their first class hetook the roll call, and when he reached Harry’s namehe gave an excited squeak and toppled out of sight.

Professor McGonagall was again different. Harry hadbeen quite right to think she wasn’t a teacher to

Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

cross. Strict and clever, she gave them a talking-tothe moment they sat down in her first class.

“Transfiguration is some of the most complex anddangerous magic you will learn at Hogwarts,” shesaid. “Anyone messing around in my class will leaveand not come back. You have been warned.”

Then she changed her desk into a pig and back again.They were all very impressed and couldn’t wait to getstarted, but soon realized they weren’t going to bechanging the furniture into animals for a long time.After taking a lot of complicated notes, they were eachgiven a match and started trying to turn it into aneedle. By the end of the lesson, only HermioneGranger had made any difference to her match;Professor McGonagall showed the class how it hadgone all silver and pointy and gave Hermione a raresmile.

The class everyone had really been looking forward towas Defense Against the Dark Arts, but Quirrell’slessons turned out to be a bit of a joke. His classroomsmelled strongly of garlic, which everyone said was toward off a vampire he’d met in Romania and wasafraid would be coming back to get him one of thesedays. His turban, he told them, had been given to himby an African prince as a thank-you for getting rid ofa troublesome zombie, but they weren’t sure theybelieved this story. For one thing, when SeamusFinnigan asked eagerly to hear how Quirrell hadfought off the zombie, Quirrell went pink and startedtalking about the weather; for another, they hadnoticed that a funny smell hung around the turban,and the Weasley twins insisted that it was stuffed fullof garlic as well, so that Quirrell was protectedwherever he went.

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry was very relieved to find out that he wasn’tmiles behind everyone else. Lots of people had comefrom Muggle families and, like him, hadn’t had anyidea that they were witches and wizards. There was somuch to learn that even people like Ron didn’t havemuch of a head start.

Friday was an important day for Harry and Ron. Theyfinally managed to find their way down to the GreatHall for breakfast without getting lost once.

“What have we got today?” Harry asked Ron as hepoured sugar on his porridge.

“Double Potions with the Slytherins,” said Ron.“Snape’s Head of Slytherin House. They say he alwaysfavors them — we’ll be able to see if it’s true.”

“Wish McGonagall favored us,” said Harry. ProfessorMcGonagall was head of Gryffindor House, but ithadn’t stopped her from giving them a huge pile ofhomework the day before.

Just then, the mail arrived. Harry had gotten used tothis by now, but it had given him a bit of a shock onthe first morning, when about a hundred owls hadsuddenly streamed into the Great Hall duringbreakfast, circling the tables until they saw theirowners, and dropping letters and packages onto theirlaps.

Hedwig hadn’t brought Harry anything so far. Shesometimes flew in to nibble his ear and have a bit oftoast before going off to sleep in the owlery with theother school owls. This morning, however, shefluttered down between the marmalade and the sugarbowl and dropped a note onto Harry’s plate. Harrytore it open at once. It said, in a very untidy scrawl:

Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Dear Harry,

I know you get Friday afternoons off so would you liketo come and have a cup of tea with me around three?

I want to hear all about your first week. Send us ananswer back with Hedwig.

Hagrid

Harry borrowed Ron’s quill, scribbled Yes, please, seeyou later on the back of the note, and sent Hedwig offagain.

It was lucky that Harry had tea with Hagrid to lookforward to, because the Potions lesson turned out tobe the worst thing that had happened to him so far.

At the start-of-term banquet, Harry had gotten theidea that Professor Snape disliked him. By the end ofthe first Potions lesson, he knew he’d been wrong.Snape didn’t dislike Harry — he hated him.

Potions lessons took place down in one of thedungeons. It was colder here than up in the maincastle, and would have been quite creepy enoughwithout the pickled animals floating in glass jars allaround the walls.

Snape, like Flitwick, started the class by taking theroll call, and like Flitwick, he paused at Harry’s name.

“Ah, yes,” he said softly, “Harry Potter. Our new —celebrity.”

Draco Malfoy and his friends Crabbe and Goylesniggered behind their hands. Snape finished callingthe names and looked up at the class. His eyes wereblack like Hagrid’s, but they had none of Hagrid’s

Page | 152 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

warmth. They were cold and empty and made youthink of dark tunnels.

“You are here to learn the subtle science and exact artof potion-making,” he began. He spoke in barely morethan a whisper, but they caught every word — likeProfessor McGonagall, Snape had the gift of keeping aclass silent without effort. “As there is little foolishwand-waving here, many of you will hardly believethis is magic. I don’t expect you will really understandthe beauty of the softly simmering cauldron with itsshimmering fumes, the delicate power of liquids thatcreep through human veins, bewitching the mind,ensnaring the senses. ... I can teach you how to bottlefame, brew glory, even stopper death — if you aren’tas big a bunch of dunderheads as I usually have toteach.”

More silence followed this little speech. Harry andRon exchanged looks with raised eyebrows. HermioneGranger was on the edge of her seat and lookeddesperate to start proving that she wasn’t adunderhead.

“Potter!” said Snape suddenly. “What would I get if Iadded powdered root of asphodel to an infusion ofwormwood?”

Powdered root of what to an infusion of what? Harryglanced at Ron, who looked as stumped as he was;Hermione’s hand had shot into the air.

“I don’t know, sir,” said Harry.

Snape’s lips curled into a sneer.

“Tut, tut — fame clearly isn’t everything.”

He ignored Hermione’s hand.

Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Let’s try again. Potter, where would you look if I toldyou to find me a bezoar?”

Hermione stretched her hand as high into the air as itwould go without her leaving her seat, but Harrydidn’t have the faintest idea what a bezoar was. Hetried not to look at Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle, whowere shaking with laughter.

“I don’t know, sir.”

“Thought you wouldn’t open a book before coming,eh, Potter?”

Harry forced himself to keep looking straight intothose cold eyes. He had looked through his books atthe Dursleys’, but did Snape expect him to remembereverything in One Thousand Magical Herbs andFungi?

Snape was still ignoring Hermione’s quivering hand.

“What is the difference, Potter, between monkshoodand wolfsbane?”

At this, Hermione stood up, her hand stretchingtoward the dungeon ceiling.

“I don’t know,” said Harry quietly. “I think Hermionedoes, though, why don’t you try her?”

A few people laughed; Harry caught Seamus’s eye,and Seamus winked. Snape, however, was notpleased.

“Sit down,” he snapped at Hermione. “For yourinformation, Potter, asphodel and wormwood make asleeping potion so powerful it is known as theDraught of Living Death. A bezoar is a stone taken

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

from the stomach of a goat and it will save you frommost poisons. As for monkshood and wolfsbane, theyare the same plant, which also goes by the name ofaconite. Well? Why aren’t you all copying that down?”

There was a sudden rummaging for quills andparchment. Over the noise, Snape said, “And a pointwill be taken from Gryffindor House for your cheek,Potter.”

Things didn’t improve for the Gryffindors as thePotions lesson continued. Snape put them all intopairs and set them to mixing up a simple potion tocure boils. He swept around in his long black cloak,watching them weigh dried nettles and crush snakefangs, criticizing almost everyone except Malfoy,whom he seemed to like. He was just telling everyoneto look at the perfect way Malfoy had stewed hishorned slugs when clouds of acid green smoke and aloud hissing filled the dungeon. Neville had somehowmanaged to melt Seamus’s cauldron into a twistedblob, and their potion was seeping across the stonefloor, burning holes in people’s shoes. Withinseconds, the whole class was standing on their stoolswhile Neville, who had been drenched in the potionwhen the cauldron collapsed, moaned in pain asangry red boils sprang up all over his arms and legs.

“Idiot boy!” snarled Snape, clearing the spilled potionaway with one wave of his wand. “I suppose youadded the porcupine quills before taking the cauldronoff the fire?”

Neville whimpered as boils started to pop up all overhis nose.

“Take him up to the hospital wing,” Snape spat atSeamus. Then he rounded on Harry and Ron, whohad been working next to Neville.

Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“You — Potter — why didn’t you tell him not to addthe quills? Thought he’d make you look good if he gotit wrong, did you? That’s another point you’ve lost forGryffindor.”

This was so unfair that Harry opened his mouth toargue, but Ron kicked him behind their cauldron.

“Don’t push it,” he muttered, “I’ve heard Snape canturn very nasty.”

As they climbed the steps out of the dungeon an hourlater, Harry’s mind was racing and his spirits werelow. He’d lost two points for Gryffindor in his veryfirst week — why did Snape hate him so much?

“Cheer up,” said Ron, “Snape’s always taking pointsoff Fred and George. Can I come and meet Hagridwith you?”

At five to three they left the castle and made their wayacross the grounds. Hagrid lived in a small woodenhouse on the edge of the forbidden forest. A crossbowand a pair of galoshes were outside the front door.

When Harry knocked they heard a frantic scrabblingfrom inside and several booming barks. Then Hagrid’svoice rang out, saying, “Back, Fang — back.”

Hagrid’s big, hairy face appeared in the crack as hepulled the door open.

“Hang on,” he said. “Back, Fang.”

He let them in, struggling to keep a hold on the collarof an enormous black boarhound.

There was only one room inside. Hams and pheasantswere hanging from the ceiling, a copper kettle was

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

boiling on the open fire, and in the corner stood amassive bed with a patchwork quilt over it.

“Make yerselves at home,” said Hagrid, letting go ofFang, who bounded straight at Ron and startedlicking his ears. Like Hagrid, Fang was clearly not asfierce as he looked.

“This is Ron,” Harry told Hagrid, who was pouringboiling water into a large teapot and putting rockcakes onto a plate.

“Another Weasley, eh?” said Hagrid, glancing at Ron’sfreckles. “I spent half me life chasin’ yer twin brothersaway from the forest.”

The rock cakes were shapeless lumps with raisinsthat almost broke their teeth, but Harry and Ronpretended to be enjoying them as they told Hagrid allabout their first lessons. Fang rested his head onHarry’s knee and drooled all over his robes.

Harry and Ron were delighted to hear Hagrid callFilch “that old git.”

“An’ as fer that cat, Mrs. Norris, I’d like ter introduceher to Fang sometime. D’yeh know, every time I go upter the school, she follows me everywhere? Can’t getrid of her — Filch puts her up to it.”

Harry told Hagrid about Snape’s lesson. Hagrid, likeRon, told Harry not to worry about it, that Snapeliked hardly any of the students.

“But he seemed to really hate me.”

“Rubbish!” said Hagrid. “Why should he?”

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Yet Harry couldn’t help thinking that Hagrid didn’tquite meet his eyes when he said that.

“How’s yer brother Charlie?” Hagrid asked Ron. “Iliked him a lot — great with animals.”

Harry wondered if Hagrid had changed the subject onpurpose. While Ron told Hagrid all about Charlie’swork with dragons, Harry picked up a piece of paperthat was lying on the table under the tea cozy. It wasa cutting from the Daily Prophet:

GRINGOTTS BREAK-IN LATEST

Investigations continue into the break-in at Gringottson 31 July, widely believed to be the work of Darkwizards or witches unknown.

Gringotts goblins today insisted that nothing hadbeen taken. The vault that was searched had in factbeen emptied the same day.

“But we’re not telling you what was in there, so keepyour noses out if you know what’s good for you,” saida Gringotts spokesgoblin this afternoon.

Harry remembered Ron telling him on the train thatsomeone had tried to rob Gringotts, but Ron hadn’tmentioned the date.

“Hagrid!” said Harry, “that Gringotts break-inhappened on my birthday! It might’ve been happeningwhile we were there!”

There was no doubt about it, Hagrid definitely didn’tmeet Harry’s eyes this time. He grunted and offeredhim another rock cake. Harry read the story again.

The vault that was searched had in fact been emptiedearlier that same day. Hagrid had emptied vault sevenPage | 158 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

hundred and thirteen, if you could call it emptying,taking out that grubby little package. Had that beenwhat the thieves were looking for?

As Harry and Ron walked back to the castle fordinner, their pockets weighed down with rock cakesthey’d been too polite to refuse, Harry thought thatnone of the lessons he’d had so far had given him asmuch to think about as tea with Hagrid. Had Hagridcollected that package just in time? Where was itnow? And did Hagrid know something about Snapethat he didn’t want to tell Harry?

Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling



THE MIDNIGHT DUEL

Harry had never believed he would meet a boy hehated more than Dudley, but that was before he metDraco Malfoy. Still, first-year Gryffindors only hadPotions with the Slytherins, so they didn’t have to putup with Malfoy much. Or at least, they didn’t untilthey spotted a notice pinned up in the Gryffindorcommon room that made them all groan. Flyinglessons would be starting on Thursday — andGryffindor and Slytherin would be learning together.

“Typical,” said Harry darkly. “Just what I alwayswanted. To make a fool of myself on a broomstick infront of Malfoy.”

He had been looking forward to learning to fly morethan anything else.

“You don’t know that you’ll make a fool of yourself,”said Ron reasonably. “Anyway, I know Malfoy’s alwaysgoing on about how good he is at Quidditch, but I betthat’s all talk.”

Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

Malfoy certainly did talk about flying a lot. Hecomplained loudly about first years never getting onthe House Quidditch teams and told long, boastfulstories that always seemed to end with him narrowlyescaping Muggles in helicopters. He wasn’t the onlyone, though: the way Seamus Finnigan told it, he’dspent most of his childhood zooming around thecountryside on his broomstick. Even Ron would tellanyone who’d listen about the time he’d almost hit ahang glider on Charlie’s old broom. Everyone fromwizarding families talked about Quidditch constantly.Ron had already had a big argument with DeanThomas, who shared their dormitory, about soccer.Ron couldn’t see what was exciting about a game withonly one ball where no one was allowed to fly. Harryhad caught Ron prodding Dean’s poster of West Hamsoccer team, trying to make the players move.

Neville had never been on a broomstick in his life,because his grandmother had never let him near one.Privately, Harry felt she’d had good reason, becauseNeville managed to have an extraordinary number ofaccidents even with both feet on the ground.

Hermione Granger was almost as nervous aboutflying as Neville was. This was something you couldn’tlearn by heart out of a book — not that she hadn’ttried. At breakfast on Thursday she bored them allstupid with flying tips she’d gotten out of a librarybook called Quidditch Through the Ages. Neville washanging on to her every word, desperate for anythingthat might help him hang on to his broomstick later,but everybody else was very pleased when Hermione’slecture was interrupted by the arrival of the mail.

Harry hadn’t had a single letter since Hagrid’s note,something that Malfoy had been quick to notice, ofcourse. Malfoy’s eagle owl was always bringing him

Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

packages of sweets from home, which he openedgloatingly at the Slytherin table.

A barn owl brought Neville a small package from hisgrandmother. He opened it excitedly and showedthem a glass ball the size of a large marble, whichseemed to be full of white smoke.

“It’s a Remembrall!” he explained. “Gran knows Iforget things — this tells you if there’s somethingyou’ve forgotten to do. Look, you hold it tight like thisand if it turns red — oh ...” His face fell, because theRemembrall had suddenly glowed scarlet, “... you’veforgotten something ...”

Neville was trying to remember what he’d forgottenwhen Draco Malfoy, who was passing the Gryffindortable, snatched the Remembrall out of his hand.

Harry and Ron jumped to their feet. They were halfhoping for a reason to fight Malfoy, but ProfessorMcGonagall, who could spot trouble quicker than anyteacher in the school, was there in a flash.

“What’s going on?”

“Malfoy’s got my Remembrall, Professor.”

Scowling, Malfoy quickly dropped the Remembrallback on the table.

“Just looking,” he said, and he sloped away withCrabbe and Goyle behind him.

At three-thirty that afternoon, Harry, Ron, and theother Gryffindors hurried down the front steps ontothe grounds for their first flying lesson. It was a clear,breezy day, and the grass rippled under their feet asthey marched down the sloping lawns toward aPage | 162 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

smooth, flat lawn on the opposite side of the groundsto the forbidden forest, whose trees were swayingdarkly in the distance.

The Slytherins were already there, and so were twentybroomsticks lying in neat lines on the ground. Harryhad heard Fred and George Weasley complain aboutthe school brooms, saying that some of them startedto vibrate if you flew too high, or always flew slightlyto the left.

Their teacher, Madam Hooch, arrived. She had short,gray hair, and yellow eyes like a hawk.

“Well, what are you all waiting for?” she barked.“Everyone stand by a broomstick. Come on, hurryup.” "

Harry glanced down at his broom. It was old andsome of the twigs stuck out at odd angles.

“Stick out your right hand over your broom,” calledMadam Hooch at the front, “and say ‘Up!’ ”

“UP!” everyone shouted.

Harry’s broom jumped into his hand at once, but itwas one of the few that did. Hermione Granger’s hadsimply rolled over on the ground, and Neville’s hadn’tmoved at all. Perhaps brooms, like horses, could tellwhen you were afraid, thought Harry; there was aquaver in Neville’s voice that said only too clearly thathe wanted to keep his feet on the ground.

Madam Hooch then showed them how to mount theirbrooms without sliding off the end, and walked upand down the rows correcting their grips. Harry andRon were delighted when she told Malfoy he’d beendoing it wrong for years.

Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Now, when I blow my whistle, you kick off from theground, hard,” said Madam Hooch. “Keep yourbrooms steady, rise a few feet, and then come straightback down by leaning forward slightly. On my whistle— three — two —”

But Neville, nervous and jumpy and frightened ofbeing left on the ground, pushed off hard before thewhistle had touched Madam Hooch’s lips.

“Come back, boy!” she shouted, but Neville was risingstraight up like a cork shot out of a bottle — twelvefeet — twenty feet. Harry saw his scared white facelook down at the ground falling away, saw him gasp,slip sideways off the broom and —

WHAM — a thud and a nasty crack and Neville layfacedown on the grass in a heap. His broomstick wasstill rising higher and higher, and started to driftlazily toward the forbidden forest and out of sight.

Madam Hooch was bending over Neville, her face aswhite as his.

“Broken wrist,” Harry heard her mutter. “Come on,boy — it’s all right, up you get.”

She turned to the rest of the class.

“None of you is to move while I take this boy to thehospital wing! You leave those brooms where they areor you’ll be out of Hogwarts before you can say‘Quidditch.’ Come on, dear.”

Neville, his face tear-streaked, clutching his wrist,hobbled off with Madam Hooch, who had her armaround him.

Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

No sooner were they out of earshot than Malfoy burstinto laughter.

“Did you see his face, the great lump?”

The other Slytherins joined in.

“Shut up, Malfoy,” snapped Parvati Patil.

“Ooh, sticking up for Longbottom?” said PansyParkinson, a hard-faced Slytherin girl. “Never thoughtyou’d like fat little crybabies, Parvati.”

“Look!” said Malfoy, darting forward and snatchingsomething out of the grass. “It’s that stupid thingLongbottom’s gran sent him.”

The Remembrall glittered in the sun as he held it up.

“Give that here, Malfoy,” said Harry quietly. Everyonestopped talking to watch.

Malfoy smiled nastily.

“I think I’ll leave it somewhere for Longbottom to find— how about — up a tree?”

“Give it here!” Harry yelled, but Malfoy had leapt ontohis broomstick and taken off. He hadn’t been lying, hecould fly well. Hovering level with the topmostbranches of an oak he called, “Come and get it,Potter!”

Harry grabbed his broom.

“iVo!” shouted Hermione Granger. “Madam Hooch toldus not to move — you’ll get us all into trouble.”

Page | 165 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry ignored her. Blood was pounding in his ears.

He mounted the broom and kicked hard against theground and up, up he soared; air rushed through hishair, and his robes whipped out behind him — and ina rush of fierce joy he realized he’d found somethinghe could do without being taught — this was easy,this was wonderful. He pulled his broomstick up alittle to take it even higher, and heard screams andgasps of girls back on the ground and an admiringwhoop from Ron.

He turned his broomstick sharply to face Malfoy inmidair. Malfoy looked stunned.

“Give it here,” Harry called, “or I’ll knock you off thatbroom!”

“Oh, yeah?” said Malfoy, trying to sneer, but lookingworried.

Harry knew, somehow, what to do. He leaned forwardand grasped the broom tightly in both hands, and itshot toward Malfoy like a javelin. Malfoy only just gotout of the way in time; Harry made a sharp about-face and held the broom steady. A few people belowwere clapping.

“No Crabbe and Goyle up here to save your neck,Malfoy,” Harry called.

The same thought seemed to have struck Malfoy.

“Catch it if you can, then!” he shouted, and he threwthe glass ball high into the air and streaked backtoward the ground.

Harry saw, as though in slow motion, the ball rise upin the air and then start to fall. He leaned forwardand pointed his broom handle down — next second

Page | 166 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

he was gathering speed in a steep dive, racing the ball— wind whistled in his ears, mingled with thescreams of people watching — he stretched out hishand — a foot from the ground he caught it, just intime to pull his broom straight, and he toppled gentlyonto the grass with the Remembrall clutched safely inhis fist.

“HARRY POTTER!”

His heart sank faster than he’d just dived. ProfessorMcGonagall was running toward them. He got to hisfeet, trembling.

“Never — in all my time at Hogwarts —”

Professor McGonagall was almost speechless withshock, and her glasses flashed furiously, “— how dareyou — might have broken your neck —”

“It wasn’t his fault, Professor —”

“Be quiet, Miss Patil —”

“But Malfoy —”

“That’s enough, Mr. Weasley. Potter, follow me, now.”

Harry caught sight of Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle’striumphant faces as he left, walking numbly inProfessor McGonagall’s wake as she strode toward thecastle. He was going to be expelled, he just knew it.

He wanted to say something to defend himself, butthere seemed to be something wrong with his voice.Professor McGonagall was sweeping along withouteven looking at him; he had to jog to keep up. Nowhe’d done it. He hadn’t even lasted two weeks. He’d bepacking his bags in ten minutes. What would theDursleys say when he turned up on the doorstep?Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Up the front steps, up the marble staircase inside,and still Professor McGonagall didn’t say a word tohim. She wrenched open doors and marched alongcorridors with Harry trotting miserably behind her.Maybe she was taking him to Dumbledore. Hethought of Hagrid, expelled but allowed to stay on asgamekeeper. Perhaps he could be Hagrid’s assistant.His stomach twisted as he imagined it, watching Ronand the others becoming wizards while he stumpedaround the grounds carrying Hagrid’s bag.

Professor McGonagall stopped outside a classroom.She opened the door and poked her head inside.

“Excuse me, Professor Flitwick, could I borrow Woodfor a moment?”

Wood? thought Harry, bewildered; was Wood a caneshe was going to use on him?

But Wood turned out to be a person, a burly fifth-yearboy who came out of Flitwick’s class lookingconfused.

“Follow me, you two,” said Professor McGonagall, andthey marched on up the corridor, Wood lookingcuriously at Harry.

“In here.”

Professor McGonagall pointed them into a classroomthat was empty except for Peeves, who was busywriting rude words on the blackboard.

“Out, Peeves!” she barked. Peeves threw the chalkinto a bin, which clanged loudly, and he swooped outcursing. Professor McGonagall slammed the doorbehind him and turned to face the two boys.

Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Potter, this is Oliver Wood. Wood — I’ve found you aSeeker.”

Wood’s expression changed from puzzlement todelight.

“Are you serious, Professor?”

“Absolutely,” said Professor McGonagall crisply. “Theboy’s a natural. I’ve never seen anything like it. Wasthat your first time on a broomstick, Potter?”

Harry nodded silently. He didn’t have a clue what wasgoing on, but he didn’t seem to be being expelled, andsome of the feeling started coming back to his legs.

“He caught that thing in his hand after a fifty-footdive,” Professor McGonagall told Wood. “Didn’t evenscratch himself. Charlie Weasley couldn’t have doneit.”

Wood was now looking as though all his dreams hadcome true at once.

“Ever seen a game of Quidditch, Potter?” he askedexcitedly.

“Wood’s captain of the Gryffindor team,” ProfessorMcGonagall explained.

“He’s just the build for a Seeker, too,” said Wood, nowwalking around Harry and staring at him. “Light —speedy — we’ll have to get him a decent broom,Professor — a Nimbus Two Thousand or aCleansweep Seven, I’d say.”

“I shall speak to Professor Dumbledore and see if wecan’t bend the first-year rule. Heaven knows, we needa better team than last year. Flattened in that last

Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

match by Slytherin, I couldn’t look Severus Snape inthe face for weeks. ...”

Professor McGonagall peered sternly over her glassesat Harry.

“I want to hear you’re training hard, Potter, or I maychange my mind about punishing you.”

Then she suddenly smiled.

“Your father would have been proud,” she said. “Hewas an excellent Quidditch player himself.”

“You’re joking.”

It was dinnertime. Harry had just finished telling Ronwhat had happened when he’d left the grounds withProfessor McGonagall. Ron had a piece of steak andkidney pie halfway to his mouth, but he’d forgotten allabout it.

“Seeker?” he said. “But first years never — you mustbe the youngest House player in about —”

“— a century,” said Harry, shoveling pie into hismouth. He felt particularly hungry after theexcitement of the afternoon. “Wood told me.”

Ron was so amazed, so impressed, he just sat andgaped at Harry.

“I start training next week,” said Harry. “Only don’ttell anyone, Wood wants to keep it a secret.”

Fred and George Weasley now came into the hall,spotted Harry, and hurried over.

Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Well done,” said George in a low voice. “Wood told us.We’re on the team too — Beaters.”

“I tell you, we’re going to win that Quidditch Cup forsure this year,” said Fred. “We haven’t won sinceCharlie left, but this year’s team is going to bebrilliant. You must be good, Harry, Wood was almostskipping when he told us.”

“Anyway, we’ve got to go, Lee Jordan reckons he’sfound a new secret passageway out of the school.”

“Bet it’s that one behind the statue of Gregory theSmarmy that we found in our first week. See you.”

Fred and George had hardly disappeared whensomeone far less welcome turned up: Malfoy, flankedby Crabbe and Goyle.

“Having a last meal, Potter? When are you getting thetrain back to the Muggles?”

“You’re a lot braver now that you’re back on theground and you’ve got your little friends with you,”said Harry coolly. There was of course nothing at alllittle about Crabbe and Goyle, but as the High Tablewas full of teachers, neither of them could do morethan crack their knuckles and scowl.

“I’d take you on anytime on my own,” said Malfoy.“Tonight, if you want. Wizard’s duel. Wands only —no contact. What’s the matter? Never heard of awizard’s duel before, I suppose?”

“Of course he has,” said Ron, wheeling around. “I’mhis second, who’s yours?”

Malfoy looked at Crabbe and Goyle, sizing them up.

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Crabbe,” he said. “Midnight all right? Well meet youin the trophy room; that’s always unlocked.”

When Malfoy had gone, Ron and Harry looked at eachother.

“What is a wizard’s duel?” said Harry. “And what doyou mean, you’re my second?”

“Well, a second’s there to take over if you die,” saidRon casually, getting started at last on his cold pie.Catching the look on Harry’s face, he added quickly,“But people only die in proper duels, you know, withreal wizards. The most you and Malfoy’ll be able to dois send sparks at each other. Neither of you knowsenough magic to do any real damage. I bet heexpected you to refuse, anyway.”

“And what if I wave my wand and nothing happens?”

“Throw it away and punch him on the nose,” Ronsuggested.

“Excuse me.”

They both looked up. It was Hermione Granger.

“Can’t a person eat in peace in this place?” said Ron.

Hermione ignored him and spoke to Harry.

“I couldn’t help overhearing what you and Malfoywere saying —”

“Bet you could,” Ron muttered.

“— and you mustn’t go wandering around the schoolat night, think of the points you’ll lose Gryffindor if

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

you’re caught, and you’re bound to be. It’s really veryselfish of you.”

“And it’s really none of your business,” said Harry.“Good-bye,” said Ron.

All the same, it wasn’t what you’d call the perfect endto the day, Harry thought, as he lay awake much laterlistening to Dean and Seamus falling asleep (Nevillewasn’t back from the hospital wing). Ron had spentall evening giving him advice such as “If he tries tocurse you, you’d better dodge it, because I can’tremember how to block them.” There was a very goodchance they were going to get caught by Filch or Mrs.Norris, and Harry felt he was pushing his luck,breaking another school rule today. On the otherhand, Malfoy’s sneering face kept looming up out ofthe darkness — this was his big chance to beatMalfoy face-to-face. He couldn’t miss it.

“Half-past eleven,” Ron muttered at last, “we’d bettergo.”

They pulled on their bathrobes, picked up theirwands, and crept across the tower room, down thespiral staircase, and into the Gryffindor commonroom. A few embers were still glowing in the fireplace,turning all the armchairs into hunched blackshadows. They had almost reached the portrait holewhen a voice spoke from the chair nearest them, “Ican’t believe you’re going to do this, Harry.”

A lamp flickered on. It was Hermione Granger,wearing a pink bathrobe and a frown.

“You!” said Ron furiously. “Go back to bed!”

Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I almost told your brother,” Hermione snapped,

“Percy — he’s a prefect, he’d put a stop to this.”

Harry couldn’t believe anyone could be so interfering.

“Come on,” he said to Ron. He pushed open theportrait of the Fat Lady and climbed through the hole.

Hermione wasn’t going to give up that easily. Shefollowed Ron through the portrait hole, hissing atthem like an angry goose.

“Don’t you care about Gryffindor, do you only careabout yourselves, / don’t want Slytherin to win theHouse Cup, and you’ll lose all the points I got fromProfessor McGonagall for knowing about SwitchingSpells.”

“Go away.”

“All right, but I warned you, you just remember whatI said when you’re on the train home tomorrow,you’re so —”

But what they were, they didn’t find out. Hermionehad turned to the portrait of the Fat Lady to get backinside and found herself facing an empty painting.

The Fat Lady had gone on a nighttime visit andHermione was locked out of Gryffindor Tower.

“Now what am I going to do?” she asked shrilly.

“That’s your problem,” said Ron. “We’ve got to go,we’re going to be late.”

They hadn’t even reached the end of the corridorwhen Hermione caught up with them.

“I’m coming with you,” she said.

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“You are not.”

“D’you think I’m going to stand out here and wait forFilch to catch me? If he finds all three of us I’ll tellhim the truth, that I was trying to stop you, and youcan back me up.”

“You’ve got some nerve —” said Ron loudly.

“Shut up, both of you!” said Harry sharply. “I heardsomething.”

It was a sort of snuffling.

“Mrs. Norris?” breathed Ron, squinting through thedark.

It wasn’t Mrs. Norris. It was Neville. He was curled upon the floor, fast asleep, but jerked suddenly awakeas they crept nearer.

“Thank goodness you found me! I’ve been out here forhours, I couldn’t remember the new password to getin to bed.”

“Keep your voice down, Neville. The password’s ‘Pigsnout’ but it won’t help you now, the Fat Lady’s goneoff somewhere.”

“How’s your arm?” said Harry.

“Fine,” said Neville, showing them. “Madam Pomfreymended it in about a minute.”

“Good — well, look, Neville, we’ve got to besomewhere, we’ll see you later —”

Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t leave me!” said Neville, scrambling to his feet,

“I don’t want to stay here alone, the Bloody Baron’sbeen past twice already.”

Ron looked at his watch and then glared furiously atHermione and Neville.

“If either of you get us caught, I’ll never rest until I’velearned that Curse of the Bogies Quirrell told usabout, and used it on you.”

Hermione opened her mouth, perhaps to tell Ronexactly how to use the Curse of the Bogies, but Harryhissed at her to be quiet and beckoned them allforward.

They flitted along corridors striped with bars ofmoonlight from the high windows. At every turn Harryexpected to run into Filch or Mrs. Norris, but theywere lucky. They sped up a staircase to the third floorand tiptoed toward the trophy room.

Malfoy and Crabbe weren’t there yet. The crystaltrophy cases glimmered where the moonlight caughtthem. Cups, shields, plates, and statues winked silverand gold in the darkness. They edged along the walls,keeping their eyes on the doors at either end of theroom. Harry took out his wand in case Malfoy leapt inand started at once. The minutes crept by.

“He’s late, maybe he’s chickened out,” Ron whispered.

Then a noise in the next room made them jump.

Harry had only just raised his wand when they heardsomeone speak — and it wasn’t Malfoy.

“Sniff around, my sweet, they might be lurking in acorner.”

Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

It was Filch speaking to Mrs. Norris. Horror-struck,Harry waved madly at the other three to follow him asquickly as possible; they scurried silently toward thedoor, away from Filch’s voice. Neville’s robes hadbarely whipped round the corner when they heardFilch enter the trophy room.

“They’re in here somewhere,” they heard him mutter,“probably hiding.”

“This way!” Harry mouthed to the others and,petrified, they began to creep down a long gallery fullof suits of armor. They could hear Filch gettingnearer. Neville suddenly let out a frightened squeakand broke into a run — he tripped, grabbed Ronaround the waist, and the pair of them toppled rightinto a suit of armor.

The clanging and crashing were enough to wake thewhole castle.

“RUN!” Harry yelled, and the four of them sprinteddown the gallery, not looking back to see whetherFilch was following — they swung around thedoorpost and galloped down one corridor thenanother, Harry in the lead, without any idea wherethey were or where they were going — they rippedthrough a tapestry and found themselves in a hiddenpassageway, hurtled along it and came out near theirCharms classroom, which they knew was miles fromthe trophy room.

“I think we’ve lost him,” Harry panted, leaning againstthe cold wall and wiping his forehead. Neville wasbent double, wheezing and spluttering.

“I — told — you,” Hermione gasped, clutching at thestitch in her chest, “I — told — you.”

Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“We’ve got to get back to Gryffindor Tower,” said Ron,“quickly as possible.”

“Malfoy tricked you,” Hermione said to Harry. “Yourealize that, don’t you? He was never going to meetyou — Filch knew someone was going to be in thetrophy room, Malfoy must have tipped him off.”

Harry thought she was probably right, but he wasn’tgoing to tell her that.

“Let’s go.”

It wasn’t going to be that simple. They hadn’t gonemore than a dozen paces when a doorknob rattledand something came shooting out of a classroom infront of them.

It was Peeves. He caught sight of them and gave asqueal of delight.

“Shut up, Peeves — please — you’ll get us thrownout.”

Peeves cackled.

“Wandering around at midnight, Ickle Firsties? Tut,tut, tut. Naughty, naughty, you’ll get caughty.”

“Not if you don’t give us away, Peeves, please.”

“Should tell Filch, I should,” said Peeves in a sanityvoice, but his eyes glittered wickedly. “It’s for yourown good, you know.”

“Get out of the way,” snapped Ron, taking a swipe atPeeves — this was a big mistake.

Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“STUDENTS OUT OF BED!” Peeves bellowed,“STUDENTS OUT OF BED DOWN THE CHARMSCORRIDOR!”

Ducking under Peeves, they ran for their lives, rightto the end of the corridor where they slammed into adoor — and it was locked.

“This is it!” Ron moaned, as they pushed helplessly atthe door, “We’re done for! This is the end!”

They could hear footsteps, Filch running as fast as hecould toward Peeves’s shouts.

“Oh, move over,” Hermione snarled. She grabbedHarry’s wand, tapped the lock, and whispered,“Alohomora\”

The lock clicked and the door swung open — theypiled through it, shut it quickly, and pressed theirears against it, listening.

“Which way did they go, Peeves?” Filch was saying.“Quick, tell me.”

“Say ‘please.’ ”

“Don’t mess with me, Peeves, now where did they go?”

“Shan’t say nothing if you don’t say please,” saidPeeves in his annoying singsong voice.

“All right — please.”

“NOTHING! Ha haaa! Told you I wouldn’t say nothingif you didn’t say please! Ha ha! Haaaaaa!” And theyheard the sound of Peeves whooshing away and Filchcursing in rage.

Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“He thinks this door is locked,” Harry whispered. “Ithink well be okay — get off Neville!” For Neville hadbeen tugging on the sleeve of Harry’s bathrobe for thelast minute. “What?”

Harry turned around — and saw, quite clearly, what.For a moment, he was sure he’d walked into anightmare — this was too much, on top of everythingthat had happened so far.

They weren’t in a room, as he had supposed. Theywere in a corridor. The forbidden corridor on the thirdfloor. And now they knew why it was forbidden.

They were looking straight into the eyes of amonstrous dog, a dog that filled the whole spacebetween ceiling and floor. It had three heads. Threepairs of rolling, mad eyes; three noses, twitching andquivering in their direction; three drooling mouths,saliva hanging in slippery ropes from yellowish fangs.

It was standing quite still, all six eyes staring at them,and Harry knew that the only reason they weren’talready dead was that their sudden appearance hadtaken it by surprise, but it was quickly getting overthat, there was no mistaking what those thunderousgrowls meant.

Harry groped for the doorknob — between Filch anddeath, he’d take Filch.

They fell backward — Harry slammed the door shut,and they ran, they almost flew, back down thecorridor. Filch must have hurried off to look for themsomewhere else, because they didn’t see himanywhere, but they hardly cared — all they wanted todo was put as much space as possible between themand that monster. They didn’t stop running until they

Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

reached the portrait of the Fat Lady on the seventhfloor.

“Where on earth have you all been?” she asked,looking at their bathrobes hanging off their shouldersand their flushed, sweaty faces.

“Never mind that — pig snout, pig snout,” pantedHarry, and the portrait swung forward. Theyscrambled into the common room and collapsed,trembling, into armchairs.

It was a while before any of them said anything.Neville, indeed, looked as if he’d never speak again.

“What do they think they’re doing, keeping a thinglike that locked up in a school?” said Ron finally. “Ifany dog needs exercise, that one does.”

Hermione had got both her breath and her badtemper back again.

“You don’t use your eyes, any of you, do you?” shesnapped. “Didn’t you see what it was standing on?”

“The floor?” Harry suggested. “I wasn’t looking at itsfeet, I was too busy with its heads.”

“No, not the floor. It was standing on a trapdoor. It’sobviously guarding something.”

She stood up, glaring at them.

“I hope you’re pleased with yourselves. We could allhave been killed — or worse, expelled. Now, if youdon’t mind, I’m going to bed.”

Ron stared after her, his mouth open.

Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“No, we don’t mind,” he said. “You’d think we draggedher along, wouldn’t you?”

But Hermione had given Harry something else tothink about as he climbed back into bed. The dog wasguarding something. ... What had Hagrid said?Gringotts was the safest place in the world forsomething you wanted to hide — except perhapsHogwarts.

It looked as though Harry had found out where thegrubby little package from vault seven hundred andthirteen was.

Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling



HALLOWEEN

Malfoy couldn’t believe his eyes when he saw thatHarry and Ron were still at Hogwarts the next day,looking tired but perfectly cheerful. Indeed, by thenext morning Harry and Ron thought that meetingthe three-headed dog had been an excellentadventure, and they were quite keen to have anotherone. In the meantime, Harry filled Ron in about thepackage that seemed to have been moved fromGringotts to Hogwarts, and they spent a lot of timewondering what could possibly need such heavyprotection.

“It’s either really valuable or really dangerous,” saidRon.

“Or both,” said Harry.

But as all they knew for sure about the mysteriousobject was that it was about two inches long, theydidn’t have much chance of guessing what it waswithout further clues.

Page | 183 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone-J.K. Rowling

Neither Neville nor Hermione showed the slightestinterest in what lay underneath the dog and thetrapdoor. All Neville cared about was never going nearthe dog again.

Hermione was now refusing to speak to Harry andRon, but she was such a bossy know-it-all that theysaw this as an added bonus. All they really wantednow was a way of getting back at Malfoy, and to theirgreat delight, just such a thing arrived in the mailabout a week later.

As the owls flooded into the Great Hall as usual,everyone’s attention was caught at once by a long,thin package carried by six large screech owls. Harrywas just as interested as everyone else to see whatwas in this large parcel, and was amazed when theowls soared down and dropped it right in front of him,knocking his bacon to the floor. They had hardlyfluttered out of the way when another owl dropped aletter on top of the parcel.

Harry ripped open the letter first, which was lucky,because it said:

DO NOT OPEN THE PARCEL AT THE TABLE.

It contains your new Nimbus Two Thousand, but Idon’t want everybody knowing you’ve got abroomstick or they’ll all want one. Oliver Wood willmeet you tonight on the Quidditch field at seveno’clock for your first training session.

Professor M. McGonagall

Harry had difficulty hiding his glee as he handed thenote to Ron to read.

Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“A Nimbus Two Thousand!” Ron moaned enviously.“I’ve never even touched one.”

They left the hall quickly, wanting to unwrap thebroomstick in private before their first class, buthalfway across the entrance hall they found the wayupstairs barred by Crabbe and Goyle. Malfoy seizedthe package from Harry and felt it.

“That’s a broomstick,” he said, throwing it back toHarry with a mixture of jealousy and spite on his face.“You’ll be in for it this time, Potter, first years aren’tallowed them.”

Ron couldn’t resist it.

“It’s not any old broomstick,” he said, “it’s a NimbusTwo Thousand. What did you say you’ve got at home,Malfoy, a Comet Two Sixty?” Ron grinned at Harry.“Comets look flashy, but they’re not in the sameleague as the Nimbus.”

“What would you know about it, Weasley, youcouldn’t afford half the handle,” Malfoy snapped back.“I suppose you and your brothers have to save uptwig by twig.”

Before Ron could answer, Professor Flitwick appearedat Malfoy’s elbow.

“Not arguing, I hope, boys?” he squeaked.

“Potters been sent a broomstick, Professor,” saidMalfoy quickly.

“Yes, yes, that’s right,” said Professor Flitwick,beaming at Harry. “Professor McGonagall told me allabout the special circumstances, Potter. And whatmodel is it?”

Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“A Nimbus Two Thousand, sir,” said Harry, fightingnot to laugh at the look of horror on Malfoy’s face.“And it’s really thanks to Malfoy here that I’ve got it,”he added.

Harry and Ron headed upstairs, smothering theirlaughter at Malfoy’s obvious rage and confusion.

“Well, it’s true,” Harry chortled as they reached thetop of the marble staircase, “If he hadn’t stolenNeville’s Remembrall I wouldn’t be on the team. ...”

“So I suppose you think that’s a reward for breakingrules?” came an angry voice from just behind them.Hermione was stomping up the stairs, lookingdisapprovingly at the package in Harry’s hand.

“I thought you weren’t speaking to us?” said Harry.

“Yes, don’t stop now,” said Ron, “it’s doing us somuch good.”

Hermione marched away with her nose in the air.

Harry had a lot of trouble keeping his mind on hislessons that day. It kept wandering up to thedormitory where his new broomstick was lying underhis bed, or straying off to the Quidditch field wherehe’d be learning to play that night. He bolted hisdinner that evening without noticing what he waseating, and then rushed upstairs with Ron to unwrapthe Nimbus Two Thousand at last.

“Wow,” Ron sighed, as the broomstick rolled ontoHarry’s bedspread.

Even Harry, who knew nothing about the differentbrooms, thought it looked wonderful. Sleek andshiny, with a mahogany handle, it had a long tail of

Page | 186 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

neat, straight twigs and Nimbus Two Thousandwritten in gold near the top.

As seven o’clock drew nearer, Harry left the castle andset off in the dusk toward the Quidditch field. He’dnever been inside the stadium before. Hundreds ofseats were raised in stands around the field so thatthe spectators were high enough to see what wasgoing on. At either end of the field were three goldenpoles with hoops on the end. They reminded Harry ofthe little plastic sticks Muggle children blew bubblesthrough, except that they were fifty feet high.

Too eager to fly again to wait for Wood, Harrymounted his broomstick and kicked off from theground. What a feeling — he swooped in and out ofthe goal posts and then sped up and down the field.The Nimbus Two Thousand turned wherever hewanted at his lightest touch.

“Hey, Potter, come down!”

Oliver Wood had arrived. He was carrying a largewooden crate under his arm. Harry landed next tohim.

“Very nice,” said Wood, his eyes glinting. “I see whatMcGonagall meant ... you really are a natural. I’mjust going to teach you the rules this evening, thenyou’ll be joining team practice three times a week.”

He opened the crate. Inside were four different-sizedballs.

“Right,” said Wood. “Now, Quidditch is easy enough tounderstand, even if it’s not too easy to play. There areseven players on each side. Three of them are calledChasers.”

Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Three Chasers,” Harry repeated, as Wood took out abright red ball about the size of a soccer ball.

“This ball’s called the Quaffle,” said Wood. “TheChasers throw the Quaffle to each other and try andget it through one of the hoops to score a goal. Tenpoints every time the Quaffle goes through one of thehoops. Follow me?”

“The Chasers throw the Quaffle and put it throughthe hoops to score,” Harry recited. “So — that’s sort oflike basketball on broomsticks with six hoops, isn’tit?”

“What’s basketball?” said Wood curiously.

“Never mind,” said Harry quickly.

“Now, there’s another player on each side who’s calledthe Keeper — I’m Keeper for Gryffindor. I have to flyaround our hoops and stop the other team fromscoring.”

“Three Chasers, one Keeper,” said Harry, who wasdetermined to remember it all. “And they play withthe Quaffle. Okay, got that. So what are they for?” Hepointed at the three balls left inside the box.

“I’ll show you now,” said Wood. “Take this.”

He handed Harry a small club, a bit like a shortbaseball bat.

“I’m going to show you what the Bludgers do,” Woodsaid. “These two are the Bludgers.”

He showed Harry two identical balls, jet black andslightly smaller than the red Quaffle. Harry noticed

Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

that they seemed to be straining to escape the strapsholding them inside the box.

“Stand back,” Wood warned Harry. He bent down andfreed one of the Bludgers.

At once, the black ball rose high in the air and thenpelted straight at Harry’s face. Harry swung at it withthe bat to stop it from breaking his nose, and sent itzigzagging away into the air — it zoomed around theirheads and then shot at Wood, who dived on top of itand managed to pin it to the ground.

“See?” Wood panted, forcing the struggling Bludgerback into the crate and strapping it down safely. “TheBludgers rocket around, trying to knock players offtheir brooms. That’s why you have two Beaters oneach team — the Weasley twins are ours — it’s theirjob to protect their side from the Bludgers and try andknock them toward the other team. So — think you’vegot all that?”

“Three Chasers try and score with the Quaffle; theKeeper guards the goal posts; the Beaters keep theBludgers away from their team,” Harry reeled off.

“Very good,” said Wood.

“Er — have the Bludgers ever killed anyone?” Harryasked, hoping he sounded offhand.

“Never at Hogwarts. We’ve had a couple of brokenjaws but nothing worse than that. Now, the lastmember of the team is the Seeker. That’s you. Andyou don’t have to worry about the Quaffle or theBludgers —”

“— unless they crack my head open.”

Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t worry, the Weasleys are more than a match forthe Bludgers — I mean, they’re like a pair of humanBludgers themselves.”

Wood reached into the crate and took out the fourthand last ball. Compared with the Quaffle and theBludgers, it was tiny, about the size of a large walnut.It was bright gold and had little fluttering silverwings.

“This,” said Wood, “is the Golden Snitch, and it’s themost important ball of the lot. It’s very hard to catchbecause it’s so fast and difficult to see. It’s theSeeker’s job to catch it. You’ve got to weave in and outof the Chasers, Beaters, Bludgers, and Quaffle to getit before the other team’s Seeker, because whicheverSeeker catches the Snitch wins his team an extrahundred and fifty points, so they nearly always win.That’s why Seekers get fouled so much. A game ofQuidditch only ends when the Snitch is caught, so itcan go on for ages — I think the record is threemonths, they had to keep bringing on substitutes sothe players could get some sleep.

“Well, that’s it — any questions?”

Harry shook his head. He understood what he had todo all right, it was doing it that was going to be theproblem.

“We won’t practice with the Snitch yet,” said Wood,carefully shutting it back inside the crate, “it’s toodark, we might lose it. Let’s try you out with a few ofthese.”

He pulled a bag of ordinary golf balls out of his pocketand a few minutes later, he and Harry were up in theair, Wood throwing the golf balls as hard as he couldin every direction for Harry to catch.

Page | 190 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry didn’t miss a single one, and Wood wasdelighted. After half an hour, night had really fallenand they couldn’t carry on.

“That Quidditch Cup’ll have our name on it this year,”said Wood happily as they trudged back up to thecastle. “I wouldn’t be surprised if you turn out betterthan Charlie Weasley, and he could have played forEngland if he hadn’t gone off chasing dragons.”

Perhaps it was because he was now so busy, whatwith Quidditch practice three evenings a week on topof all his homework, but Harry could hardly believe itwhen he realized that he’d already been at Hogwartstwo months. The castle felt more like home thanPrivet Drive ever had. His lessons, too, were becomingmore and more interesting now that they hadmastered the basics.

On Halloween morning they woke to the delicioussmell of baking pumpkin wafting through thecorridors. Even better, Professor Flitwick announcedin Charms that he thought they were ready to startmaking objects fly, something they had all been dyingto try since they’d seen him make Neville’s toad zoomaround the classroom. Professor Flitwick put theclass into pairs to practice. Harry’s partner wasSeamus Finnigan (which was a relief, because Nevillehad been trying to catch his eye). Ron, however, wasto be working with Hermione Granger. It was hard totell whether Ron or Hermione was angrier about this.She hadn’t spoken to either of them since the dayHarry’s broomstick had arrived.

“Now, don’t forget that nice wrist movement we’vebeen practicing!” squeaked Professor Flitwick,perched on top of his pile of books as usual. “Swishand flick, remember, swish and flick. And saying themagic words properly is very important, too — neverPage | 191 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

forget Wizard Baruffio, who said ‘s’ instead of ‘f andfound himself on the floor with a buffalo on hischest.”

It was very difficult. Harry and Seamus swished andflicked, but the feather they were supposed to besending skyward just lay on the desktop. Seamus gotso impatient that he prodded it with his wand and setfire to it — Harry had to put it out with his hat.

Ron, at the next table, wasn’t having much moreluck.

“Wingardium Leviosal” he shouted, waving his longarms like a windmill.

“You’re saying it wrong,” Harry heard Hermione snap.“It’s Wing-gar-dium Levi-o-sa, make the ‘gar’ nice andlong.”

“You do it, then, if you’re so clever,” Ron snarled.

Hermione rolled up the sleeves of her gown, flickedher wand, and said, “Wingardium LeviosaV’

Their feather rose off the desk and hovered about fourfeet above their heads.

“Oh, well done!” cried Professor Flitwick, clapping.“Everyone see here, Miss Granger’s done it!”

Ron was in a very bad mood by the end of the class.

“It’s no wonder no one can stand her,” he said toHarry as they pushed their way into the crowdedcorridor, “she’s a nightmare, honestly.”

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Someone knocked into Harry as they hurried pasthim. It was Hermione. Harry caught a glimpse of herface — and was startled to see that she was in tears.

“I think she heard you.”

“So?” said Ron, but he looked a bit uncomfortable.“She must’ve noticed she’s got no friends.”

Hermione didn’t turn up for the next class and wasn’tseen all afternoon. On their way down to the GreatHall for the Halloween feast, Harry and Ron overheardParvati Patil telling her friend Lavender that Hermionewas crying in the girls’ bathroom and wanted to beleft alone. Ron looked still more awkward at this, buta moment later they had entered the Great Hall,where the Halloween decorations put Hermione out oftheir minds.

A thousand live bats fluttered from the walls andceiling while a thousand more swooped over thetables in low black clouds, making the candles in thepumpkins stutter. The feast appeared suddenly onthe golden plates, as it had at the start-of-termbanquet.

Harry was just helping himself to a baked potatowhen Professor Quirrell came sprinting into the hall,his turban askew and terror on his face. Everyonestared as he reached Professor Dumbledore’s chair,slumped against the table, and gasped, “Troll — inthe dungeons — thought you ought to know.”

He then sank to the floor in a dead faint.

There was an uproar. It took several purplefirecrackers exploding from the end of ProfessorDumbledore’s wand to bring silence.

Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Prefects,” he rumbled, “lead your Houses back to thedormitories immediately!”

Percy was in his element.

“Follow me! Stick together, first years! No need to fearthe troll if you follow my orders! Stay close behindme, now. Make way, first years coming through!Excuse me, I’m a prefect!”

“How could a troll get in?” Harry asked as theyclimbed the stairs.

“Don’t ask me, they’re supposed to be really stupid,”said Ron. “Maybe Peeves let it in for a Halloweenjoke.”

They passed different groups of people hurrying indifferent directions. As they jostled their way througha crowd of confused Hufflepuffs, Harry suddenlygrabbed Ron’s arm.

“I’ve just thought — Hermione.”

“What about her?”

“She doesn’t know about the troll.”

Ron bit his lip.

“Oh, all right,” he snapped. “But Percy’d better notsee us.”

Ducking down, they joined the Hufflepuffs going theother way, slipped down a deserted side corridor, andhurried off toward the girls’ bathroom. They had justturned the corner when they heard quick footstepsbehind them.

Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Percy!” hissed Ron, pulling Harry behind a largestone griffin.

Peering around it, however, they saw not Percy butSnape. He crossed the corridor and disappeared fromview.

“What’s he doing?” Harry whispered. “Why isn’t hedown in the dungeons with the rest of the teachers?”

“Search me.”

Quietly as possible, they crept along the next corridorafter Snape’s fading footsteps.

“He’s heading for the third floor,” Harry said, but Ronheld up his hand.

“Can you smell something?”

Harry sniffed and a foul stench reached his nostrils, amixture of old socks and the kind of public toilet noone seems to clean.

And then they heard it — a low grunting, and theshuffling footfalls of gigantic feet. Ron pointed — atthe end of a passage to the left, something huge wasmoving toward them. They shrank into the shadowsand watched as it emerged into a patch of moonlight.

It was a horrible sight. Twelve feet tall, its skin was adull, granite gray, its great lumpy body like a boulderwith its small bald head perched on top like acoconut. It had short legs thick as tree trunks withflat, horny feet. The smell coming from it wasincredible. It was holding a huge wooden club, whichdragged along the floor because its arms were so long.

Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

The troll stopped next to a doorway and peered inside.It waggled its long ears, making up its tiny mind, thenslouched slowly into the room.

“The key’s in the lock,” Harry muttered. “We couldlock it in.”

“Good idea,” said Ron nervously.

They edged toward the open door, mouths dry,praying the troll wasn’t about to come out of it. Withone great leap, Harry managed to grab the key, slamthe door, and lock it.

“Yes!”

Flushed with their victory, they started to run backup the passage, but as they reached the corner theyheard something that made their hearts stop — ahigh, petrified scream — and it was coming from thechamber they’d just chained up.

“Oh, no,” said Ron, pale as the Bloody Baron.

“It’s the girls’ bathroom!” Harry gasped.

“Hermionel” they said together.

It was the last thing they wanted to do, but whatchoice did they have? Wheeling around, they sprintedback to the door and turned the key, fumbling in theirpanic. Harry pulled the door open and they raninside.

Hermione Granger was shrinking against the wallopposite, looking as if she was about to faint. The trollwas advancing on her, knocking the sinks off thewalls as it went.

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Confuse it!” Harry said desperately to Ron, and,seizing a tap, he threw it as hard as he could againstthe wall.

The troll stopped a few feet from Hermione. Itlumbered around, blinking stupidly, to see what hadmade the noise. Its mean little eyes saw Harry. Ithesitated, then made for him instead, lifting its clubas it went.

“Oy, pea-brain!” yelled Ron from the other side of thechamber, and he threw a metal pipe at it. The trolldidn’t even seem to notice the pipe hitting itsshoulder, but it heard the yell and paused again,turning its ugly snout toward Ron instead, givingHarry time to run around it.

“Come on, run, run\” Harry yelled at Hermione, tryingto pull her toward the door, but she couldn’t move,she was still flat against the wall, her mouth openwith terror.

The shouting and the echoes seemed to be driving thetroll berserk. It roared again and started toward Ron,who was nearest and had no way to escape.

Harry then did something that was both very braveand very stupid: He took a great running jump andmanaged to fasten his arms around the troll’s neckfrom behind. The troll couldn’t feel Harry hangingthere, but even a troll will notice if you stick a long bitof wood up its nose, and Harry’s wand had still beenin his hand when he’d jumped — it had gone straightup one of the troll’s nostrils.

Howling with pain, the troll twisted and flailed itsclub, with Harry clinging on for dear life; any second,the troll was going to rip him off or catch him aterrible blow with the club.

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Hermione had sunk to the floor in fright; Ron pulledout his own wand — not knowing what he was goingto do he heard himself cry the first spell that cameinto his head: “Wingardium Leviosal”

The club flew suddenly out of the troll’s hand, rosehigh, high up into the air, turned slowly over — anddropped, with a sickening crack, onto its owner’shead. The troll swayed on the spot and then fell flaton its face, with a thud that made the whole roomtremble.

Harry got to his feet. He was shaking and out ofbreath. Ron was standing there with his wand stillraised, staring at what he had done.

It was Hermione who spoke first.

“Is it — dead?”

“I don’t think so,” said Harry, “I think it’s just beenknocked out.”

He bent down and pulled his wand out of the troll’snose. It was covered in what looked like lumpy grayglue.

“Urgh — troll boogers.”

He wiped it on the troll’s trousers.

A sudden slamming and loud footsteps made thethree of them look up. They hadn’t realized what aracket they had been making, but of course, someonedownstairs must have heard the crashes and thetroll’s roars. A moment later, Professor McGonagallhad come bursting into the room, closely followed bySnape, with Quirrell bringing up the rear. Quirrell

Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

took one look at the troll, let out a faint whimper, andsat quickly down on a toilet, clutching his heart.

Snape bent over the troll. Professor McGonagall waslooking at Ron and Harry. Harry had never seen herlook so angry. Her lips were white. Hopes of winningfifty points for Gryffindor faded quickly from Harry’smind.

“What on earth were you thinking of?” said ProfessorMcGonagall, with cold fury in her voice. Harry lookedat Ron, who was still standing with his wand in theair. “You’re lucky you weren’t killed. Why aren’t youin your dormitory?”

Snape gave Harry a swift, piercing look. Harry lookedat the floor. He wished Ron would put his wand down.

Then a small voice came out of the shadows.

“Please, Professor McGonagall — they were looking forme.”

“Miss Granger!”

Hermione had managed to get to her feet at last.

“I went looking for the troll because I — I thought Icould deal with it on my own — you know, becauseI’ve read all about them.”

Ron dropped his wand. Hermione Granger, telling adownright lie to a teacher?

“If they hadn’t found me, I’d be dead now. Harrystuck his wand up its nose and Ron knocked it outwith its own club. They didn’t have time to come andfetch anyone. It was about to finish me off when theyarrived.”

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry and Ron tried to look as though this storywasn’t new to them.

“Well — in that case ...” said Professor McGonagall,staring at the three of them, “Miss Granger, youfoolish girl, how could you think of tackling amountain troll on your own?”

Hermione hung her head. Harry was speechless.Hermione was the last person to do anything againstthe rules, and here she was, pretending she had, toget them out of trouble. It was as if Snape had startedhanding out sweets.

“Miss Granger, five points will be taken fromGryffindor for this,” said Professor McGonagall. “I’mvery disappointed in you. If you’re not hurt at all,you’d better get off to Gryffindor Tower. Students arefinishing the feast in their Houses.”

Hermione left.

Professor McGonagall turned to Harry and Ron.

“Well, I still say you were lucky, but not many firstyears could have taken on a full-grown mountaintroll. You each win Gryffindor five points. ProfessorDumbledore will be informed of this. You may go.”

They hurried out of the chamber and didn’t speak atall until they had climbed two floors up. It was a reliefto be away from the smell of the troll, quite apart fromanything else.

“We should have gotten more than ten points,” Rongrumbled.

“Five, you mean, once she’s taken off Hermione’s.”

Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Good of her to get us out of trouble like that,” Ronadmitted. “Mind you, we did save her.”

“She might not have needed saving if we hadn’tlocked the thing in with her,” Harry reminded him.

They had reached the portrait of the Fat Lady.

“Pig snout,” they said and entered.

The common room was packed and noisy. Everyonewas eating the food that had been sent up. Hermione,however, stood alone by the door, waiting for them.There was a very embarrassed pause. Then, none ofthem looking at each other, they all said “Thanks,”and hurried off to get plates.

But from that moment on, Hermione Granger becametheir friend. There are some things you can’t sharewithout ending up liking each other, and knockingout a twelve-foot mountain troll is one of them.

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling



QUIDDITCH

As they entered November, the weather turned verycold. The mountains around the school became icygray and the lake like chilled steel. Every morning theground was covered in frost. Hagrid could be seenfrom the upstairs windows defrosting broomsticks onthe Quidditch field, bundled up in a long moleskinovercoat, rabbit fur gloves, and enormous beaverskinboots.

The Quidditch season had begun. On Saturday, Harrywould be playing in his first match after weeks oftraining: Gryffindor versus Slytherin. If Gryffindorwon, they would move up into second place in theHouse Championship.

Hardly anyone had seen Harry play because Woodhad decided that, as their secret weapon, Harryshould be kept, well, secret. But the news that he wasplaying Seeker had leaked out somehow, and Harrydidn’t know which was worse — people telling himhe’d be brilliant or people telling him they’d berunning around underneath him holding a mattress.Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

It was really lucky that Harry now had Hermione as afriend. He didn’t know how he’d have gotten throughall his homework without her, what with all the last-minute Quidditch practice Wood was making themdo. She had also lent him Quidditch Through the Ages,which turned out to be a very interesting read.

Harry learned that there were seven hundred ways ofcommitting a Quidditch foul and that all of them hadhappened during a World Cup match in 1473; thatSeekers were usually the smallest and fastest players,and that most serious Quidditch accidents seemed tohappen to them; that although people rarely diedplaying Quidditch, referees had been known to vanishand turn up months later in the Sahara Desert.

Hermione had become a bit more relaxed aboutbreaking rules since Harry and Ron had saved herfrom the mountain troll, and she was much nicer forit. The day before Harry’s first Quidditch match thethree of them were out in the freezing courtyardduring break, and she had conjured them up a brightblue fire that could be carried around in a jam jar.They were standing with their backs to it, gettingwarm, when Snape crossed the yard. Harry noticed atonce that Snape was limping. Harry, Ron, andHermione moved closer together to block the fire fromview; they were sure it wouldn’t be allowed.Unfortunately, something about their guilty facescaught Snape’s eye. He limped over. He hadn’t seenthe fire, but he seemed to be looking for a reason totell them off anyway.

“What’s that you’ve got there, Potter?”

It was Quidditch Through the Ages. Harry showed him.

Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Library books are not to be taken outside theschool,” said Snape. “Give it to me. Five points fromGryffindor.”

“He’s just made that rule up,” Harry muttered angrilyas Snape limped away. “Wonder what’s wrong withhis leg?”

“Dunno, but I hope it’s really hurting him,” said Ronbitterly.

The Gryffindor common room was very noisy thatevening. Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat together nextto a window. Hermione was checking Harry and Ron’sCharms homework for them. She would never letthem copy (“How will you learn?”), but by asking herto read it through, they got the right answers anyway.

Harry felt restless. He wanted Quidditch Through theAges back, to take his mind off his nerves abouttomorrow. Why should he be afraid of Snape? Gettingup, he told Ron and Hermione he was going to askSnape if he could have it.

“Better you than me,” they said together, but Harryhad an idea that Snape wouldn’t refuse if there wereother teachers listening.

He made his way down to the staffroom and knocked.There was no answer. He knocked again. Nothing.

Perhaps Snape had left the book in there? It wasworth a try. He pushed the door ajar and peeredinside — and a horrible scene met his eyes.

Snape and Filch were inside, alone. Snape washolding his robes above his knees. One of his legs wasbloody and mangled. Filch was handing Snapebandages.

Page | 204 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Blasted thing,” Snape was saying. “How are yousupposed to keep your eyes on all three heads atonce?”

Harry tried to shut the door quietly, but —

“POTTER!”

Snape’s face was twisted with fury as he dropped hisrobes quickly to hide his leg. Harry gulped.

“I just wondered if I could have my book back.”

“GET OUT! OUT!”

Harry left, before Snape could take any more pointsfrom Gryffindor. He sprinted back upstairs.

“Did you get it?” Ron asked as Harry joined them.“What’s the matter?”

In a low whisper, Harry told them what he’d seen.

“You know what this means?” he finishedbreathlessly. “He tried to get past that three-headeddog at Halloween! That’s where he was going when wesaw him — he’s after whatever it’s guarding! And I’dbet my broomstick he let that troll in, to make adiversion!”

Hermione’s eyes were wide.

“No — he wouldn’t,” she said. “I know he’s not verynice, but he wouldn’t try and steal somethingDumbledore was keeping safe.”

“Honestly, Hermione, you think all teachers are saintsor something,” snapped Ron. “I’m with Harry. I

Page | 205 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

wouldn’t put anything past Snape. But what’s heafter? What’s that dog guarding?”

Harry went to bed with his head buzzing with thesame question. Neville was snoring loudly, but Harrycouldn’t sleep. He tried to empty his mind — heneeded to sleep, he had to, he had his first Quidditchmatch in a few hours — but the expression onSnape’s face when Harry had seen his leg wasn’t easyto forget.

The next morning dawned very bright and cold. TheGreat Hall was full of the delicious smell of friedsausages and the cheerful chatter of everyone lookingforward to a good Quidditch match.

“You’ve got to eat some breakfast.”

“I don’t want anything.”

“Just a bit of toast,” wheedled Hermione.

“I’m not hungry.”

Harry felt terrible. In an hour’s time he’d be walkingonto the field.

“Harry, you need your strength,” said SeamusFinnigan. “Seekers are always the ones who getclobbered by the other team.”

“Thanks, Seamus,” said Harry, watching Seamus pileketchup on his sausages.

By eleven o’clock the whole school seemed to be outin the stands around the Quidditch pitch. Manystudents had binoculars. The seats might be raisedhigh in the air, but it was still difficult to see whatwas going on sometimes.

Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Ron and Hermione joined Neville, Seamus, and Deanthe West Ham fan up in the top row. As a surprise forHarry, they had painted a large banner on one of thesheets Scabbers had ruined. It said Potter forPresident, and Dean, who was good at drawing, haddone a large Gryffindor lion underneath. ThenHermione had performed a tricky little charm so thatthe paint flashed different colors.

Meanwhile, in the locker room, Harry and the rest ofthe team were changing into their scarlet Quidditchrobes (Slytherin would be playing in green).

Wood cleared his throat for silence.

“Okay, men,” he said.

“And women,” said Chaser Angelina Johnson.

“And women,” Wood agreed. “This is it.”

“The big one,” said Fred Weasley.

“The one we’ve all been waiting for,” said George.

“We know Oliver’s speech by heart,” Fred told Harry,“we were on the team last year.”

“Shut up, you two,” said Wood. “This is the best teamGryffindor’s had in years. We’re going to win. I knowit.”

He glared at them all as if to say, “Or else.”

“Right. It’s time. Good luck, all of you.”

Harry followed Fred and George out of the lockerroom and, hoping his knees weren’t going to give way,walked onto the field to loud cheers.

Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Madam Hooch was refereeing. She stood in themiddle of the field waiting for the two teams, herbroom in her hand.

“Now, I want a nice fair game, all of you,” she said,once they were all gathered around her. Harry noticedthat she seemed to be speaking particularly to theSlytherin Captain, Marcus Flint, a fifth year. Harrythought Flint looked as if he had some troll blood inhim. Out of the corner of his eye he saw the flutteringbanner high above, flashing Potter for President overthe crowd. His heart skipped. He felt braver.

“Mount your brooms, please.”

Harry clambered onto his Nimbus Two Thousand.

Madam Hooch gave a loud blast on her silver whistle.

Fifteen brooms rose up, high, high into the air. Theywere off.

“And the Quaffle is taken immediately by AngelinaJohnson of Gryffindor — what an excellent Chaserthat girl is, and rather attractive, too —”

“JORDAN!”

“Sorry, Professor.”

The Weasley twins’ friend, Lee Jordan, was doing thecommentary for the match, closely watched byProfessor McGonagall.

“And she’s really belting along up there, a neat passto Alicia Spinnet, a good find of Oliver Wood’s, lastyear only a reserve — back to Johnson and — no, theSlytherins have taken the Quaffle, Slytherin CaptainMarcus Flint gains the Quaffle and off he goes — FlintPage | 208 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

flying like an eagle up there — he’s going to sc- no,stopped by an excellent move by Gryffindor KeeperWood and the Gryffindors take the Quaffle — that’sChaser Katie Bell of Gryffindor there, nice divearound Flint, off up the field and — OUCH — thatmust have hurt, hit in the back of the head by aBludger — Quaffle taken by the Slytherins — that’sAdrian Pucey speeding off toward the goal posts, buthe’s blocked by a second Bludger — sent his way byFred or George Weasley, can’t tell which — nice playby the Gryffindor Beater, anyway, and Johnson backin possession of the Quaffle, a clear field ahead andoff she goes — she’s really flying — dodges a speedingBludger — the goal posts are ahead — come on, now,Angelina — Keeper Bletchley dives — misses —GRYFFINDORS SCORE!”

Gryffindor cheers filled the cold air, with howls andmoans from the Slytherins.

“Budge up there, move along.”

“Hagrid!”

Ron and Hermione squeezed together to give Hagridenough space to join them.

“Bin watchin’ from me hut,” said Hagrid, patting alarge pair of binoculars around his neck, “But it isn’tthe same as bein’ in the crowd. No sign of the Snitchyet, eh?”

“Nope,” said Ron. “Harry hasn’t had much to do yet.”

“Kept outta trouble, though, that’s somethin’,” saidHagrid, raising his binoculars and peering skyward atthe speck that was Harry.

Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Way up above them, Harry was gliding over the game,squinting about for some sign of the Snitch. This waspart of his and Wood’s game plan.

“Keep out of the way until you catch sight of theSnitch,” Wood had said. “We don’t want you attackedbefore you have to be.”

When Angelina had scored, Harry had done a coupleof loop-the-loops to let off his feelings. Now he wasback to staring around for the Snitch. Once he caughtsight of a flash of gold, but it was just a reflectionfrom one of the Weasleys’ wristwatches, and once aBludger decided to come pelting his way, more like acannonball than anything, but Harry dodged it andFred Weasley came chasing after it.

“All right there, Harry?” he had time to yell, as hebeat the Bludger furiously toward Marcus Flint.

“Slytherin in possession,” Lee Jordan was saying,“Chaser Pucey ducks two Bludgers, two Weasleys,and Chaser Bell, and speeds toward the — wait amoment — was that the Snitch?”

A murmur ran through the crowd as Adrian Puceydropped the Quaffle, too busy looking over hisshoulder at the flash of gold that had passed his leftear.

Harry saw it. In a great rush of excitement he diveddownward after the streak of gold. Slytherin SeekerTerence Higgs had seen it, too. Neck and neck theyhurtled toward the Snitch — all the Chasers seemedto have forgotten what they were supposed to bedoing as they hung in midair to watch.

Page | 210 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry was faster than Higgs — he could see the littleround ball, wings fluttering, darting up ahead — heput on an extra spurt of speed —

WHAM! A roar of rage echoed from the Gryffindorsbelow — Marcus Flint had blocked Harry on purpose,and Harry’s broom spun off course, Harry holding onfor dear life.

“Foul!” screamed the Gryffindors.

Madam Hooch spoke angrily to Flint and then ordereda free shot at the goal posts for Gryffindor. But in allthe confusion, of course, the Golden Snitch haddisappeared from sight again.

Down in the stands, Dean Thomas was yelling, “Sendhim off, ref! Red card!”

“What are you talking about, Dean?” said Ron.

“Red card!” said Dean furiously. “In soccer you getshown the red card and you’re out of the game!”

“But this isn’t soccer, Dean,” Ron reminded him.

Hagrid, however, was on Dean’s side.

“They oughta change the rules. Flint coulda knockedHarry outta the air.”

Lee Jordan was finding it difficult not to take sides.

“So — after that obvious and disgusting bit ofcheating —”

“Jordan!” growled Professor McGonagall.

“I mean, after that open and revolting foul —”

Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Jordan, I’m warning you —”

“All right, all right. Flint nearly kills the GryffindorSeeker, which could happen to anyone, I’m sure, so apenalty to Gryffindor, taken by Spinnet, who puts itaway, no trouble, and we continue play, Gryffindorstill in possession.”

It was as Harry dodged another Bludger, which wentspinning dangerously past his head, that it happened.His broom gave a sudden, frightening lurch. For asplit second, he thought he was going to fall. Hegripped the broom tightly with both his hands andknees. He’d never felt anything like that.

It happened again. It was as though the broom wastrying to buck him off. But Nimbus Two Thousandsdid not suddenly decide to buck their riders off. Harrytried to turn back toward the Gryffindor goal posts —he had half a mind to ask Wood to call time-out —and then he realized that his broom was completelyout of his control. He couldn’t turn it. He couldn’tdirect it at all. It was zigzagging through the air, andevery now and then making violent swishingmovements that almost unseated him.

Lee was still commentating.

“Slytherin in possession — Flint with the Quaffle —passes Spinnet — passes Bell — hit hard in the faceby a Bludger, hope it broke his nose — only joking,Professor — Slytherins score — oh no ...”

The Slytherins were cheering. No one seemed to havenoticed that Harry’s broom was behaving strangely Itwas carrying him slowly higher, away from the game,jerking and twitching as it went.

Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Dunno what Harry thinks he’s doing,” Hagridmumbled. He stared through his binoculars. “If Ididn’ know better, I’d say he’d lost control of hisbroom ... but he can’t have. ...”

Suddenly, people were pointing up at Harry all overthe stands. His broom had started to roll over andover, with him only just managing to hold on. Thenthe whole crowd gasped. Harry’s broom had given awild jerk and Harry swung off it. He was now danglingfrom it, holding on with only one hand.

“Did something happen to it when Flint blocked him?”Seamus whispered.

“Can’t have,” Hagrid said, his voice shaking. “Can’tnothing interfere with a broomstick except powerfulDark magic — no kid could do that to a Nimbus TwoThousand.”

At these words, Hermione seized Hagrid’s binoculars,but instead of looking up at Harry, she startedlooking frantically at the crowd.

“What are you doing?” moaned Ron, gray-faced.

“I knew it,” Hermione gasped, “Snape — look.”

Ron grabbed the binoculars. Snape was in the middleof the stands opposite them. He had his eyes fixed onHarry and was muttering nonstop under his breath.

“He’s doing something —jinxing the broom,” saidHermione.

“What should we do?”

“Leave it to me.”

Page | 213 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Before Ron could say another word, Hermione haddisappeared. Ron turned the binoculars back onHarry. His broom was vibrating so hard, it was almostimpossible for him to hang on much longer. Thewhole crowd was on its feet, watching, terrified, as theWeasleys flew up to try and pull Harry safely onto oneof their brooms, but it was no good — every time theygot near him, the broom would jump higher still. Theydropped lower and circled beneath him, obviouslyhoping to catch him if he fell. Marcus Flint seized theQuaffle and scored five times without anyonenoticing.

“Come on, Hermione,” Ron muttered desperately.

Hermione had fought her way across to the standwhere Snape stood, and was now racing along the rowbehind him; she didn’t even stop to say sorry as sheknocked Professor Quirrell headfirst into the row infront. Reaching Snape, she crouched down, pulledout her wand, and whispered a few, well-chosenwords. Bright blue flames shot from her wand ontothe hem of Snape’s robes.

It took perhaps thirty seconds for Snape to realizethat he was on fire. A sudden yelp told her she haddone her job. Scooping the fire off him into a little jarin her pocket, she scrambled back along the row —Snape would never know what had happened.

It was enough. Up in the air, Harry was suddenly ableto clamber back on to his broom.

“Neville, you can look!” Ron said. Neville had beensobbing into Hagrid’s jacket for the last five minutes.

Harry was speeding toward the ground when thecrowd saw him clap his hand to his mouth as though

Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

he was about to be sick — he hit the field on all fours— coughed — and something gold fell into his hand.

“I’ve got the Snitch!” he shouted, waving it above hishead, and the game ended in complete confusion.

“He didn’t catch it, he nearly swallowed it,” Flint wasstill howling twenty minutes later, but it made nodifference — Harry hadn’t broken any rules and LeeJordan was still happily shouting the results —Gryffindor had won by one hundred and seventypoints to sixty. Harry heard none of this, though. Hewas being made a cup of strong tea back in Hagrid’shut, with Ron and Hermione.

“It was Snape,” Ron was explaining, “Hermione and Isaw him. He was cursing your broomstick, muttering,he wouldn’t take his eyes off you.”

“Rubbish,” said Hagrid, who hadn’t heard a word ofwhat had gone on next to him in the stands. “Whywould Snape do somethin’ like that?”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another,wondering what to tell him. Harry decided on thetruth.

“I found out something about him,” he told Hagrid.“He tried to get past that three-headed dog onHalloween. It bit him. We think he was trying to stealwhatever it’s guarding.”

Hagrid dropped the teapot.

“How do you know about Fluffy?” he said.

“Fluffy?”

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah — he’s mine — bought him off a Greek chappieI met in the pub las’ year — I lent him to Dumbledoreto guard the —”

“Yes?” said Harry eagerly.

“Now, don’t ask me anymore,” said Hagrid gruffly.“That’s top secret, that is.”

“But Snape’s trying to steal it.”

“Rubbish,” said Hagrid again. “Snape’s a Hogwartsteacher, he’d do nothin’ of the sort.”

“So why did he just try and kill Harry?” criedHermione.

The afternoon’s events certainly seemed to havechanged her mind about Snape.

“I know a jinx when I see one, Hagrid, I’ve read allabout them! You’ve got to keep eye contact, andSnape wasn’t blinking at all, I saw him!”

“I’m tellin’ yeh, yer wrong!” said Hagrid hotly. “I don’know why Harry’s broom acted like that, but Snapewouldn’ try an’ kill a student! Now, listen to me, allthree of yeh — yer meddlin’ in things that don’concern yeh. It’s dangerous. You forget that dog, an’you forget what it’s guardin’, that’s between ProfessorDumbledore an’ Nicolas Flamel —■”

“Aha!” said Harry, “so there’s someone called NicolasFlamel involved, is there?”

Hagrid looked furious with himself.

Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





THE MIRROR OF ERISED

Christmas was coming. One morning in mid-December, Hogwarts woke to find itself covered inseveral feet of snow. The lake froze solid and theWeasley twins were punished for bewitching severalsnowballs so that they followed Quirrell around,bouncing off the back of his turban. The few owls thatmanaged to battle their way through the stormy skyto deliver mail had to be nursed back to health byHagrid before they could fly off again.

No one could wait for the holidays to start. While theGryffindor common room and the Great Hall hadroaring fires, the drafty corridors had become icy anda bitter wind rattled the windows in the classrooms.Worst of all were Professor Snape’s classes down inthe dungeons, where their breath rose in a mistbefore them and they kept as close as possible totheir hot cauldrons.

“I do feel so sorry,” said Draco Malfoy, one Potionsclass, “for all those people who have to stay at

Page | 217 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Hogwarts for Christmas because they’re not wantedat home.”

He was looking over at Harry as he spoke. Crabbe andGoyle chuckled. Harry, who was measuring outpowdered spine of lion-fish, ignored them. Malfoy hadbeen even more unpleasant than usual since theQuidditch match. Disgusted that the Slytherins hadlost, he had tried to get everyone laughing at how awide-mouthed tree frog would be replacing Harry asSeeker next. Then he’d realized that nobody foundthis funny, because they were all so impressed at theway Harry had managed to stay on his buckingbroomstick. So Malfoy, jealous and angry, had goneback to taunting Harry about having no properfamily.

It was true that Harry wasn’t going back to PrivetDrive for Christmas. Professor McGonagall had comearound the week before, making a list of studentswho would be staying for the holidays, and Harry hadsigned up at once. He didn’t feel sorry for himself atall; this would probably be the best Christmas he’dever had. Ron and his brothers were staying, too,because Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were going to Romaniato visit Charlie.

When they left the dungeons at the end of Potions,they found a large fir tree blocking the corridor ahead.Two enormous feet sticking out at the bottom and aloud puffing sound told them that Hagrid was behindit.

“Hi, Hagrid, want any help?” Ron asked, sticking hishead through the branches.

“Nah, I’m all right, thanks, Ron.”

Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Would you mind moving out of the way?” cameMalfoy’s cold drawl from behind them. “Are you tryingto earn some extra money, Weasley? Hoping to begamekeeper yourself when you leave Hogwarts, Isuppose — that hut of Hagrid’s must seem like apalace compared to what your family’s used to.”

Ron dived at Malfoy just as Snape came up the stairs.

“WEASLEY!”

Ron let go of the front of Malfoy’s robes.

“He was provoked, Professor Snape,” said Hagrid,sticking his huge hairy face out from behind the tree.“Malfoy was insultin’ his family.”

“Be that as it may, fighting is against Hogwarts rules,Hagrid,” said Snape silkily. “Five points fromGryffindor, Weasley, and be grateful it isn’t more.Move along, all of you.”

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle pushed roughly past thetree, scattering needles everywhere and smirking.

“I’ll get him,” said Ron, grinding his teeth at Malfoy’sback, “one of these days, I’ll get him —”

“I hate them both,” said Harry, “Malfoy and Snape.”

“Come on, cheer up, it’s nearly Christmas,” saidHagrid. “Tell yeh what, come with me an’ see theGreat Hall, looks a treat.”

So the three of them followed Hagrid and his tree offto the Great Hall, where Professor McGonagall andProfessor Flitwick were busy with the Christmasdecorations.

Page | 219 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Ah, Hagrid, the last tree — put it in the far corner,would you?”

The hall looked spectacular. Festoons of holly andmistletoe hung all around the walls, and no less thantwelve towering Christmas trees stood around theroom, some sparkling with tiny icicles, some glitteringwith hundreds of candles.

“How many days you got left until yer holidays?”Hagrid asked.

“Just one,” said Hermione. “And that reminds me —Harry, Ron, we’ve got half an hour before lunch, weshould be in the library.”

“Oh yeah, you’re right,” said Ron, tearing his eyesaway from Professor Flitwick, who had goldenbubbles blossoming out of his wand and was trailingthem over the branches of the new tree.

“The library?” said Hagrid, following them out of thehall. “Just before the holidays? Bit keen, aren’t yeh?”

“Oh, we’re not working,” Harry told him brightly.

“Ever since you mentioned Nicolas Flamel we’ve beentrying to find out who he is.”

“You what?” Hagrid looked shocked. “Listen here —I’ve told yeh — drop it. It’s nothin’ to you what thatdog’s guardin’.”

“We just want to know who Nicolas Flamel is, that’sall,” said Hermione.

“Unless you’d like to tell us and save us the trouble?”Harry added. “We must’ve been through hundreds ofbooks already and we can’t find him anywhere — just

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

give us a hint — I know I’ve read his namesomewhere.”

“I’m sayin’ nothin’,” said Hagrid flatly.

“Just have to find out for ourselves, then,” said Ron,and they left Hagrid looking disgruntled and hurriedoff to the library.

They had indeed been searching books for Flamel’sname ever since Hagrid had let it slip, because howelse were they going to find out what Snape wastrying to steal? The trouble was, it was very hard toknow where to begin, not knowing what Flamel mighthave done to get himself into a book. He wasn’t inGreat Wizards of the Twentieth Century, or NotableMagical Names of Our Time; he was missing, too, fromImportant Modern Magical Discoveries, and A Study ofRecent Developments in Wizardry. And then, ofcourse, there was the sheer size of the library; tens ofthousands of books; thousands of shelves; hundredsof narrow rows.

Hermione took out a list of subjects and titles she haddecided to search while Ron strode off down a row ofbooks and started pulling them off the shelves atrandom. Harry wandered over to the RestrictedSection. He had been wondering for a while if Flamelwasn’t somewhere in there. Unfortunately, youneeded a specially signed note from one of theteachers to look in any of the restricted books, and heknew he’d never get one. These were the bookscontaining powerful Dark Magic never taught atHogwarts, and only read by older students studyingadvanced Defense Against the Dark Arts.

“What are you looking for, boy?”

“Nothing,” said Harry.

Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Madam Pince the librarian brandished a featherduster at him.

“You’d better get out, then. Go on — out!”

Wishing he’d been a bit quicker at thinking up somestory, Harry left the library. He, Ron, and Hermionehad already agreed they’d better not ask MadamPince where they could find Flamel. They were sureshe’d be able to tell them, but they couldn’t riskSnape hearing what they were up to.

Harry waited outside in the corridor to see if the othertwo had found anything, but he wasn’t very hopeful.They had been looking for two weeks, after all, but asthey only had odd moments between lessons it wasn’tsurprising they’d found nothing. What they reallyneeded was a nice long search without Madam Pincebreathing down their necks.

Five minutes later, Ron and Hermione joined him,shaking their heads. They went off to lunch.

“You will keep looking while I’m away, won’t you?”said Hermione. “And send me an owl if you findanything.”

“And you could ask your parents if they know whoFlamel is,” said Ron. “It’d be safe to ask them.”

“Very safe, as they’re both dentists,” said Hermione.

Once the holidays had started, Ron and Harry werehaving too good a time to think much about Flamel.They had the dormitory to themselves and thecommon room was far emptier than usual, so theywere able to get the good armchairs by the fire. Theysat by the hour eating anything they could spear on atoasting fork — bread, English muffins,

Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

marshmallows — and plotting ways of getting Malfoyexpelled, which were fun to talk about even if theywouldn’t work.

Ron also started teaching Harry wizard chess. Thiswas exactly like Muggle chess except that the figureswere alive, which made it a lot like directing troops inbattle. Ron’s set was very old and battered. Likeeverything else he owned, it had once belonged tosomeone else in his family — in this case, hisgrandfather. However, old chessmen weren’t adrawback at all. Ron knew them so well he never hadtrouble getting them to do what he wanted.

Harry played with chessmen Seamus Finnigan hadlent him, and they didn’t trust him at all. He wasn’t avery good player yet and they kept shouting differentbits of advice at him, which was confusing. “Don’tsend me there, can’t you see his knight? Send him, wecan afford to lose him.”

On Christmas Eve, Harry went to bed looking forwardto the next day for the food and the fun, but notexpecting any presents at all. When he woke early inthe morning, however, the first thing he saw was asmall pile of packages at the foot of his bed.

“Merry Christmas,” said Ron sleepily as Harryscrambled out of bed and pulled on his bathrobe.

“You, too,” said Harry. “Will you look at this? I’ve gotsome presents!”

“What did you expect, turnips?” said Ron, turning tohis own pile, which was a lot bigger than Harry’s.

Harry picked up the top parcel. It was wrapped inthick brown paper and scrawled across it was ToHarry, from Hagrid. Inside was a roughly cut wooden

Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

flute. Hagrid had obviously whittled it himself. Harryblew it — it sounded a bit like an owl.

A second, very small parcel contained a note.

We received your message and enclose your Christmaspresent. From Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia. Tapedto the note was a fifty-pence piece.

“That’s friendly,” said Harry.

Ron was fascinated by the fifty pence.

“ Weird\” he said, “What a shape! This is money?”

“You can keep it,” said Harry, laughing at howpleased Ron was. “Hagrid and my aunt and uncle —so who sent these?”

“I think I know who that one’s from,” said Ron,turning a bit pink and pointing to a very lumpyparcel. “My mom. I told her you didn’t expect anypresents and — oh, no,” he groaned, “she’s made youa Weasley sweater.”

Harry had torn open the parcel to find a thick, hand-knitted sweater in emerald green and a large box ofhomemade fudge.

“Every year she makes us a sweater,” said Ron,unwrapping his own, “and mine’s always maroon.”

“That’s really nice of her,” said Harry, trying thefudge, which was very tasty.

His next present also contained candy — a large boxof Chocolate Frogs from Hermione.

Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

This only left one parcel. Harry picked it up and feltit. It was very light. He unwrapped it.

Something fluid and silvery gray went slithering to thefloor where it lay in gleaming folds. Ron gasped.

“I’ve heard of those,” he said in a hushed voice,dropping the box of Every Flavor Beans he’d gottenfrom Hermione. “If that’s what I think it is — they’rereally rare, and really valuable.”

“What is it?”

Harry picked the shining, silvery cloth off the floor. Itwas strange to the touch, like water woven intomaterial.

“It’s an Invisibility Cloak,” said Ron, a look of awe onhis face. “I’m sure it is — try it on.”

Harry threw the cloak around his shoulders and Rongave a yell.

“It is! Look down!”

Harry looked down at his feet, but they were gone. Hedashed to the mirror. Sure enough, his reflectionlooked back at him, just his head suspended inmidair, his body completely invisible. He pulled thecloak over his head and his reflection vanishedcompletely.

“There’s a note!” said Ron suddenly. “A note fell out ofit!”

Harry pulled off the cloak and seized the letter.Written in narrow, loopy writing he had never seenbefore were the following words:

Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Your father left this in my possession before he died. Itis time it was returned to you.

Use it well.

A Very Merry Christmas to you.

There was no signature. Harry stared at the note. Ronwas admiring the cloak.

“I’d give anuthinq for one of these,” he said. “Anuthinq.What’s the matter?”

“Nothing,” said Harry. He felt very strange. Who hadsent the cloak? Had it really once belonged to hisfather?

Before he could say or think anything else, thedormitory door was flung open and Fred and GeorgeWeasley bounded in. Harry stuffed the cloak quicklyout of sight. He didn’t feel like sharing it with anyoneelse yet.

“Merry Christmas!”

“Hey, look — Harry’s got a Weasley sweater, too!”

Fred and George were wearing blue sweaters, onewith a large yellow F on it, the other a G.

“Harry’s is better than ours, though,” said Fred,holding up Harry’s sweater. “She obviously makesmore of an effort if you’re not family.”

“Why aren’t you wearing yours, Ron?” Georgedemanded. “Come on, get it on, they’re lovely andwarm.”

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I hate maroon,” Ron moaned halfheartedly as hepulled it over his head.

“You haven’t got a letter on yours,” George observed.

“I suppose she thinks you don’t forget your name. Butwe’re not stupid — we know we’re called Gred andForge.”

“What’s all this noise?”

Percy Weasley stuck his head through the door,looking disapproving. He had clearly gotten halfwaythrough unwrapping his presents as he, too, carried alumpy sweater over his arm, which Fred seized.

“P for prefect! Get it on, Percy, come on, we’re allwearing ours, even Harry got one.”

“I — don’t — want —” said Percy thickly, as the twinsforced the sweater over his head, knocking his glassesaskew.

“And you’re not sitting with the prefects today,either,” said George. “Christmas is a time for family.”

They frog-marched Percy from the room, his armspinned to his side by his sweater.

Harry had never in all his life had such a Christmasdinner. A hundred fat, roast turkeys; mountains ofroast and boiled potatoes; platters of chipolatas;tureens of buttered peas, silver boats of thick, richgravy and cranberry sauce — and stacks of wizardcrackers every few feet along the table. Thesefantastic party favors were nothing like the feebleMuggle ones the Dursleys usually bought, with theirlittle plastic toys and their flimsy paper hats inside.Harry pulled a wizard cracker with Fred and it didn’tjust bang, it went off with a blast like a cannon andPage | 227 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

engulfed them all in a cloud of blue smoke, while fromthe inside exploded a rear admiral’s hat and severallive, white mice. Up at the High Table, Dumbledorehad swapped his pointed wizard’s hat for a floweredbonnet, and was chuckling merrily at a joke ProfessorFlitwick had just read him.

Flaming Christmas puddings followed the turkey.Percy nearly broke his teeth on a silver Sickleembedded in his slice. Harry watched Hagrid gettingredder and redder in the face as he called for morewine, finally kissing Professor McGonagall on thecheek, who, to Harry’s amazement, giggled andblushed, her top hat lopsided.

When Harry finally left the table, he was laden downwith a stack of things out of the crackers, including apack of non-explodable, luminous balloons, a Grow-Your-Own-Warts kit, and his own new wizard chessset. The white mice had disappeared and Harry had anasty feeling they were going to end up as Mrs.Norris’s Christmas dinner.

Harry and the Weasleys spent a happy afternoonhaving a furious snowball fight on the grounds. Then,cold, wet, and gasping for breath, they returned to thefire in the Gryffindor common room, where Harrybroke in his new chess set by losing spectacularly toRon. He suspected he wouldn’t have lost so badly ifPercy hadn’t tried to help him so much.

After a meal of turkey sandwiches, crumpets, trifle,and Christmas cake, everyone felt too full and sleepyto do much before bed except sit and watch Percychase Fred and George all over Gryffindor Towerbecause they’d stolen his prefect badge.

It had been Harry’s best Christmas day ever. Yetsomething had been nagging at the back of his mind

Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

all day. Not until he climbed into bed was he free tothink about it: the Invisibility Cloak and whoever hadsent it.

Ron, full of turkey and cake and with nothingmysterious to bother him, fell asleep almost as soonas he’d drawn the curtains of his four-poster. Harryleaned over the side of his own bed and pulled thecloak out from under it.

His father’s ... this had been his father’s. He let thematerial flow over his hands, smoother than silk, lightas air. Use it well, the note had said.

He had to try it, now. He slipped out of bed andwrapped the cloak around himself. Looking down athis legs, he saw only moonlight and shadows. It was avery funny feeling.

Use it well.

Suddenly, Harry felt wide-awake. The whole ofHogwarts was open to him in this cloak. Excitementflooded through him as he stood there in the darkand silence. He could go anywhere in this, anywhere,and Filch would never know.

Ron grunted in his sleep. Should Harry wake him?Something held him back — his father’s cloak — hefelt that this time — the first time — he wanted to useit alone.

He crept out of the dormitory, down the stairs, acrossthe common room, and climbed through the portraithole.

“Who’s there?” squawked the Fat Lady. Harry saidnothing. He walked quickly down the corridor.

Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Where should he go? He stopped, his heart racing,and thought. And then it came to him. The RestrictedSection in the library. He’d be able to read as long ashe liked, as long as it took to find out who Flamelwas. He set off, drawing the Invisibility Cloak tightaround him as he walked.

The library was pitch-black and very eerie. Harry lit alamp to see his way along the rows of books. Thelamp looked as if it was floating along in midair, andeven though Harry could feel his arm supporting it,the sight gave him the creeps.

The Restricted Section was right at the back of thelibrary. Stepping carefully over the rope thatseparated these books from the rest of the library, heheld up his lamp to read the titles.

They didn’t tell him much. Their peeling, faded goldletters spelled words in languages Harry couldn’tunderstand. Some had no title at all. One book had adark stain on it that looked horribly like blood. Thehairs on the back of Harry’s neck prickled. Maybe hewas imagining it, maybe not, but he thought a faintwhispering was coming from the books, as thoughthey knew someone was there who shouldn’t be.

He had to start somewhere. Setting the lamp downcarefully on the floor, he looked along the bottomshelf for an interesting-looking book. A large blackand silver volume caught his eye. He pulled it outwith difficulty, because it was very heavy, and,balancing it on his knee, let it fall open.

A piercing, bloodcurdling shriek split the silence —the book was screaming! Harry snapped it shut, butthe shriek went on and on, one high, unbroken,earsplitting note. He stumbled backward and knockedover his lamp, which went out at once. Panicking, hePage | 230 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

heard footsteps coming down the corridor outside —stuffing the shrieking book back on the shelf, he ranfor it. He passed Filch in the doorway; Filch’s pale,wild eyes looked straight through him, and Harryslipped under Filch’s outstretched arm and streakedoff up the corridor, the book’s shrieks still ringing inhis ears.

He came to a sudden halt in front of a tall suit ofarmor. He had been so busy getting away from thelibrary, he hadn’t paid attention to where he wasgoing. Perhaps because it was dark, he didn’trecognize where he was at all. There was a suit ofarmor near the kitchens, he knew, but he must befive floors above there.

“You asked me to come directly to you, Professor, ifanyone was wandering around at night, andsomebody’s been in the library — Restricted Section.”

Harry felt the blood drain out of his face. Wherever hewas, Filch must know a shortcut, because his soft,greasy voice was getting nearer, and to his horror, itwas Snape who replied, “The Restricted Section? Well,they can’t be far, we’ll catch them.”

Harry stood rooted to the spot as Filch and Snapecame around the corner ahead. They couldn’t seehim, of course, but it was a narrow corridor and ifthey came much nearer they’d knock right into him —the cloak didn’t stop him from being solid.

He backed away as quietly as he could. A door stoodajar to his left. It was his only hope. He squeezedthrough it, holding his breath, trying not to move it,and to his relief he managed to get inside the roomwithout their noticing anything. They walked straightpast, and Harry leaned against the wall, breathingdeeply, listening to their footsteps dying away. ThatPage | 231 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

had been close, very close. It was a few secondsbefore he noticed anything about the room he hadhidden in.

It looked like an unused classroom. The dark shapesof desks and chairs were piled against the walls, andthere was an upturned wastepaper basket — butpropped against the wall facing him was somethingthat didn’t look as if it belonged there, something thatlooked as if someone had just put it there to keep itout of the way.

It was a magnificent mirror, as high as the ceiling,with an ornate gold frame, standing on two clawedfeet. There was an inscription carved around the top:Erised stra ehru oyt ube cafru oyt on wohsi.

His panic fading now that there was no sound of Filchand Snape, Harry moved nearer to the mirror,wanting to look at himself but see no reflection again.He stepped in front of it.

He had to clap his hands to his mouth to stop himselffrom screaming. He whirled around. His heart waspounding far more furiously than when the book hadscreamed — for he had seen not only himself in themirror, but a whole crowd of people standing rightbehind him.

But the room was empty. Breathing very fast, heturned slowly back to the mirror.

There he was, reflected in it, white and scared-looking, and there, reflected behind him, were at leastten others. Harry looked over his shoulder — but still,no one was there. Or were they all invisible, too? Washe in fact in a room full of invisible people and thismirrors trick was that it reflected them, invisible ornot?

Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

He looked in the mirror again. A woman standingright behind his reflection was smiling at him andwaving. He reached out a hand and felt the air behindhim. If she was really there, he’d touch her, theirreflections were so close together, but he felt only air— she and the others existed only in the mirror.

She was a very pretty woman. She had dark red hairand her eyes — her eyes are just like mine, Harrythought, edging a little closer to the glass. Brightgreen — exactly the same shape, but then he noticedthat she was crying; smiling, but crying at the sametime. The tall, thin, black-haired man standing nextto her put his arm around her. He wore glasses, andhis hair was very untidy. It stuck up at the back, justas Harry’s did.

Harry was so close to the mirror now that his nosewas nearly touching that of his reflection.

“Mom?” he whispered. “Dad?”

They just looked at him, smiling. And slowly, Harrylooked into the faces of the other people in the mirror,and saw other pairs of green eyes like his, other noseslike his, even a little old man who looked as thoughhe had Harry’s knobbly knees — Harry was looking athis family, for the first time in his life.

The Potters smiled and waved at Harry and he staredhungrily back at them, his hands pressed flat againstthe glass as though he was hoping to fall rightthrough it and reach them. He had a powerful kind ofache inside him, half joy, half terrible sadness.

How long he stood there, he didn’t know. Thereflections did not fade and he looked and lookeduntil a distant noise brought him back to his senses.He couldn’t stay here, he had to find his way back to

Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

bed. He tore his eyes away from his mother’s face,whispered, “I’ll come back,” and hurried from theroom.

“You could have woken me up,” said Ron, crossly.

“You can come tonight, I’m going back, I want to showyou the mirror.”

“I’d like to see your mom and dad,” Ron said eagerly.

“And I want to see all your family, all the Weasleys,you’ll be able to show me your other brothers andeveryone.”

“You can see them any old time,” said Ron. “Justcome round my house this summer. Anyway, maybeit only shows dead people. Shame about not findingFlamel, though. Have some bacon or something, whyaren’t you eating anything?”

Harry couldn’t eat. He had seen his parents andwould be seeing them again tonight. He had almostforgotten about Flamel. It didn’t seem very importantanymore. Who cared what the three-headed dog wasguarding? What did it matter if Snape stole it, really?

“Are you all right?” said Ron. “You look odd.”

What Harry feared most was that he might not beable to find the mirror room again. With Ron coveredin the cloak, too, they had to walk much more slowlythe next night. They tried retracing Harry’s route fromthe library, wandering around the dark passagewaysfor nearly an hour.

“I’m freezing,” said Ron. “Let’s forget it and go back.”

“IVo!” Harry hissed. “I know it’s here somewhere.”

Page | 234 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

They passed the ghost of a tall witch gliding in theopposite direction, but saw no one else. Just as Ronstarted moaning that his feet were dead with cold,Harry spotted the suit of armor.

“It’s here — just here — yes!”

They pushed the door open. Harry dropped the cloakfrom around his shoulders and ran to the mirror.

There they were. His mother and father beamed at thesight of him.

“See?” Harry whispered.

“I can’t see anything.”

“Look! Look at them all ... there are loads of them. ...”“I can only see you.”

“Look in it properly, go on, stand where I am.”

Harry stepped aside, but with Ron in front of themirror, he couldn’t see his family anymore, just Ronin his paisley pajamas.

Ron, though, was staring transfixed at his image.“Look at me!” he said.

“Can you see all your family standing around you?”

“No — I’m alone — but I’m different — I look older —and I’m Head Boy!”

“What?”

Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I am — I’m wearing the badge like Bill used to — andI’m holding the House Cup and the Quidditch Cup —I’m Quidditch captain, too!”

Ron tore his eyes away from this splendid sight tolook excitedly at Harry.

“Do you think this mirror shows the future?”

“How can it? All my family are dead — let me haveanother look —”

“You had it to yourself all last night, give me a bitmore time.”

“You’re only holding the Quidditch Cup, what’sinteresting about that? I want to see my parents.”

“Don’t push me —”

A sudden noise outside in the corridor put an end totheir discussion. They hadn’t realized how loudly theyhad been talking.

“Quick!”

Ron threw the cloak back over them as the luminouseyes of Mrs. Norris came round the door. Ron andHarry stood quite still, both thinking the same thing— did the cloak work on cats? After what seemed anage, she turned and left.

“This isn’t safe — she might have gone for Filch, I betshe heard us. Come on.”

And Ron pulled Harry out of the room.

The snow still hadn’t melted the next morning.

Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Want to play chess, Harry?” said Ron.

“No.”

“Why don’t we go down and visit Hagrid?”

“No ... you go ...”

“I know what you’re thinking about, Harry, thatmirror. Don’t go back tonight.”

“Why not?”

“I dunno, I’ve just got a bad feeling about it — andanyway, you’ve had too many close shaves already.Filch, Snape, and Mrs. Norris are wandering around.So what if they can’t see you? What if they walk intoyou? What if you knock something over?”

“You sound like Hermione.”

“I’m serious, Harry, don’t go.”

But Harry only had one thought in his head, whichwas to get back in front of the mirror, and Ron wasn’tgoing to stop him.

That third night he found his way more quickly thanbefore. He was walking so fast he knew he wasmaking more noise than was wise, but he didn’t meetanyone.

And there were his mother and father smiling at himagain, and one of his grandfathers nodding happily.Harry sank down to sit on the floor in front of themirror. There was nothing to stop him from stayinghere all night with his family. Nothing at all.

Except —

Page | 237 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“So — back again, Harry?”

Harry felt as though his insides had turned to ice. Helooked behind him. Sitting on one of the desks by thewall was none other than Albus Dumbledore. Harrymust have walked straight past him, so desperate toget to the mirror he hadn’t noticed him.

“I — I didn’t see you, sir.”

“Strange how nearsighted being invisible can makeyou,” said Dumbledore, and Harry was relieved to seethat he was smiling.

“So,” said Dumbledore, slipping off the desk to sit onthe floor with Harry, “you, like hundreds before you,have discovered the delights of the Mirror of Erised.”

“I didn’t know it was called that, sir.”

“But I expect you’ve realized by now what it does?”

“It — well — it shows me my family —”

“And it showed your friend Ron himself as Head Boy.”

“How did you know — ?”

“I don’t need a cloak to become invisible,” saidDumbledore gently. “Now, can you think what theMirror of Erised shows us all?”

Harry shook his head.

“Let me explain. The happiest man on earth would beable to use the Mirror of Erised like a normal mirror,that is, he would look into it and see himself exactlyas he is. Does that help?”

Page | 238 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry thought. Then he said slowly, “It shows uswhat we want ... whatever we want ...”

“Yes and no,” said Dumbledore quietly. “It shows usnothing more or less than the deepest, mostdesperate desire of our hearts. You, who have neverknown your family, see them standing around you.Ronald Weasley, who has always been overshadowedby his brothers, sees himself standing alone, the bestof all of them. However, this mirror will give usneither knowledge or truth. Men have wasted awaybefore it, entranced by what they have seen, or beendriven mad, not knowing if what it shows is real oreven possible.

“The Mirror will be moved to a new home tomorrow,Harry, and I ask you not to go looking for it again. Ifyou ever do run across it, you will now be prepared. Itdoes not do to dwell on dreams and forget to live,remember that. Now, why don’t you put thatadmirable cloak back on and get off to bed?”

Harry stood up.

“Sir — Professor Dumbledore? Can I ask yousomething?”

“Obviously, you’ve just done so,” Dumbledore smiled.“You may ask me one more thing, however.”

“What do you see when you look in the mirror?”

“I? I see myself holding a pair of thick, woolen socks.”

Harry stared.

“One can never have enough socks,” saidDumbledore. “Another Christmas has come and gone

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

and I didn’t get a single pair. People will insist ongiving me books.”

It was only when he was back in bed that it struckHarry that Dumbledore might not have been quitetruthful. But then, he thought, as he shovedScabbers off his pillow, it had been quite a personalquestion.

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





NICHOLAS FLAMBL

Dumbledore had convinced Harry not to go lookingfor the Mirror of Erised again, and for the rest of theChristmas holidays the Invisibility Cloak stayedfolded at the bottom of his trunk. Harry wished hecould forget what he’d seen in the mirror as easily,but he couldn’t. He started having nightmares. Overand over again he dreamed about his parentsdisappearing in a flash of green light, while a highvoice cackled with laughter.

“You see, Dumbledore was right, that mirror coulddrive you mad,” said Ron, when Harry told him aboutthese dreams.

Hermione, who came back the day before termstarted, took a different view of things. She was tornbetween horror at the idea of Harry being out of bed,roaming the school three nights in a row (“If Filch hadcaught you!”), and disappointment that he hadn’t atleast found out who Nicolas Flamel was.

Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

They had almost given up hope of ever finding Flamelin a library book, even though Harry was still surehe’d read the name somewhere. Once term hadstarted, they were back to skimming through booksfor ten minutes during their breaks. Harry had evenless time than the other two, because Quidditchpractice had started again.

Wood was working the team harder than ever. Eventhe endless rain that had replaced the snow couldn’tdampen his spirits. The Weasleys complained thatWood was becoming a fanatic, but Harry was onWood’s side. If they won their next match, againstHufflepuff, they would overtake Slytherin in theHouse Championship for the first time in seven years.Quite apart from wanting to win, Harry found that hehad fewer nightmares when he was tired out aftertraining.

Then, during one particularly wet and muddy practicesession, Wood gave the team a bit of bad news. He’djust gotten very angry with the Weasleys, who keptdive-bombing each other and pretending to fall offtheir brooms.

“Will you stop messing around!” he yelled. “That’sexactly the sort of thing that’ll lose us the match!Snape’s refereeing this time, and he’ll be looking forany excuse to knock points off Gryffindor!”

George Weasley really did fall off his broom at thesewords.

“Snape’s refereeing?” he spluttered through amouthful of mud. “When’s he ever refereed aQuidditch match? He’s not going to be fair if we mightovertake Slytherin.”

Page | 242 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

The rest of the team landed next to George tocomplain, too.

“It’s not my fault,” said Wood. “We’ve just got to makesure we play a clean game, so Snape hasn’t got anexcuse to pick on us.”

Which was all very well, thought Harry, but he hadanother reason for not wanting Snape near him whilehe was playing Quidditch. ...

The rest of the team hung back to talk to one anotheras usual at the end of practice, but Harry headedstraight back to the Gryffindor common room, wherehe found Ron and Hermione playing chess. Chess wasthe only thing Hermione ever lost at, something Harryand Ron thought was very good for her.

“Don’t talk to me for a moment,” said Ron when Harrysat down next to him, “I need to concern” He caughtsight of Harry’s face. “What’s the matter with you?

You look terrible.”

Speaking quietly so that no one else would hear,

Harry told the other two about Snape’s sudden,sinister desire to be a Quidditch referee.

“Don’t play,” said Hermione at once.

“Say you’re ill,” said Ron.

“Pretend to break your leg,” Hermione suggested.

“Really break your leg,” said Ron.

“I can’t,” said Harry. “There isn’t a reserve Seeker. If Iback out, Gryffindor can’t play at all.”

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

At that moment Neville toppled into the commonroom. How he had managed to climb through theportrait hole was anyone’s guess, because his legshad been stuck together with what they recognized atonce as the Leg-Locker Curse. He must have had tobunny hop all the way up to Gryffindor Tower.

Everyone fell over laughing except Hermione, wholeapt up and performed the countercurse. Neville’slegs sprang apart and he got to his feet, trembling.

“What happened?” Hermione asked him, leading himover to sit with Harry and Ron.

“Malfoy,” said Neville shakily. “I met him outside thelibrary. He said he’d been looking for someone topractice that on.”

“Go to Professor McGonagall!” Hermione urgedNeville. “Report him!”

Neville shook his head.

“I don’t want more trouble,” he mumbled.

“You’ve got to stand up to him, Neville!” said Ron.“He’s used to walking all over people, but that’s noreason to lie down in front of him and make it easier.”

“There’s no need to tell me I’m not brave enough to bein Gryffindor, Malfoy’s already done that,” Nevillechoked out.

Harry felt in the pocket of his robes and pulled out aChocolate Frog, the very last one from the boxHermione had given him for Christmas. He gave it toNeville, who looked as though he might cry.

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“You’re worth twelve of Malfoy,” Harry said. “TheSorting Hat chose you for Gryffindor, didn’t it? Andwhere’s Malfoy? In stinking Slytherin.”

Neville’s lips twitched in a weak smile as heunwrapped the frog.

“Thanks, Harry ... I think I’ll go to bed. ... D’you wantthe card, you collect them, don’t you?”

As Neville walked away, Harry looked at the FamousWizard card.

“Dumbledore again,” he said, “He was the first one Iever —”

He gasped. He stared at the back of the card. Then helooked up at Ron and Hermione.

“I’ve found him\” he whispered. “I’ve found Flamel! Itold you I’d read the name somewhere before, I read iton the train coming here — listen to this:

‘Dumbledore is particularly famous for his defeat ofthe Dark wizard Grindelwald in 1945, for thediscovery of the twelve uses of dragon’s blood, and hiswork on alchemy with his partner, Nicolas Flamel’V’

Hermione jumped to her feet. She hadn’t looked soexcited since they’d gotten back the marks for theirvery first piece of homework.

“Stay there!” she said, and she sprinted up the stairsto the girls’ dormitories. Harry and Ron barely hadtime to exchange mystified looks before she wasdashing back, an enormous old book in her arms.

“I never thought to look in here!” she whisperedexcitedly. “I got this out of the library weeks ago for abit of light reading.”

Page | 245 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Light?” said Ron, but Hermione told him to be quietuntil she’d looked something up, and started flickingfrantically through the pages, muttering to herself.

At last she found what she was looking for.

“I knew it! I knew it!”

“Are we allowed to speak yet?” said Ron grumpily.Hermione ignored him.

“Nicolas Flamel,” she whispered dramatically, “is theonly known maker of the Sorcerer’s Stone\”

This didn’t have quite the effect she’d expected.

“The what?” said Harry and Ron.

“Oh, honestly, don’t you two read? Look — read that,there.”

She pushed the book toward them, and Harry andRon read:

The ancient study of alchemy is concerned withmaking the Sorcerer’s Stone, a legendary substancewith astonishing powers. The Stone will transformany metal into pure gold. It also produces the Elixir ofLife, which will make the drinker immortal.

There have been many reports of the Sorcerer’s Stoneover the centuries, but the only Stone currently inexistence belongs to Mr. Nicolas Flamel, the notedalchemist and opera lover. Mr. Flamel, who celebratedhis six hundred and sixty-fifth birthday last year,enjoys a quiet life in Devon with his wife, Perenelle(six hundred and fifty-eight).

Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“See?” said Hermione, when Harry and Ron hadfinished. “The dog must be guarding Flamel’sSorcerer’s Stone! I bet he asked Dumbledore to keepit safe for him, because they’re friends and he knewsomeone was after it, that’s why he wanted the Stonemoved out of Gringotts!”

“A stone that makes gold and stops you from everdying!” said Harry. “No wonder Snape’s after it!

Anyone would want it.”

“And no wonder we couldn’t find Flamel in that Studyof Recent Developments in Wizardry,” said Ron. “He’snot exactly recent if he’s six hundred and sixty-five, ishe?”

The next morning in Defense Against the Dark Arts,while copying down different ways of treating werewolfbites, Harry and Ron were still discussing what they’ddo with a Sorcerer’s Stone if they had one. It wasn’tuntil Ron said he’d buy his own Quidditch team thatHarry remembered about Snape and the comingmatch.

“I’m going to play,” he told Ron and Hermione. “If Idon’t, all the Slytherins will think I’m just too scaredto face Snape. I’ll show them ... it’ll really wipe thesmiles off their faces if we win.”

“Just as long as we’re not wiping you off the field,”said Hermione.

As the match drew nearer, however, Harry becamemore and more nervous, whatever he told Ron andHermione. The rest of the team wasn’t too calm,either. The idea of overtaking Slytherin in the HouseChampionship was wonderful, no one had done it forseven years, but would they be allowed to, with sucha biased referee?

Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry didn’t know whether he was imagining it or not,but he seemed to keep running into Snape whereverhe went. At times, he even wondered whether Snapewas following him, trying to catch him on his own.Potions lessons were turning into a sort of weeklytorture, Snape was so horrible to Harry. Could Snapepossibly know they’d found out about the Sorcerer’sStone? Harry didn’t see how he could — yet hesometimes had the horrible feeling that Snape couldread minds.

Harry knew, when they wished him good luckoutside the locker rooms the next afternoon, that Ronand Hermione were wondering whether they’d eversee him alive again. This wasn’t what you’d callcomforting. Harry hardly heard a word of Wood’s peptalk as he pulled on his Quidditch robes and pickedup his Nimbus Two Thousand.

Ron and Hermione, meanwhile, had found a place inthe stands next to Neville, who couldn’t understandwhy they looked so grim and worried, or why they hadboth brought their wands to the match. Little didHarry know that Ron and Hermione had been secretlypracticing the Leg-Locker Curse. They’d gotten theidea from Malfoy using it on Neville, and were readyto use it on Snape if he showed any sign of wanting tohurt Harry.

“Now, don’t forget, it’s Locomotor Mortis,” Hermionemuttered as Ron slipped his wand up his sleeve.

“I know,” Ron snapped. “Don’t nag.”

Back in the locker room, Wood had taken Harryaside.

“Don’t want to pressure you, Potter, but if we everneed an early capture of the Snitch it’s now. Finish

Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

the game before Snape can favor Hufflepuff toomuch.”

“The whole school’s out there!” said Fred Weasley,peering out of the door. “Even — blimey —Dumbledore’s come to watch!”

Harry’s heart did a somersault.

“Dumbledore?” he said, dashing to the door to makesure. Fred was right. There was no mistaking thatsilver beard.

Harry could have laughed out loud with relief. He wassafe. There was simply no way that Snape would dareto try to hurt him if Dumbledore was watching.

Perhaps that was why Snape was looking so angry asthe teams marched onto the field, something that Ronnoticed, too.

“I’ve never seen Snape look so mean,” he toldHermione. “Look — they’re off. Ouch!”

Someone had poked Ron in the back of the head. Itwas Malfoy.

“Oh, sorry, Weasley, didn’t see you there.”

Malfoy grinned broadly at Crabbe and Goyle.

“Wonder how long Potter’s going to stay on his broomthis time? Anyone want a bet? What about you,Weasley?”

Ron didn’t answer; Snape had just awardedHufflepuff a penalty because George Weasley had hita Bludger at him. Hermione, who had all her fingerscrossed in her lap, was squinting fixedly at Harry,

Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

who was circling the game like a hawk, looking for theSnitch.

“You know how I think they choose people for theGryffindor team?” said Malfoy loudly a few minuteslater, as Snape awarded Hufflepuff another penaltyfor no reason at all. “It’s people they feel sorry for.

See, there’s Potter, who’s got no parents, then there’sthe Weasleys, who’ve got no money — you should beon the team, Longbottom, you’ve got no brains.”

Neville went bright red but turned in his seat to faceMalfoy.

“I’m worth twelve of you, Malfoy,” he stammered.

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle howled with laughter, butRon, still not daring to take his eyes from the game,said, “You tell him, Neville.”

“Longbottom, if brains were gold you’d be poorer thanWeasley, and that’s saying something.”

Ron’s nerves were already stretched to the breakingpoint with anxiety about Harry.

“I’m warning you, Malfoy — one more word —”

“Ron!” said Hermione suddenly, “Harry — !”

“What? Where?”

Harry had suddenly gone into a spectacular dive,which drew gasps and cheers from the crowd.Hermione stood up, her crossed fingers in her mouth,as Harry streaked toward the ground like a bullet.

“You’re in luck, Weasley, Potter’s obviously spottedsome money on the ground!” said Malfoy.

Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Ron snapped. Before Malfoy knew what washappening, Ron was on top of him, wrestling him tothe ground. Neville hesitated, then clambered over theback of his seat to help.

“Come on, Harry!” Hermione screamed, leaping ontoher seat to watch as Harry sped straight at Snape —she didn’t even notice Malfoy and Ron rolling aroundunder her seat, or the scuffles and yelps coming fromthe whirl of fists that was Neville, Crabbe, and Goyle.

Up in the air, Snape turned on his broomstick just intime to see something scarlet shoot past him, missinghim by inches — the next second, Harry had pulledout of the dive, his arm raised in triumph, the Snitchclasped in his hand.

The stands erupted; it had to be a record, no onecould ever remember the Snitch being caught soquickly.

“Ron! Ron! Where are you? The game’s over! Harry’swon! We’ve won! Gryffindor is in the lead!” shriekedHermione, dancing up and down on her seat andhugging Parvati Patil in the row in front.

Harry jumped off his broom, a foot from the ground.He couldn’t believe it. He’d done it — the game wasover; it had barely lasted five minutes. As Gryffindorscame spilling onto the field, he saw Snape landnearby, white-faced and tight-lipped — then Harry felta hand on his shoulder and looked up intoDumbledore’s smiling face.

“Well done,” said Dumbledore quietly, so that onlyHarry could hear. “Nice to see you haven’t beenbrooding about that mirror ... been keeping busy ...excellent ...”

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Snape spat bitterly on the ground.

Jc Jc Jc

Harry left the locker room alone some time later, totake his Nimbus Two Thousand back to thebroomshed. He couldn’t ever remember feelinghappier. He’d really done something to be proud ofnow — no one could say he was just a famous nameany more. The evening air had never smelled sosweet. He walked over the damp grass, reliving thelast hour in his head, which was a happy blur:Gryffindors running to lift him onto their shoulders;Ron and Hermione in the distance, jumping up anddown, Ron cheering through a heavy nosebleed.

Harry had reached the shed. He leaned against thewooden door and looked up at Hogwarts, with itswindows glowing red in the setting sun. Gryffindor inthe lead. He’d done it, he’d shown Snape. ...

And speaking of Snape ...

A hooded figure came swiftly down the front steps ofthe castle. Clearly not wanting to be seen, it walkedas fast as possible toward the forbidden forest.Harry’s victory faded from his mind as he watched.He recognized the figure’s prowling walk. Snape,sneaking into the forest while everyone else was atdinner — what was going on?

Harry jumped back on his Nimbus Two Thousandand took off. Gliding silently over the castle he sawSnape enter the forest at a run. He followed.

The trees were so thick he couldn’t see where Snapehad gone. He flew in circles, lower and lower,brushing the top branches of trees until he heard

Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

voices. He glided toward them and landed noiselesslyin a towering beech tree.

He climbed carefully along one of the branches,holding tight to his broomstick, trying to see throughthe leaves.

Below, in a shadowy clearing, stood Snape, but hewasn’t alone. Quirrell was there, too. Harry couldn’tmake out the look on his face, but he was stutteringworse than ever. Harry strained to catch what theywere saying.

"... d-don’t know why you wanted t-t-to meet here ofall p-places, Severus ...”

“Oh, I thought we’d keep this private,” said Snape, hisvoice icy. “Students aren’t supposed to know aboutthe Sorcerer’s Stone, after all.”

Harry leaned forward. Quirrell was mumblingsomething. Snape interrupted him.

“Have you found out how to get past that beast ofHagrid’s yet?”

“B-b-but Severus, I —”

“You don’t want me as your enemy, Quirrell,” saidSnape, taking a step toward him.

“I-I don’t know what you —”

“You know perfectly well what I mean.”

An owl hooted loudly, and Harry nearly fell out of thetree. He steadied himself in time to hear Snape say,

“— your little bit of hocus-pocus. I’m waiting.”

Page | 253 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“B-but I d-d-don’t —”

“Very well,” Snape cut in. “Well have another littlechat soon, when you’ve had time to think things overand decided where your loyalties lie.”

He threw his cloak over his head and strode out of theclearing. It was almost dark now, but Harry could seeQuirrell, standing quite still as though he waspetrified.

Jc Jc Jc

“Harry, where have you been?” Hermione squeaked.

“We won! You won! We won!” shouted Ron, thumpingHarry on the back. “And I gave Malfoy a black eye,and Neville tried to take on Crabbe and Goyle single-handed! He’s still out cold but Madam Pomfrey sayshe’ll be all right — talk about showing Slytherin!Everyone’s waiting for you in the common room, we’rehaving a party, Fred and George stole some cakes andstuff from the kitchens.”

“Never mind that now,” said Harry breathlessly. “Let’sfind an empty room, you wait ’til you hear this. ...”

He made sure Peeves wasn’t inside before shuttingthe door behind them, then he told them what he’dseen and heard.

“So we were right, it is the Sorcerer’s Stone, andSnape’s trying to force Quirrell to help him get it. Heasked if he knew how to get past Fluffy — and he saidsomething about Quirrell’s ‘hocus-pocus’ — I reckonthere are other things guarding the stone apart fromFluffy, loads of enchantments, probably, and Quirrell

Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

would have done some anti-Dark Arts spell thatSnape needs to break through —”

“So you mean the Stone’s only safe as long as Quirrellstands up to Snape?” said Hermione in alarm.

“It’ll be gone by next Tuesday,” said Ron.

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





NORBERT THE NORWEGIANRIDGEBACK

Quirrell, however, must have been braver than they’dthought. In the weeks that followed he did seem to begetting paler and thinner, but it didn’t look as thoughhe’d cracked yet.

Every time they passed the third-floor corridor, Harry,Ron, and Hermione would press their ears to the doorto check that Fluffy was still growling inside. Snapewas sweeping about in his usual bad temper, whichsurely meant that the Stone was still safe. WheneverHarry passed Quirrell these days he gave him anencouraging sort of smile, and Ron had started tellingpeople off for laughing at Quirrell’s stutter.

Hermione, however, had more on her mind than theSorcerer’s Stone. She had started drawing up studyschedules and color-coding all her notes. Harry andRon wouldn’t have minded, but she kept naggingthem to do the same.

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Hermione, the exams are ages away.”

“Ten weeks,” Hermione snapped. “That’s not ages,that’s like a second to Nicolas Flamel.”

“But we’re not six hundred years old,” Ron remindedher. “Anyway, what are you studying for, you alreadyknow it all.”

“What am I studying for? Are you crazy? You realizewe need to pass these exams to get into the secondyear? They’re very important, I should have startedstudying a month ago, I don’t know what’s gotten intome.”

Unfortunately, the teachers seemed to be thinkingalong the same lines as Hermione. They piled somuch homework on them that the Easter holidaysweren’t nearly as much fun as the Christmas ones. Itwas hard to relax with Hermione next to you recitingthe twelve uses of dragon’s blood or practicing wandmovements. Moaning and yawning, Harry and Ronspent most of their free time in the library with her,trying to get through all their extra work.

“I’ll never remember this,” Ron burst out oneafternoon, throwing down his quill and lookinglongingly out of the library window. It was the firstreally fine day they’d had in months. The sky was aclear, forget-me-not blue, and there was a feeling inthe air of summer coming.

Harry, who was looking up “Dittany” in One ThousandMagical Herbs and Fungi, didn’t look up until heheard Ron say, “Hagrid! What are you doing in thelibrary?”

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid shuffled into view, hiding something behindhis back. He looked very out of place in his moleskinovercoat.

“Jus’ lookin’,” he said, in a shifty voice that got theirinterest at once. “An’ what’re you lot up ter?” Helooked suddenly suspicious. “Yer not still lookin’ ferNicolas Flamel, are yeh?”

“Oh, we found out who he is ages ago,” said Ronimpressively. “And we know what that dog’s guarding,it’s a Sorcerer’s St —”

“Shhhh\” Hagrid looked around quickly to see ifanyone was listening. “Don’ go shoutin’ about it,what’s the matter with yeh?”

“There are a few things we wanted to ask you, as amatter of fact,” said Harry, “about what’s guardingthe Stone apart from Fluffy —”

“SHHHH!” said Hagrid again. “Listen — come an’ seeme later, I’m not promisin’ I’ll tell yeh anythin’, mind,but don’ go rabbitin’ about it in here, students aren’s’pposed ter know. They’ll think I’ve told yeh —”

“See you later, then,” said Harry.

Hagrid shuffled off.

“What was he hiding behind his back?” saidHermione thoughtfully.

“Do you think it had anything to do with the Stone?”

“I’m going to see what section he was in,” said Ron,who’d had enough of working. He came back aminute later with a pile of books in his arms andslammed them down on the table.

Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Dragons'.” he whispered. “Hagrid was looking up stuffabout dragons! Look at these: Dragon Species of GreatBritain and Ireland; From Egg to Inferno, A DragonKeeper’s Guide.”

“Hagrid’s always wanted a dragon, he told me so thefirst time I ever met him,” said Harry.

“But it’s against our laws,” said Ron. “Dragonbreeding was outlawed by the Warlocks’ Conventionof 1709, everyone knows that. It’s hard to stopMuggles from noticing us if we’re keeping dragons inthe back garden — anyway, you can’t tame dragons,it’s dangerous. You should see the burns Charlie’s gotoff wild ones in Romania.”

“But there aren’t wild dragons in Britain?” said Harry.

“Of course there are,” said Ron. “Common WelshGreen and Hebridean Blacks. The Ministry of Magichas a job hushing them up, I can tell you. Our kindhave to keep putting spells on Muggles who’ve spottedthem, to make them forget.”

“So what on earth’s Hagrid up to?” said Hermione.

When they knocked on the door of the gamekeeper’shut an hour later, they were surprised to see that allthe curtains were closed. Hagrid called “Who is it?”before he let them in, and then shut the door quicklybehind them.

It was stifling hot inside. Even though it was such awarm day, there was a blazing fire in the grate.

Hagrid made them tea and offered them stoatsandwiches, which they refused.

“So — yeh wanted to ask me somethin’?”

Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Harry. There was no point beating aroundthe bush. “We were wondering if you could tell uswhat’s guarding the Sorcerer’s Stone apart fromFluffy.”

Hagrid frowned at him.

“O’ course I can’t,” he said. “Number one, I don’ knowmeself. Number two, yeh know too much already, so Iwouldn’ tell yeh if I could. That Stone’s here fer a goodreason. It was almost stolen outta Gringotts — Is’ppose yeh’ve worked that out an’ all? Beats me howyeh even know abou’ Fluffy.”

“Oh, come on, Hagrid, you might not want to tell us,but you do know, you know everything that goes onround here,” said Hermione in a warm, flatteringvoice. Hagrid’s beard twitched and they could tell hewas smiling. “We only wondered who had done theguarding, really.” Hermione went on. “We wonderedwho Dumbledore had trusted enough to help him,apart from you.”

Hagrid’s chest swelled at these last words. Harry andRon beamed at Hermione.

“Well, I don’ s’pose it could hurt ter tell yeh that ...let’s see ... he borrowed Fluffy from me ... then someo’ the teachers did enchantments ... Professor Sprout— Professor Flitwick — Professor McGonagall —” heticked them off on his fingers, “Professor Quirrell —an’ Dumbledore himself did somethin’, o’ course.

Hang on, I’ve forgotten someone. Oh yeah, ProfessorSnape.”

“Snape?”

Page | 260 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah — yer not still on abou’ that, are yeh? Look,Snape helped protect the Stone, he’s not about tersteal it.”

Harry knew Ron and Hermione were thinking thesame as he was. If Snape had been in on protectingthe Stone, it must have been easy to find out how theother teachers had guarded it. He probably kneweverything — except, it seemed, Quirrell’s spell andhow to get past Fluffy.

“You’re the only one who knows how to get pastFluffy, aren’t you, Hagrid?” said Harry anxiously.

“And you wouldn’t tell anyone, would you? Not evenone of the teachers?”

“Not a soul knows except me an’ Dumbledore,” saidHagrid proudly.

“Well, that’s something,” Harry muttered to theothers. “Hagrid, can we have a window open? I’mboiling.”

“Can’t, Harry, sorry,” said Hagrid. Harry noticed himglance at the fire. Harry looked at it, too.

“Hagrid — what’s that?”

But he already knew what it was. In the very heart ofthe fire, underneath the kettle, was a huge, black egg.

“Ah,” said Hagrid, fiddling nervously with his beard,“That’s — er ...”

“Where did you get it, Hagrid?” said Ron, crouchingover the fire to get a closer look at the egg. “It must’vecost you a fortune.”

Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Won it,” said Hagrid. “Las’ night. I was down in thevillage havin’ a few drinks an’ got into a game o’ cardswith a stranger. Think he was quite glad ter get rid ofit, ter be honest.”

“But what are you going to do with it when it’shatched?” said Hermione.

“Well, I’ve bin doin’ some readin’,” said Hagrid, pullinga large book from under his pillow. “Got this outta thelibrary — Dragon Breeding for Pleasure and Profit —it’s a bit outta date, o’ course, but it’s all in here. Keepthe egg in the fire, ’cause their mothers breathe on’em, see, an’ when it hatches, feed it on a bucket o’brandy mixed with chicken blood every half hour. An’see here — how ter recognize diff’rent eggs — what Igot there’s a Norwegian Ridge-back. They’re rare,them.”

He looked very pleased with himself, but Hermionedidn’t.

“Hagrid, you live in a wooden house,” she said.

But Hagrid wasn’t listening. He was humming merrilyas he stoked the fire.

So now they had something else to worry about: whatmight happen to Hagrid if anyone found out he washiding an illegal dragon in his hut.

“Wonder what it’s like to have a peaceful life,” Ronsighed, as evening after evening they struggledthrough all the extra homework they were getting.Hermione had now started making study schedulesfor Harry and Ron, too. It was driving them nuts.

Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Then, one breakfast time, Hedwig brought Harryanother note from Hagrid. He had written only twowords: It’s hatching.

Ron wanted to skip Herbology and go straight down tothe hut. Hermione wouldn’t hear of it.

“Hermione, how many times in our lives are we goingto see a dragon hatching?”

“We’ve got lessons, we’ll get into trouble, and that’snothing to what Hagrid’s going to be in when someonefinds out what he’s doing —”

“Shut up!” Harry whispered.

Malfoy was only a few feet away and he had stoppeddead to listen. How much had he heard? Harry didn’tlike the look on Malfoy’s face at all.

Ron and Hermione argued all the way to Herbologyand in the end, Hermione agreed to run down toHagrid’s with the other two during morning break.When the bell sounded from the castle at the end oftheir lesson, the three of them dropped their trowelsat once and hurried through the grounds to the edgeof the forest. Hagrid greeted them, looking flushedand excited.

“It’s nearly out.” He ushered them inside.

The egg was lying on the table. There were deepcracks in it. Something was moving inside; a funnyclicking noise was coming from it.

They all drew their chairs up to the table and watchedwith bated breath.

Page | 263 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

All at once there was a scraping noise and the eggsplit open. The baby dragon flopped onto the table. Itwasn’t exactly pretty; Harry thought it looked like acrumpled, black umbrella. Its spiny wings were hugecompared to its skinny jet body, it had a long snoutwith wide nostrils, the stubs of horns and bulging,orange eyes.

It sneezed. A couple of sparks flew out of its snout.

“Isn’t he beautiful?” Hagrid murmured. He reachedout a hand to stroke the dragon’s head. It snapped athis fingers, showing pointed fangs.

“Bless him, look, he knows his mommy!” said Hagrid.

“Hagrid,” said Hermione, “how fast do NorwegianRidgebacks grow, exactly?”

Hagrid was about to answer when the color suddenlydrained from his face — he leapt to his feet and ran tothe window.

“What’s the matter?”

“Someone was lookin’ through the gap in the curtains— it’s a kid — he’s runnin’ back up ter the school.”

Harry bolted to the door and looked out. Even at adistance there was no mistaking him.

Malfoy had seen the dragon.

Something about the smile lurking on Malfoy’s faceduring the next week made Harry, Ron, and Hermionevery nervous. They spent most of their free time inHagrid’s darkened hut, trying to reason with him.

“Just let him go,” Harry urged. “Set him free.”

Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I can’t,” said Hagrid. “He’s too little. He’d die.”

They looked at the dragon. It had grown three timesin length in just a week. Smoke kept furling out of itsnostrils. Hagrid hadn’t been doing his gamekeepingduties because the dragon was keeping him so busy.There were empty brandy bottles and chickenfeathers all over the floor.

“I’ve decided to call him Norbert,” said Hagrid, lookingat the dragon with misty eyes. “He really knows menow, watch. Norbert! Norbert! Where’s Mommy?”

“He’s lost his marbles,” Ron muttered in Harry’s ear.

“Hagrid,” said Harry loudly, “give it two weeks andNorbert’s going to be as long as your house. Malfoycould go to Dumbledore at any moment.”

Hagrid bit his lip.

“I — I know I can’t keep him forever, but I can’t jus’dump him, can’t.”

Harry suddenly turned to Ron.

“Charlie,” he said.

“You’re losing it, too,” said Ron. “I’m Ron, remember?”

“No — Charlie — your brother, Charlie. In Romania.Studying dragons. We could send Norbert to him.Charlie can take care of him and then put him backin the wild!”

“Brilliant!” said Ron. “How about it, Hagrid?”

And in the end, Hagrid agreed that they could sendan owl to Charlie to ask him.

Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

The following week dragged by. Wednesday nightfound Hermione and Harry sitting alone in thecommon room, long after everyone else had gone tobed. The clock on the wall had just chimed midnightwhen the portrait hole burst open. Ron appeared outof nowhere as he pulled off Harry’s Invisibility Cloak.He had been down at Hagrid’s hut, helping him feedNorbert, who was now eating dead rats by the crate.

“It bit me!” he said, showing them his hand, whichwas wrapped in a bloody handkerchief. “I’m not goingto be able to hold a quill for a week. I tell you, thatdragon’s the most horrible animal I’ve ever met, butthe way Hagrid goes on about it, you’d think it was afluffy little bunny rabbit. When it bit me he told me offfor frightening it. And when I left, he was singing it alullaby.”

There was a tap on the dark window.

“It’s Hedwig!” said Harry, hurrying to let her in. “She’llhave Charlie’s answer!”

The three of them put their heads together to read thenote.

Dear Ron,

How are you? Thanks for the letter — I’d be glad totake the Norwegian Ridgeback, but it won’t be easygetting him here. I think the best thing will be to sendhim over with some friends of mine who are coming tovisit me next week. Trouble is, they mustn’t be seencarrying an illegal dragon.

Could you get the Ridgeback up the tallest tower atmidnight on Saturday? They can meet you there andtake him away while it’s still dark.

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Send me an answer as soon as possible.

Love,

Charlie

They looked at one another.

“We’ve got the Invisibility Cloak,” said Harry. “Itshouldn’t be too difficult — I think the cloak’s bigenough to cover two of us and Norbert.”

It was a mark of how bad the last week had been thatthe other two agreed with him. Anything to get rid ofNorbert — and Malfoy.

There was a hitch. By the next morning, Ron’s bittenhand had swollen to twice its usual size. He didn’tknow whether it was safe to go to Madam Pomfrey —would she recognize a dragon bite? By the afternoon,though, he had no choice. The cut had turned a nastyshade of green. It looked as if Norbert’s fangs werepoisonous.

Harry and Hermione rushed up to the hospital wingat the end of the day to find Ron in a terrible state inbed.

“It’s not just my hand,” he whispered, “although thatfeels like it’s about to fall off. Malfoy told MadamPomfrey he wanted to borrow one of my books so hecould come and have a good laugh at me. He keptthreatening to tell her what really bit me — I’ve toldher it was a dog, but I don’t think she believes me — Ishouldn’t have hit him at the Quidditch match, that’swhy he’s doing this.”

Harry and Hermione tried to calm Ron down.

Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“It’ll all be over at midnight on Saturday,” saidHermione, but this didn’t soothe Ron at all. On thecontrary, he sat bolt upright and broke into a sweat.

“Midnight on Saturday!” he said in a hoarse voice.

“Oh no — oh no — I’ve just remembered — Charlie’sletter was in that book Malfoy took, he’s going toknow we’re getting rid of Norbert.”

Harry and Hermione didn’t get a chance to answer.Madam Pomfrey came over at that moment and madethem leave, saying Ron needed sleep.

“It’s too late to change the plan now,” Harry toldHermione. “We haven’t got time to send Charlieanother owl, and this could be our only chance to getrid of Norbert. We’ll have to risk it. And we have gotthe Invisibility Cloak, Malfoy doesn’t know aboutthat.”

They found Fang the boarhound sitting outside with abandaged tail when they went to tell Hagrid, whoopened a window to talk to them.

“I won’t let you in,” he puffed. “Norbert’s at a trickystage — nothin’ I can’t handle.”

When they told him about Charlie’s letter, his eyesfilled with tears, although that might have beenbecause Norbert had just bitten him on the leg.

“Aargh! It’s all right, he only got my boot —jus’playin’ — he’s only a baby, after all.”

The baby banged its tail on the wall, making thewindows rattle. Harry and Hermione walked back tothe castle feeling Saturday couldn’t come quicklyenough.

Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

They would have felt sorry for Hagrid when the timecame for him to say good-bye to Norbert if they hadn’tbeen so worried about what they had to do. It was avery dark, cloudy night, and they were a bit latearriving at Hagrid’s hut because they’d had to wait forPeeves to get out of their way in the entrance hall,where he’d been playing tennis against the wall.

Hagrid had Norbert packed and ready in a large crate.

“He’s got lots o’ rats an’ some brandy fer the journey,”said Hagrid in a muffled voice. “An’ I’ve packed histeddy bear in case he gets lonely.”

From inside the crate came ripping noises thatsounded to Harry as though the teddy was having hishead torn off.

“Bye-bye, Norbert!” Hagrid sobbed, as Harry andHermione covered the crate with the Invisibility Cloakand stepped underneath it themselves. “Mommy willnever forget you!”

How they managed to get the crate back up to thecastle, they never knew. Midnight ticked nearer asthey heaved Norbert up the marble staircase in theentrance hall and along the dark corridors. Upanother staircase, then another — even one of Harry’sshortcuts didn’t make the work much easier.

“Nearly there!” Harry panted as they reached thecorridor beneath the tallest tower.

Then a sudden movement ahead of them made themalmost drop the crate. Forgetting that they werealready invisible, they shrank into the shadows,staring at the dark outlines of two people grapplingwith each other ten feet away. A lamp flared.

Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Professor McGonagall, in a tartan bathrobe and a hairnet, had Malfoy by the ear.

“Detention!” she shouted. “And twenty points fromSlytherin! Wandering around in the middle of thenight, how dare you —”

“You don’t understand, Professor. Harry Potter’scoming — he’s got a dragon!”

“What utter rubbish! How dare you tell such lies!Come on — I shall see Professor Snape about you,Malfoy!”

The steep spiral staircase up to the top of the towerseemed the easiest thing in the world after that. Notuntil they’d stepped out into the cold night air didthey throw off the cloak, glad to be able to breatheproperly again. Hermione did a sort of jig.

“Malfoy’s got detention! I could sing!”

“Don’t,” Harry advised her.

Chuckling about Malfoy, they waited, Norbertthrashing about in his crate. About ten minutes later,four broomsticks came swooping down out of thedarkness.

Charlie’s friends were a cheery lot. They showedHarry and Hermione the harness they’d rigged up, sothey could suspend Norbert between them. They allhelped buckle Norbert safely into it and then Harryand Hermione shook hands with the others andthanked them very much.

At last, Norbert was going ... going ... gone.

Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

They slipped back down the spiral staircase, theirhearts as light as their hands, now that Norbert wasoff them. No more dragon — Malfoy in detention —what could spoil their happiness?

The answer to that was waiting at the foot of thestairs. As they stepped into the corridor, Filch’s faceloomed suddenly out of the darkness.

“Well, well, well,” he whispered, “we are in trouble.”

They’d left the Invisibility Cloak on top of the tower.

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling



THE FORBIDDEN FOREST

Things couldn’t have been worse.

Filch took them down to Professor McGonagall’sstudy on the first floor, where they sat and waitedwithout saying a word to each other. Hermione wastrembling. Excuses, alibis, and wild cover-up storieschased each other around Harry’s brain, each morefeeble than the last. He couldn’t see how they weregoing to get out of trouble this time. They werecornered. How could they have been so stupid as toforget the cloak? There was no reason on earth thatProfessor McGonagall would accept for their being outof bed and creeping around the school in the dead ofnight, let alone being up the tallest Astronomy Tower,which was out-of-bounds except for classes. AddNorbert and the Invisibility Cloak, and they might aswell be packing their bags already.

Had Harry thought that things couldn’t have beenworse? He was wrong. When Professor McGonagallappeared, she was leading Neville.

Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Harry!” Neville burst out, the moment he saw theother two. “I was trying to find you to warn you, Iheard Malfoy saying he was going to catch you, hesaid you had a drag —”

Harry shook his head violently to shut Neville up, butProfessor McGonagall had seen. She looked morelikely to breathe fire than Norbert as she towered overthe three of them.

“I would never have believed it of any of you. Mr. Filchsays you were up in the Astronomy Tower. It’s oneo’clock in the morning. Explain yourselves.”

It was the first time Hermione had ever failed toanswer a teacher’s question. She was staring at herslippers, as still as a statue.

“I think I’ve got a good idea of what’s been going on,”said Professor McGonagall. “It doesn’t take a geniusto work it out. You fed Draco Malfoy some cock-and-bull story about a dragon, trying to get him out of bedand into trouble. I’ve already caught him. I supposeyou think it’s funny that Longbottom here heard thestory and believed it, too?”

Harry caught Neville’s eye and tried to tell himwithout words that this wasn’t true, because Nevillewas looking stunned and hurt. Poor, blunderingNeville — Harry knew what it must have cost him totry and find them in the dark, to warn them.

“I’m disgusted,” said Professor McGonagall. “Fourstudents out of bed in one night! I’ve never heard ofsuch a thing before! You, Miss Granger, I thought youhad more sense. As for you, Mr. Potter, I thoughtGryffindor meant more to you than this. All three ofyou will receive detentions — yes, you too, Mr.Longbottom, nothing gives you the right to walkPage | 273 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

around school at night, especially these days, it’s verydangerous — and fifty points will be taken fromGryffindor.”

“Fifty?” Harry gasped — they would lose the lead, thelead he’d won in the last Quidditch match.

“Fifty points each,” said Professor McGonagall,breathing heavily through her long, pointed nose.

“Professor — please —”

“You can’t—”

“Don’t tell me what I can and can’t do, Potter. Now getback to bed, all of you. I’ve never been more ashamedof Gryffindor students.”

A hundred and fifty points lost. That put Gryffindor inlast place. In one night, they’d ruined any chanceGryffindor had had for the House Cup. Harry felt asthough the bottom had dropped out of his stomach.How could they ever make up for this?

Harry didn’t sleep all night. He could hear Nevillesobbing into his pillow for what seemed like hours.Harry couldn’t think of anything to say to comforthim. He knew Neville, like himself, was dreading thedawn. What would happen when the rest ofGryffindor found out what they’d done?

At first, Gryffindors passing the giant hourglassesthat recorded the House points the next day thoughtthere’d been a mistake. How could they suddenlyhave a hundred and fifty points fewer than yesterday?And then the story started to spread: Harry Potter,the famous Harry Potter, their hero of two Quidditchmatches, had lost them all those points, him and acouple of other stupid first years.

Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

From being one of the most popular and admiredpeople at the school, Harry was suddenly the mosthated. Even Ravenclaws and Hufflepuffs turned onhim, because everyone had been longing to seeSlytherin lose the House Cup. Everywhere Harrywent, people pointed and didn’t trouble to lower theirvoices as they insulted him. Slytherins, on the otherhand, clapped as he walked past them, whistling andcheering, “Thanks Potter, we owe you one!”

Only Ron stood by him.

“They’ll all forget this in a few weeks. Fred and Georgehave lost loads of points in all the time they’ve beenhere, and people still like them.”

“They’ve never lost a hundred and fifty points in onego, though, have they?” said Harry miserably.

“Well — no,” Ron admitted.

It was a bit late to repair the damage, but Harryswore to himself not to meddle in things that weren’this business from now on. He’d had it with sneakingaround and spying. He felt so ashamed of himself thathe went to Wood and offered to resign from theQuidditch team.

“Resign?” Wood thundered. “What good’ll that do?

How are we going to get any points back if we can’twin at Quidditch?”

But even Quidditch had lost its fun. The rest of theteam wouldn’t speak to Harry during practice, and ifthey had to speak about him, they called him “theSeeker.”

Hermione and Neville were suffering, too. They didn’thave as bad a time as Harry, because they weren’t as

Page | 275 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

well-known, but nobody would speak to them, either.Hermione had stopped drawing attention to herself inclass, keeping her head down and working in silence.

Harry was almost glad that the exams weren’t faraway. All the studying he had to do kept his mind offhis misery. He, Ron, and Hermione kept tothemselves, working late into the night, trying toremember the ingredients in complicated potions,learn charms and spells by heart, memorize the datesof magical discoveries and goblin rebellions. ...

Then, about a week before the exams were due tostart, Harry’s new resolution not to interfere inanything that didn’t concern him was put to anunexpected test. Walking back from the library on hisown one afternoon, he heard somebody whimperingfrom a classroom up ahead. As he drew closer, heheard Quirrell’s voice.

“No — no — not again, please —”

It sounded as though someone was threatening him.Harry moved closer.

“All right — all right —” he heard Quirrell sob.

Next second, Quirrell came hurrying out of theclassroom straightening his turban. He was pale andlooked as though he was about to cry. He strode outof sight; Harry didn’t think Quirrell had even noticedhim. He waited until Quirrell’s footsteps haddisappeared, then peered into the classroom. It wasempty, but a door stood ajar at the other end. Harrywas halfway toward it before he remembered whathe’d promised himself about not meddling.

All the same, he’d have gambled twelve Sorcerer’sStones that Snape had just left the room, and from

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

what Harry had just heard, Snape would be walkingwith a new spring in his step — Quirrell seemed tohave given in at last.

Harry went back to the library, where Hermione wastesting Ron on Astronomy. Harry told them what he’dheard.

“Snape’s done it, then!” said Ron. “If Quirrell’s toldhim how to break his Anti-Dark Force spell —”

“There’s still Fluffy, though,” said Hermione.

“Maybe Snape’s found out how to get past himwithout asking Hagrid,” said Ron, looking up at thethousands of books surrounding them. “I bet there’s abook somewhere in here telling you how to get past agiant three-headed dog. So what do we do, Harry?”

The light of adventure was kindling again in Ron’seyes, but Hermione answered before Harry could.

“Go to Dumbledore. That’s what we should have doneages ago. If we try anything ourselves we’ll be thrownout for sure.”

“But we’ve got no proof.” said Harry. “Quirrell’s tooscared to back us up. Snape’s only got to say hedoesn’t know how the troll got in at Halloween andthat he was nowhere near the third floor — who doyou think they’ll believe, him or us? It’s not exactly asecret we hate him, Dumbledore’ll think we made itup to get him sacked. Filch wouldn’t help us if his lifedepended on it, he’s too friendly with Snape, and themore students get thrown out, the better, he’ll think.And don’t forget, we’re not supposed to know aboutthe Stone or Fluffy. That’ll take a lot of explaining.”

Hermione looked convinced, but Ron didn’t.

Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“If we just do a bit of poking around —”

“No,” said Harry flatly, “we’ve done enough pokingaround.”

He pulled a map of Jupiter toward him and started tolearn the names of its moons.

The following morning, notes were delivered to Harry,Hermione, and Neville at the breakfast table. Theywere all the same:

Your detention will take place at eleven o’clocktonight.

Meet Mr. Filch in the entrance hall.

Professor M. McGonagall

Harry had forgotten they still had detentions to do inthe furor over the points they’d lost. He half expectedHermione to complain that this was a whole night ofstudying lost, but she didn’t say a word. Like Harry,she felt they deserved what they’d got.

At eleven o’clock that night, they said good-bye to Ronin the common room and went down to the entrancehall with Neville. Filch was already there — and sowas Malfoy. Harry had also forgotten that Malfoy hadgotten a detention, too.

“Follow me,” said Filch, lighting a lamp and leadingthem outside.

“I bet you’ll think twice about breaking a school ruleagain, won’t you, eh?” he said, leering at them. “Ohyes ... hard work and pain are the best teachers if youask me. ... It’s just a pity they let the oldpunishments die out ... hang you by your wrists fromPage | 278 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

the ceiling for a few days, I’ve got the chains still inmy office, keep ’em well oiled in case they’re everneeded. ... Right, off we go, and don’t think of runningoff, now, it’ll be worse for you if you do.”

They marched off across the dark grounds. Nevillekept sniffing. Harry wondered what their punishmentwas going to be. It must be something really horrible,or Filch wouldn’t be sounding so delighted.

The moon was bright, but clouds scudding across itkept throwing them into darkness. Ahead, Harrycould see the lighted windows of Hagrid’s hut. Thenthey heard a distant shout.

“Is that you, Filch? Hurry up, I want ter get started.”

Harry’s heart rose; if they were going to be workingwith Hagrid it wouldn’t be so bad. His relief musthave showed in his face, because Filch said, “Isuppose you think you’ll be enjoying yourself withthat oaf? Well, think again, boy — it’s into the forestyou’re going and I’m much mistaken if you’ll all comeout in one piece.”

At this, Neville let out a little moan, and Malfoystopped dead in his tracks.

“The forest?” he repeated, and he didn’t sound quiteas cool as usual. “We can’t go in there at night —there’s all sorts of things in there — werewolves, Iheard.”

Neville clutched the sleeve of Harry’s robe and made achoking noise.

“That’s your problem, isn’t it?” said Filch, his voicecracking with glee. “Should’ve thought of themwerewolves before you got in trouble, shouldn’t you?”

Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid came striding toward them out of the dark,Fang at his heel. He was carrying his large crossbow,and a quiver of arrows hung over his shoulder.

“Abou’ time,” he said. “I bin waitin’ fer half an houralready. All right, Harry, Hermione?”

“I shouldn’t be too friendly to them, Hagrid,” saidFilch coldly, “they’re here to be punished, after all.”

“That’s why yer late, is it?” said Hagrid, frowning atFilch. “Bin lecturin’ them, eh? ’Snot your place ter dothat. Yeh’ve done yer bit, I’ll take over from here.”

“I’ll be back at dawn,” said Filch, “for what’s left ofthem,” he added nastily, and he turned and startedback toward the castle, his lamp bobbing away in thedarkness.

Malfoy now turned to Hagrid.

“I’m not going in that forest,” he said, and Harry waspleased to hear the note of panic in his voice.

“Yeh are if yeh want ter stay at Hogwarts,” saidHagrid fiercely. “Yeh’ve done wrong an’ now yeh’ve gotter pay fer it.”

“But this is servant stuff, it’s not for students to do. Ithought we’d be copying lines or something, if myfather knew I was doing this, he’d —”

“— tell yer that’s how it is at Hogwarts,” Hagridgrowled. “Copyin’ lines! What good’s that ter anyone?Yeh’ll do summat useful or yeh’ll get out. If yeh thinkyer father’d rather you were expelled, then get backoff ter the castle an’ pack. Go on!”

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy didn’t move. He looked at Hagrid furiously, butthen dropped his gaze.

“Right then,” said Hagrid, “now, listen carefully,

’cause it’s dangerous what we’re gonna do tonight, an’I don’ want no one takin’ risks. Follow me over here amoment.”

He led them to the very edge of the forest. Holding hislamp up high, he pointed down a narrow, windingearth track that disappeared into the thick blacktrees. A light breeze lifted their hair as they lookedinto the forest.

“Look there,” said Hagrid, “see that stuff shinin’ onthe ground? Silvery stuff? That’s unicorn blood.There’s a unicorn in there bin hurt badly by summat.This is the second time in a week. I found one deadlast Wednesday. We’re gonna try an’ find the poorthing. We might have ter put it out of its misery.”

“And what if whatever hurt the unicorn finds usfirst?” said Malfoy, unable to keep the fear out of hisvoice.

“There’s nothin’ that lives in the forest that’ll hurt yehif yer with me or Fang,” said Hagrid. “An’ keep ter thepath. Right, now, we’re gonna split inter two partiesan’ follow the trail in diff’rent directions. There’s bloodall over the place, it must’ve bin staggerin’ aroundsince last night at least.”

“I want Fang,” said Malfoy quickly, looking at Fang’slong teeth.

“All right, but I warn yeh, he’s a coward,” said Hagrid.“So me, Harry, an’ Hermione’ll go one way an’ Draco,Neville, an’ Fang’ll go the other. Now, if any of usfinds the unicorn, we’ll send up green sparks, right?

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Get yer wands out an’ practice now — that’s it — an’if anyone gets in trouble, send up red sparks, an’ we’llall come an’ find yeh — so, be careful — let’s go.”

The forest was black and silent. A little way into itthey reached a fork in the earth path, and Harry,Hermione, and Hagrid took the left path while Malfoy,Neville, and Fang took the right.

They walked in silence, their eyes on the ground.Every now and then a ray of moonlight through thebranches above lit a spot of silver-blue blood on thefallen leaves.

Harry saw that Hagrid looked very worried.

“Could a werewolf be killing the unicorns?” Harryasked.

“Not fast enough,” said Hagrid. “It’s not easy ter catcha unicorn, they’re powerful magic creatures. I neverknew one ter be hurt before.”

They walked past a mossy tree stump. Harry couldhear running water; there must be a streamsomewhere close by. There were still spots of unicornblood here and there along the winding path.

“You all right, Hermione?” Hagrid whispered. “Don’worry, it can’t’ve gone far if it’s this badly hurt, an’then well be able ter — GET BEHIND THAT TREE!”

Hagrid seized Harry and Hermione and hoisted themoff the path behind a towering oak. He pulled out anarrow and fitted it into his crossbow, raising it, readyto fire. The three of them listened. Something wasslithering over dead leaves nearby: it sounded like acloak trailing along the ground. Hagrid was squinting

Page | 282 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

up the dark path, but after a few seconds, the soundfaded away.

“I knew it,” he murmured. “There’s summat in herethat shouldn’ be.”

“A werewolf?” Harry suggested.

“That wasn’ no werewolf an’ it wasn’ no unicorn,neither,” said Hagrid grimly. “Right, follow me, butcareful, now.”

They walked more slowly, ears straining for thefaintest sound. Suddenly, in a clearing ahead,something definitely moved.

“Who’s there?” Hagrid called. “Show yerself — I’marmed!”

And into the clearing came — was it a man, or ahorse? To the waist, a man, with red hair and beard,but below that was a horse’s gleaming chestnut bodywith a long, reddish tail. Harry and Hermione’s jawsdropped.

“Oh, it’s you, Ronan,” said Hagrid in relief. “How areyeh?”

He walked forward and shook the centaur’s hand.

“Good evening to you, Hagrid,” said Ronan. He had adeep, sorrowful voice. “Were you going to shoot me?”

“Can’t be too careful, Ronan,” said Hagrid, patting hiscrossbow. “There’s summat bad loose in this forest.This is Harry Potter an’ Hermione Granger, by theway. Students up at the school. An’ this is Ronan,you two. He’s a centaur.”

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“We’d noticed,” said Hermione faintly.

“Good evening,” said Ronan. “Students, are you? Anddo you learn much, up at the school?”

“Erm —”

“A bit,” said Hermione timidly.

“A bit. Well, that’s something.” Ronan sighed. Heflung back his head and stared at the sky. “Mars isbright tonight.”

“Yeah,” said Hagrid, glancing up, too. “Listen, I’m gladwe’ve run inter yeh, Ronan, ’cause there’s a unicornbin hurt — you seen anythin’?”

Ronan didn’t answer immediately. He staredunblinkingly upward, then sighed again.

“Always the innocent are the first victims,” he said.

“So it has been for ages past, so it is now.”

“Yeah,” said Hagrid, “but have yeh seen anythin’,Ronan? Anythin’ unusual?”

“Mars is bright tonight,” Ronan repeated, whileHagrid watched him impatiently. “Unusually bright.”

“Yeah, but I was meanin’ anythin’ unusual a bitnearer home,” said Hagrid. “So yeh haven’t noticedanythin’ strange?”

Yet again, Ronan took a while to answer. At last, hesaid, “The forest hides many secrets.”

A movement in the trees behind Ronan made Hagridraise his bow again, but it was only a second centaur,

Page | 284 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

black-haired and -bodied and wilder-looking thanRonan.

“Hullo, Bane,” said Hagrid. “All right?”

“Good evening, Hagrid, I hope you are well?”

“Well enough. Look, I’ve jus’ bin askin’ Ronan, youseen anythin’ odd in here lately? There’s a unicornbin injured — would yeh know anythin’ about it?”

Bane walked over to stand next to Ronan. He lookedskyward.

“Mars is bright tonight,” he said simply.

“We’ve heard,” said Hagrid grumpily. “Well, if either ofyou do see anythin’, let me know, won’t yeh? We’ll beoff, then.”

Harry and Hermione followed him out of the clearing,staring over their shoulders at Ronan and Bane untilthe trees blocked their view.

“Never,” said Hagrid irritably, “try an’ get a straightanswer out of a centaur. Ruddy stargazers. Notinterested in anythin’ closer’n the moon.”

“Are there many of them in here?” asked Hermione.

“Oh, a fair few. ... Keep themselves to themselvesmostly, but they’re good enough about turnin’ up ifever I want a word. They’re deep, mind, centaurs ...they know things ... jus’ don’ let on much.”

“D’you think that was a centaur we heard earlier?”said Harry.

Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Did that sound like hooves to you? Nah, if yeh askme, that was what’s bin killin’ the unicorns — neverheard anythin’ like it before.”

They walked on through the dense, dark trees. Harrykept looking nervously over his shoulder. He had thenasty feeling they were being watched. He was veryglad they had Hagrid and his crossbow with them.They had just passed a bend in the path whenHermione grabbed Hagrid’s arm.

“Hagrid! Look! Red sparks, the others are in trouble!”

“You two wait here!” Hagrid shouted. “Stay on thepath, I’ll come back for yeh!”

They heard him crashing away through theundergrowth and stood looking at each other, veryscared, until they couldn’t hear anything but therustling of leaves around them.

“You don’t think they’ve been hurt, do you?”whispered Hermione.

“I don’t care if Malfoy has, but if something’s gotNeville ... it’s our fault he’s here in the first place.”

The minutes dragged by. Their ears seemed sharperthan usual. Harry’s seemed to be picking up everysigh of the wind, every cracking twig. What was goingon? Where were the others?

At last, a great crunching noise announced Hagrid’sreturn. Malfoy, Neville, and Fang were with him.Hagrid was fuming. Malfoy, it seemed, had sneakedup behind Neville and grabbed him as a joke. Nevillehad panicked and sent up the sparks.

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Well be lucky ter catch anythin’ now, with the racketyou two were makin’. Right, we’re changin’ groups —Neville, you stay with me an’ Hermione, Harry, you gowith Fang an’ this idiot. I’m sorry,” Hagrid added in awhisper to Harry, “but he’ll have a harder timefrightenin’you, an’we’ve gotta get this done.”

So Harry set off into the heart of the forest withMalfoy and Fang. They walked for nearly half anhour, deeper and deeper into the forest, until the pathbecame almost impossible to follow because the treeswere so thick. Harry thought the blood seemed to begetting thicker. There were splashes on the roots of atree, as though the poor creature had been thrashingaround in pain close by. Harry could see a clearingahead, through the tangled branches of an ancientoak.

“Look —” he murmured, holding out his arm to stopMalfoy.

Something bright white was gleaming on the ground.They inched closer.

It was the unicorn all right, and it was dead. Harryhad never seen anything so beautiful and sad. Itslong, slender legs were stuck out at odd angles whereit had fallen and its mane was spread pearly-white onthe dark leaves.

Harry had taken one step toward it when a slitheringsound made him freeze where he stood. A bush onthe edge of the clearing quivered. ... Then, out of theshadows, a hooded figure came crawling across theground like some stalking beast. Harry, Malfoy, andFang stood transfixed. The cloaked figure reached theunicorn, lowered its head over the wound in theanimals side, and began to drink its blood.

Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“AAAAAAAAAAARGH! ”

Malfoy let out a terrible scream and bolted — so didFang. The hooded figure raised its head and lookedright at Harry — unicorn blood was dribbling down itsfront. It got to its feet and came swiftly toward Harry— he couldn’t move for fear.

Then a pain like he’d never felt before pierced hishead; it was as though his scar were on fire. Halfblinded, he staggered backward. He heard hoovesbehind him, galloping, and something jumped cleanover Harry, charging at the figure.

The pain in Harry’s head was so bad he fell to hisknees. It took a minute or two to pass. When helooked up, the figure had gone. A centaur wasstanding over him, not Ronan or Bane; this onelooked younger; he had white-blond hair and apalomino body.

“Are you all right?” said the centaur, pulling Harry tohis feet.

“Yes — thank you — what was that?”

The centaur didn’t answer. He had astonishingly blueeyes, like pale sapphires. He looked carefully atHarry, his eyes lingering on the scar that stood out,livid, on Harry’s forehead.

“You are the Potter boy,” he said. “You had better getback to Hagrid. The forest is not safe at this time —especially for you. Can you ride? It will be quickerthis way.

“My name is Firenze,” he added, as he loweredhimself on to his front legs so that Harry couldclamber onto his back.

Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

There was suddenly a sound of more galloping fromthe other side of the clearing. Ronan and Bane camebursting through the trees, their flanks heaving andsweaty.

“Firenze!” Bane thundered. “What are you doing? Youhave a human on your back! Have you no shame? Areyou a common mule?”

“Do you realize who this is?” said Firenze. “This is thePotter boy. The quicker he leaves this forest, thebetter.”

“What have you been telling him?” growled Bane.“Remember, Firenze, we are sworn not to setourselves against the heavens. Have we not read whatis to come in the movements of the planets?”

Ronan pawed the ground nervously. “I’m sure Firenzethought he was acting for the best,” he said in hisgloomy voice.

Bane kicked his back legs in anger.

“For the best! What is that to do with us? Centaursare concerned with what has been foretold! It is notour business to run around like donkeys after strayhumans in our forest!”

Firenze suddenly reared on to his hind legs in anger,so that Harry had to grab his shoulders to stay on.

“Do you not see that unicorn?” Firenze bellowed atBane. “Do you not understand why it was killed? Orhave the planets not let you in on that secret? I setmyself against what is lurking in this forest, Bane,yes, with humans alongside me if I must.”

Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

And Firenze whisked around; with Harry clutching onas best he could, they plunged off into the trees,leaving Ronan and Bane behind them.

Harry didn’t have a clue what was going on.

“Why’s Bane so angry?” he asked. “What was thatthing you saved me from, anyway?”

Firenze slowed to a walk, warned Harry to keep hishead bowed in case of low-hanging branches, but didnot answer Harry’s question. They made their waythrough the trees in silence for so long that Harrythought Firenze didn’t want to talk to him anymore.They were passing through a particularly dense patchof trees, however, when Firenze suddenly stopped.

“Harry Potter, do you know what unicorn blood isused for?”

“No,” said Harry, startled by the odd question. “We’veonly used the horn and tail hair in Potions.”

“That is because it is a monstrous thing, to slay aunicorn,” said Firenze. “Only one who has nothing tolose, and everything to gain, would commit such acrime. The blood of a unicorn will keep you alive, evenif you are an inch from death, but at a terrible price.You have slain something pure and defenseless tosave yourself, and you will have but a half-life, acursed life, from the moment the blood touches yourlips.”

Harry stared at the back of Firenze’s head, which wasdappled silver in the moonlight.

“But who’d be that desperate?” he wondered aloud. “Ifyou’re going to be cursed forever, death’s better, isn’tit?”

Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“It is,” Firenze agreed, “unless all you need is to stayalive long enough to drink something else —something that will bring you back to full strengthand power — something that will mean you can neverdie. Mr. Potter, do you know what is hidden in theschool at this very moment?”

“The Sorcerer’s Stone! Of course — the Elixir of Life!But I don’t understand who —”

“Can you think of nobody who has waited many yearsto return to power, who has clung to life, awaitingtheir chance?”

It was as though an iron fist had clenched suddenlyaround Harry’s heart. Over the rustling of the trees,he seemed to hear once more what Hagrid had toldhim on the night they had met: “Some say he died.Codswallop, in my opinion. Dunno if he had enoughhuman left in him to die.”

“Do you mean,” Harry croaked, “that was VoZ —”

“Harry! Harry, are you all right?”

Hermione was running toward them down the path,Hagrid puffing along behind her.

“I’m fine,” said Harry, hardly knowing what he wassaying. “The unicorn’s dead, Hagrid, it’s in thatclearing back there.”

“This is where I leave you,” Firenze murmured asHagrid hurried off to examine the unicorn. “You aresafe now.”

Harry slid off his back.

Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Good luck, Harry Potter,” said Firenze. “The planetshave been read wrongly before now, even by centaurs.I hope this is one of those times.”

He turned and cantered back into the depths of theforest, leaving Harry shivering behind him.

Ron had fallen asleep in the dark common room,waiting for them to return. He shouted somethingabout Quidditch fouls when Harry roughly shook himawake. In a matter of seconds, though, he was wide-eyed as Harry began to tell him and Hermione whathad happened in the forest.

Harry couldn’t sit down. He paced up and down infront of the fire. He was still shaking.

“Snape wants the Stone for Voldemort ... andVoldemort’s waiting in the forest ... and all this timewe thought Snape just wanted to get rich. ...”

“Stop saying the name!” said Ron in a terrifiedwhisper, as if he thought Voldemort could hear them.

Harry wasn’t listening.

“Firenze saved me, but he shouldn’t have done so. ...Bane was furious ... he was talking about interferingwith what the planets say is going to happen. ... Theymust show that Voldemort’s coming back. ... Banethinks Firenze should have let Voldemort kill me. ... Isuppose that’s written in the stars as well.”

“Will you stop saying the name\” Ron hissed.

“So all I’ve got to wait for now is Snape to steal theStone,” Harry went on feverishly, “then Voldemort willbe able to come and finish me off. ... Well, I supposeBane 11 be happy.”

Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Hermione looked very frightened, but she had a wordof comfort.

“Harry, everyone says Dumbledore’s the only oneYou-Know-Who was ever afraid of. With Dumbledorearound, You-Know-Who won’t touch you. Anyway,who says the centaurs are right? It sounds likefortune-telling to me, and Professor McGonagall saysthat’s a very imprecise branch of magic.”

The sky had turned light before they stopped talking.They went to bed exhausted, their throats sore. Butthe night’s surprises weren’t over.

When Harry pulled back his sheets, he found hisInvisibility Cloak folded neatly underneath them.There was a note pinned to it:

Just in case.

Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





THROUGH THE TRAPDOOR

In years to come, Harry would never quite rememberhow he had managed to get through his exams whenhe half expected Voldemort to come bursting throughthe door at any moment. Yet the days crept by, andthere could be no doubt that Fluffy was still alive andwell behind the locked door.

It was sweltering hot, especially in the largeclassroom where they did their written papers. Theyhad been given special, new quills for the exams,which had been bewitched with an Anti-Cheatingspell.

They had practical exams as well. Professor Flitwickcalled them one by one into his class to see if theycould make a pineapple tap-dance across a desk.Professor McGonagall watched them turn a mouseinto a snuffbox — points were given for how pretty thesnuffbox was, but taken away if it had whiskers.Snape made them all nervous, breathing down theirnecks while they tried to remember how to make aForgetfulness potion.

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry did the best he could, trying to ignore thestabbing pains in his forehead, which had beenbothering him ever since his trip into the forest.Neville thought Harry had a bad case of exam nervesbecause Harry couldn’t sleep, but the truth was thatHarry kept being woken by his old nightmare, exceptthat it was now worse than ever because there was ahooded figure dripping blood in it.

Maybe it was because they hadn’t seen what Harryhad seen in the forest, or because they didn’t havescars burning on their foreheads, but Ron andHermione didn’t seem as worried about the Stone asHarry. The idea of Voldemort certainly scared them,but he didn’t keep visiting them in dreams, and theywere so busy with their studying they didn’t havemuch time to fret about what Snape or anyone elsemight be up to.

Their very last exam was History of Magic. One hourof answering questions about batty old wizards who’dinvented self-stirring cauldrons and they’d be free,free for a whole wonderful week until their examresults came out. When the ghost of Professor Binnstold them to put down their quills and roll up theirparchment, Harry couldn’t help cheering with therest.

“That was far easier than I thought it would be,” saidHermione as they joined the crowds flocking out ontothe sunny grounds. “I needn’t have learned about the1637 Werewolf Code of Conduct or the uprising ofElfric the Eager.”

Hermione always liked to go through their exampapers afterward, but Ron said this made him feel ill,so they wandered down to the lake and flopped undera tree. The Weasley twins and Lee Jordan were

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

tickling the tentacles of a giant squid, which wasbasking in the warm shallows.

“No more studying,” Ron sighed happily, stretchingout on the grass. “You could look more cheerful,

Harry, we’ve got a week before we find out how badlywe’ve done, there’s no need to worry yet.”

Harry was rubbing his forehead.

“I wish I knew what this means\” he burst out angrily.“My scar keeps hurting — it’s happened before, butnever as often as this.”

“Go to Madam Pomfrey,” Hermione suggested.

“I’m not ill,” said Harry. “I think it’s a warning ... itmeans danger’s coming. ...”

Ron couldn’t get worked up, it was too hot.

“Harry, relax, Hermione’s right, the Stone’s safe aslong as Dumbledore’s around. Anyway, we’ve neverhad any proof Snape found out how to get past Fluffy.He nearly had his leg ripped off once, he’s not going totry it again in a hurry. And Neville will play Quidditchfor England before Hagrid lets Dumbledore down.”

Harry nodded, but he couldn’t shake off a lurkingfeeling that there was something he’d forgotten to do,something important. When he tried to explain this,Hermione said, “That’s just the exams. I woke up lastnight and was halfway through my Transfigurationnotes before I remembered we’d done that one.”

Harry was quite sure the unsettled feeling didn’t haveanything to do with work, though. He watched an owlflutter toward the school across the bright blue sky, anote clamped in its mouth. Hagrid was the only one

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

who ever sent him letters. Hagrid would never betrayDumbledore. Hagrid would never tell anyone how toget past Fluffy ... never ... but —

Harry suddenly jumped to his feet.

“Where’re you going?” said Ron sleepily.

“I’ve just thought of something,” said Harry. He hadturned white. “We’ve got to go and see Hagrid, now.”

“Why?” panted Hermione, hurrying to keep up.

“Don’t you think it’s a bit odd,” said Harry,scrambling up the grassy slope, “that what Hagridwants more than anything else is a dragon, and astranger turns up who just happens to have an egg inhis pocket? How many people wander around withdragon eggs if it’s against wizard law? Lucky theyfound Hagrid, don’t you think? Why didn’t I see itbefore?”

“What are you talking about?” said Ron, but Harry,sprinting across the grounds toward the forest, didn’tanswer.

Hagrid was sitting in an armchair outside his house;his trousers and sleeves were rolled up, and he wasshelling peas into a large bowl.

“Hullo,” he said, smiling. “Finished yer exams? Gottime fer a drink?”

“Yes, please,” said Ron, but Harry cut him off.

“No, we’re in a hurry. Hagrid, I’ve got to ask yousomething. You know that night you won Norbert?What did the stranger you were playing cards withlook like?”

Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Dunnosaid Hagrid casually, “he wouldn’ take hiscloak off.”

He saw the three of them look stunned and raised hiseyebrows.

“It’s not that unusual, yeh get a lot o’ funny folk inthe Hog’s Head — that’s one o’ the pubs down in thevillage. Mighta bin a dragon dealer, mightn’ he? Inever saw his face, he kept his hood up.”

Harry sank down next to the bowl of peas.

“What did you talk to him about, Hagrid? Did youmention Hogwarts at all?”

“Mighta come up,” said Hagrid, frowning as he triedto remember. “Yeah ... he asked what I did, an’ I toldhim I was gamekeeper here. ... He asked a bit aboutthe sorta creatures I look after ... so I told him ... an’ Isaid what I’d always really wanted was a dragon ...an’ then ... I can’ remember too well, ’cause he keptbuyin’ me drinks. ... Let’s see ... yeah, then he said hehad the dragon egg an’ we could play cards fer it if Iwanted ... but he had ter be sure I could handle it, hedidn’ want it ter go ter any old home. ... So I told him,after Fluffy, a dragon would be easy. ...”

“And did he — did he seem interested in Fluffy?”

Harry asked, trying to keep his voice calm.

“Well — yeah — how many three-headed dogs d’yehmeet, even around Hogwarts? So I told him, Fluffy’s apiece o’ cake if yeh know how to calm him down, jus’play him a bit o’ music an’ he’ll go straight off tersleep —”

Hagrid suddenly looked horrified.

Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I shouldn’ta told yeh that!” he blurted out. “Forget Isaid it! Hey — where’re yeh goin’?”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione didn’t speak to each otherat all until they came to a halt in the entrance hall,which seemed very cold and gloomy after thegrounds.

“We’ve got to go to Dumbledore,” said Harry. “Hagridtold that stranger how to get past Fluffy, and it waseither Snape or Voldemort under that cloak — itmust’ve been easy, once he’d got Hagrid drunk. I justhope Dumbledore believes us. Firenze might back usup if Bane doesn’t stop him. Where’s Dumbledore’soffice?”

They looked around, as if hoping to see a signpointing them in the right direction. They had neverbeen told where Dumbledore lived, nor did they knowanyone who had been sent to see him.

“Well just have to —” Harry began, but a voicesuddenly rang across the hall.

“What are you three doing inside?”

It was Professor McGonagall, carrying a large pile ofbooks.

“We want to see Professor Dumbledore,” saidHermione, rather bravely, Harry and Ron thought.

“See Professor Dumbledore?” Professor McGonagallrepeated, as though this was a very fishy thing towant to do. “Why?”

Harry swallowed — now what?

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“It’s sort of secret,” he said, but he wished at once hehadn’t, because Professor McGonagall’s nostrilsflared.

“Professor Dumbledore left ten minutes ago,” she saidcoldly. “He received an urgent owl from the Ministryof Magic and flew off for London at once.”

“He’s gone?” said Harry frantically. “Now?”

“Professor Dumbledore is a very great wizard, Potter,he has many demands on his time —”

“But this is important.”

“Something you have to say is more important thanthe Ministry of Magic, Potter?”

“Look,” said Harry, throwing caution to the winds,“Professor — it’s about the Sorcerer’s Stone —”

Whatever Professor McGonagall had expected, itwasn’t that. The books she was carrying tumbled outof her arms, but she didn’t pick them up.

“How do you know — ?” she spluttered.

“Professor, I think — I know — that Sn— thatsomeone’s going to try and steal the Stone. I’ve got totalk to Professor Dumbledore.”

She eyed him with a mixture of shock and suspicion.

“Professor Dumbledore will be back tomorrow,” shesaid finally. “I don’t know how you found out aboutthe Stone, but rest assured, no one can possibly stealit, it’s too well protected.”

“But Professor —”

Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Potter, I know what I’m talking about,” she saidshortly. She bent down and gathered up the fallenbooks. “I suggest you all go back outside and enjoythe sunshine.”

But they didn’t.

“It’s tonight,” said Harry, once he was sure ProfessorMcGonagall was out of earshot. “Snape’s goingthrough the trapdoor tonight. He’s found outeverything he needs, and now he’s got Dumbledoreout of the way. He sent that note, I bet the Ministry ofMagic will get a real shock when Dumbledore turnsup.”

“But what can we —”

Hermione gasped. Harry and Ron wheeled round.Snape was standing there.

“Good afternoon,” he said smoothly.

They stared at him.

“You shouldn’t be inside on a day like this,” he said,with an odd, twisted smile.

“We were —” Harry began, without any idea what hewas going to say.

“You want to be more careful,” said Snape. “Hangingaround like this, people will think you’re up tosomething. And Gryffindor really can’t afford to loseany more points, can it?”

Harry flushed. They turned to go outside, but Snapecalled them back.

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Be warned, Potter — any more nighttime wanderingsand I will personally make sure you are expelled.

Good day to you.”

He strode off in the direction of the staffroom.

Out on the stone steps, Harry turned to the others.

“Right, here’s what we’ve got to do,” he whisperedurgently. “One of us has got to keep an eye on Snape— wait outside the staffroom and follow him if heleaves it. Hermione, you’d better do that.”

“Why me?”

“It’s obvious,” said Ron. “You can pretend to bewaiting for Professor Flitwick, you know.” He put on ahigh voice, “ ‘Oh Professor Flitwick, I’m so worried, Ithink I got question fourteen b wrong. ... ’ ”

“Oh, shut up,” said Hermione, but she agreed to goand watch out for Snape.

“And we’d better stay outside the third-floor corridor,”Harry told Ron. “Come on.”

But that part of the plan didn’t work. No sooner hadthey reached the door separating Fluffy from the restof the school than Professor McGonagall turned upagain and this time, she lost her temper.

“I suppose you think you’re harder to get past than apack of enchantments!” she stormed. “Enough of thisnonsense! If I hear you’ve come anywhere near hereagain, I’ll take another fifty points from Gryffindor!

Yes, Weasley, from my own House!”

Harry and Ron went back to the common room. Harryhad just said, “At least Hermione’s on Snape’s tail,”

Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

when the portrait of the Fat Lady swung open andHermione came in.

“I’m sorry, Harry!” she wailed. “Snape came out andasked me what I was doing, so I said I was waiting forFlitwick, and Snape went to get him, and I’ve onlyjust got away, I don’t know where Snape went.”

“Well, that’s it then, isn’t it?” Harry said.

The other two stared at him. He was pale and his eyeswere glittering.

“I’m going out of here tonight and I’m going to try andget to the Stone first.”

“You’re mad!” said Ron.

“You can’t!” said Hermione. “After what McGonagalland Snape have said? You’ll be expelled!”

“SO WHAT?” Harry shouted. “Don’t you understand?If Snape gets hold of the Stone, Voldemort’s comingback! Haven’t you heard what it was like when he wastrying to take over? There won’t be any Hogwarts toget expelled from! He’ll flatten it, or turn it into aschool for the Dark Arts! Losing points doesn’t matteranymore, can’t you see? D’you think he’ll leave youand your families alone if Gryffindor wins the HouseCup? If I get caught before I can get to the Stone, well,I’ll have to go back to the Dursleys and wait forVoldemort to find me there, it’s only dying a bit laterthan I would have, because I’m never going over tothe Dark Side! I’m going through that trapdoortonight and nothing you two say is going to stop me!Voldemort killed my parents, remember?”

He glared at them.

Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“You’re right, Harry,” said Hermione in a small voice.

“I’ll use the Invisibility Cloak,” said Harry. “It’s justlucky I got it back.”

“But will it cover all three of us?” said Ron.

“All — all three of us?”

“Oh, come off it, you don’t think we’d let you goalone?”

“Of course not,” said Hermione briskly. “How do youthink you’d get to the Stone without us? I’d better goand look through my books, there might besomething useful. ...”

“But if we get caught, you two will be expelled, too.”

“Not if I can help it,” said Hermione grimly. “Flitwicktold me in secret that I got a hundred and twelvepercent on his exam. They’re not throwing me outafter that.”

After dinner the three of them sat nervously apart inthe common room. Nobody bothered them; none ofthe Gryffindors had anything to say to Harry anymore, after all. This was the first night he hadn’t beenupset by it. Hermione was skimming through all hernotes, hoping to come across one of theenchantments they were about to try to break. Harryand Ron didn’t talk much. Both of them werethinking about what they were about to do.

Slowly, the room emptied as people drifted off to bed.

“Better get the cloak,” Ron muttered, as Lee Jordanfinally left, stretching and yawning. Harry ranupstairs to their dark dormitory. He pulled out the

Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

cloak and then his eyes fell on the flute Hagrid hadgiven him for Christmas. He pocketed it to use onFluffy — he didn’t feel much like singing.

He ran back down to the common room.

“We’d better put the cloak on here, and make sure itcovers all three of us — if Filch spots one of our feetwandering along on its own —”

“What are you doing?” said a voice from the corner ofthe room. Neville appeared from behind an armchair,clutching Trevor the toad, who looked as though he’dbeen making another bid for freedom.

“Nothing, Neville, nothing,” said Harry, hurriedlyputting the cloak behind his back.

Neville stared at their guilty faces.

“You’re going out again,” he said.

“No, no, no,” said Hermione. “No, we’re not. Why don’tyou go to bed, Neville?”

Harry looked at the grandfather clock by the door.They couldn’t afford to waste any more time, Snapemight even now be playing Fluffy to sleep.

“You can’t go out,” said Neville, “you’ll be caughtagain. Gryffindor will be in even more trouble.”

“You don’t understand,” said Harry, “this isimportant.”

But Neville was clearly steeling himself to dosomething desperate.

Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“I won’t let you do it,” he said, hurrying to stand infront of the portrait hole. “I’ll — I’ll fight you!”

“Neville,” Ron exploded, “get away from that hole anddon’t be an idiot —”

“Don’t you call me an idiot!” said Neville. “I don’tthink you should be breaking any more rules! Andyou were the one who told me to stand up to people!”

“Yes, but not to us,” said Ron in exasperation.

“Neville, you don’t know what you’re doing.”

He took a step forward and Neville dropped Trevor thetoad, who leapt out of sight.

“Go on then, try and hit me!” said Neville, raising hisfists. “I’m ready!”

Harry turned to Hermione.

“Do something,” he said desperately.

Hermione stepped forward.

“Neville,” she said, “I’m really, really sorry about this.”She raised her wand.

“Petrificus Totalusl” she cried, pointing it at Neville.

Neville’s arms snapped to his sides. His legs sprangtogether. His whole body rigid, he swayed where hestood and then fell flat on his face, stiff as a board.

Hermione ran to turn him over. Neville’s jaws werejammed together so he couldn’t speak. Only his eyeswere moving, looking at them in horror.

Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“What’ve you done to him?” Harry whispered.

“It’s the full Body-Bind,” said Hermione miserably.“Oh, Neville, I’m so sorry.”

“We had to, Neville, no time to explain,” said Harry.

“You’ll understand later, Neville,” said Ron as theystepped over him and pulled on the Invisibility Cloak.

But leaving Neville lying motionless on the floor didn’tfeel like a very good omen. In their nervous state,every statue’s shadow looked like Filch, every distantbreath of wind sounded like Peeves swooping down onthem.

At the foot of the first set of stairs, they spotted Mrs.Norris skulking near the top.

“Oh, let’s kick her, just this once,” Ron whispered inHarry’s ear, but Harry shook his head. As theyclimbed carefully around her, Mrs. Norris turned herlamplike eyes on them, but didn’t do anything.

They didn’t meet anyone else until they reached thestaircase up to the third floor. Peeves was bobbinghalfway up, loosening the carpet so that people wouldtrip.

“Who’s there?” he said suddenly as they climbedtoward him. He narrowed his wicked black eyes.“Know you’re there, even if I can’t see you. Are youghoulie or ghostie or wee student beastie?”

He rose up in the air and floated there, squinting atthem.

“Should call Filch, I should, if something’s a-creepingaround unseen.”

Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry had a sudden idea.

“Peeves,” he said, in a hoarse whisper, “the BloodyBaron has his own reasons for being invisible.”

Peeves almost fell out of the air in shock. He caughthimself in time and hovered about a foot off thestairs.

“So sorry, your bloodiness, Mr. Baron, sir,” he saidgreasily. “My mistake, my mistake — I didn’t see you— of course I didn’t, you’re invisible — forgive oldPeevsie his little joke, sir.”

“I have business here, Peeves,” croaked Harry. “Stayaway from this place tonight.”

“I will, sir, I most certainly will,” said Peeves, rising upin the air again. “Hope your business goes well,

Baron, I’ll not bother you.”

And he scooted off.

“Brilliant, Harry!” whispered Ron.

A few seconds later, they were there, outside thethird-floor corridor — and the door was already ajar.

“Well, there you are,” Harry said quietly, “Snape’salready got past Fluffy.”

Seeing the open door somehow seemed to impressupon all three of them what was facing them.Underneath the cloak, Harry turned to the other two.

“If you want to go back, I won’t blame you,” he said.“You can take the cloak, I won’t need it now.”

“Don’t be stupid,” said Ron.

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“We’re coming,” said Hermione.

Harry pushed the door open.

As the door creaked, low, rumbling growls met theirears. All three of the dog’s noses sniffed madly in theirdirection, even though it couldn’t see them.

“What’s that at its feet?” Hermione whispered.

“Looks like a harp,” said Ron. “Snape must have left itthere.”

“It must wake up the moment you stop playing,” saidHarry. “Well, here goes ...”

He put Hagrid’s flute to his lips and blew. It wasn’treally a tune, but from the first note the beast’s eyesbegan to droop. Harry hardly drew breath. Slowly, thedog’s growls ceased — it tottered on its paws and fellto its knees, then it slumped to the ground, fastasleep.

“Keep playing,” Ron warned Harry as they slipped outof the cloak and crept toward the trapdoor. Theycould feel the dog’s hot, smelly breath as theyapproached the giant heads.

“I think we’ll be able to pull the door open,” said Ron,peering over the dog’s back. “Want to go first,Hermione?”

“No, I don’t!”

“All right.” Ron gritted his teeth and stepped carefullyover the dog’s legs. He bent and pulled the ring of thetrapdoor, which swung up and open.

“What can you see?” Hermione said anxiously.

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Nothing —just black — there’s no way of climbingdown, we’ll just have to drop.”

Harry, who was still playing the flute, waved at Ron toget his attention and pointed at himself.

“You want to go first? Are you sure?” said Ron. “Idon’t know how deep this thing goes. Give the flute toHermione so she can keep him asleep.”

Harry handed the flute over. In the few seconds’silence, the dog growled and twitched, but themoment Hermione began to play, it fell back into itsdeep sleep.

Harry climbed over it and looked down through thetrapdoor. There was no sign of the bottom.

He lowered himself through the hole until he washanging on by his fingertips. Then he looked up atRon and said, “If anything happens to me, don’tfollow. Go straight to the owlery and send Hedwig toDumbledore, right?”

“Right,” said Ron.

“See you in a minute, I hope. ...”

And Harry let go. Cold, damp air rushed past him ashe fell down, down, down and —

FLUMP. With a funny, muffled sort of thump helanded on something soft. He sat up and felt around,his eyes not used to the gloom. It felt as though hewas sitting on some sort of plant.

“It’s okay!” he called up to the light the size of apostage stamp, which was the open trapdoor, “it’s asoft landing, you can jump!”

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Ron followed right away. He landed, sprawled next toHarry.

“What’s this stuff?” were his first words.

“Dunno, some sort of plant thing. I suppose it’s hereto break the fall. Come on, Hermione!”

The distant music stopped. There was a loud barkfrom the dog, but Hermione had already jumped. Shelanded on Harry’s other side.

“We must be miles under the school,” she said.

“Lucky this plant thing’s here, really,” said Ron.

“Lucky\” shrieked Hermione. “Look at you both!”

She leapt up and struggled toward a damp wall. Shehad to struggle because the moment she had landed,the plant had started to twist snakelike tendrilsaround her ankles. As for Harry and Ron, their legshad already been bound tightly in long creeperswithout their noticing.

Hermione had managed to free herself before theplant got a firm grip on her. Now she watched inhorror as the two boys fought to pull the plant offthem, but the more they strained against it, thetighter and faster the plant wound around them.

“Stop moving!” Hermione ordered them. “I know whatthis is — it’s Devil’s Snare!”

“Oh, I’m so glad we know what it’s called, that’s agreat help,” snarled Ron, leaning back, trying to stopthe plant from curling around his neck.

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Shut up, I’m trying to remember how to kill it!” saidHermione.

“Well, hurry up, I can’t breathe!” Harry gasped,wrestling with it as it curled around his chest.

“Devil’s Snare, Devil’s Snare ... what did ProfessorSprout say? — it likes the dark and the damp —”

“So light a fire!” Harry choked.

“Yes — of course — but there’s no wood!” Hermionecried, wringing her hands.

“HAVE YOU GONE MAD?” Ron bellowed. “ARE YOU AWITCH OR NOT?”

“Oh, right!” said Hermione, and she whipped out herwand, waved it, muttered something, and sent a jet ofthe same bluebell flames she had used on Snape atthe plant. In a matter of seconds, the two boys felt itloosening its grip as it cringed away from the lightand warmth. Wriggling and flailing, it unraveled itselffrom their bodies, and they were able to pull free.

“Lucky you pay attention in Herbology, Hermione,”said Harry as he joined her by the wall, wiping sweatoff his face.

“Yeah,” said Ron, “and lucky Harry doesn’t lose hishead in a crisis — ‘there’s no wood,’ honestly.”

“This way,” said Harry, pointing down a stonepassageway, which was the only way forward.

All they could hear apart from their footsteps was thegentle drip of water trickling down the walls. Thepassageway sloped downward, and Harry wasreminded of Gringotts. With an unpleasant jolt of the

Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

heart, he remembered the dragons said to beguarding vaults in the wizards’ bank. If they met adragon, a fully-grown dragon — Norbert had been badenough ...

“Can you hear something?” Ron whispered.

Harry listened. A soft rustling and clinking seemed tobe coming from up ahead.

“Do you think it’s a ghost?”

“I don’t know ... sounds like wings to me.”

“There’s light ahead — I can see something moving.”

They reached the end of the passageway and sawbefore them a brilliantly lit chamber, its ceilingarching high above them. It was full of small, jewel-bright birds, fluttering and tumbling all around theroom. On the opposite side of the chamber was aheavy wooden door.

“Do you think they’ll attack us if we cross the room?”said Ron.

“Probably,” said Harry. “They don’t look very vicious,but I suppose if they all swooped down at once ...well, there’s no other choice ... I’ll run.”

He took a deep breath, covered his face with his arms,and sprinted across the room. He expected to feelsharp beaks and claws tearing at him any second,but nothing happened. He reached the dooruntouched. He pulled the handle, but it was locked.

The other two followed him. They tugged and heavedat the door, but it wouldn’t budge, not even whenHermione tried her Alohomora Charm.

Page | 313 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Now what?” said Ron.

“These birds ... they can’t be here just for decoration,”said Hermione.

They watched the birds soaring overhead, glittering —glittering?

“They’re not birds!” Harry said suddenly. “They’rekeys\ Winged keys — look carefully. So that mustmean ...” he looked around the chamber while theother two squinted up at the flock of keys. "... yes —look! Broomsticks! We’ve got to catch the key to thedoor!”

“But there are hundreds of them!”

Ron examined the lock on the door.

“We’re looking for a big, old-fashioned one — probablysilver, like the handle.”

They each seized a broomstick and kicked off into theair, soaring into the midst of the cloud of keys. Theygrabbed and snatched, but the bewitched keys dartedand dived so quickly it was almost impossible tocatch one.

Not for nothing, though, was Harry the youngestSeeker in a century. He had a knack for spottingthings other people didn’t. After a minute’s weavingabout through the whirl of rainbow feathers, henoticed a large silver key that had a bent wing, as if ithad already been caught and stuffed roughly into thekeyhole.

“That one!” he called to the others. “That big one —there — no, there — with bright blue wings — thefeathers are all crumpled on one side.”

Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Ron went speeding in the direction that Harry waspointing, crashed into the ceiling, and nearly fell offhis broom.

“We’ve got to close in on it!” Harry called, not takinghis eyes off the key with the damaged wing. “Ron, youcome at it from above — Hermione, stay below andstop it from going down — and I’ll try and catch it.Right, NOW!”

Ron dived, Hermione rocketed upward, the keydodged them both, and Harry streaked after it; it spedtoward the wall, Harry leaned forward and with anasty, crunching noise, pinned it against the stonewith one hand. Ron and Hermione’s cheers echoedaround the high chamber.

They landed quickly, and Harry ran to the door, thekey struggling in his hand. He rammed it into the lockand turned — it worked. The moment the lock hadclicked open, the key took flight again, looking verybattered now that it had been caught twice.

“Ready?” Harry asked the other two, his hand on thedoor handle. They nodded. He pulled the door open.

The next chamber was so dark they couldn’t seeanything at all. But as they stepped into it, lightsuddenly flooded the room to reveal an astonishingsight.

They were standing on the edge of a huge chessboard,behind the black chessmen, which were all taller thanthey were and carved from what looked like blackstone. Facing them, way across the chamber, werethe white pieces. Harry, Ron and Hermione shiveredslightly — the towering white chessmen had no faces.

“Now what do we do?” Harry whispered.

Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“It’s obvious, isn’t it?” said Ron. “We’ve got to play ourway across the room.”

Behind the white pieces they could see another door.

“How?” said Hermione nervously.

“I think,” said Ron, “we’re going to have to bechessmen.”

He walked up to a black knight and put his hand outto touch the knights horse. At once, the stone sprangto life. The horse pawed the ground and the knightturned his helmeted head to look down at Ron.

“Do we — er — have to join you to get across?”

The black knight nodded. Ron turned to the othertwo.

“This needs thinking about. ...” he said. “I supposewe’ve got to take the place of three of the black pieces.

Harry and Hermione stayed quiet, watching Ronthink. Finally he said, “Now, don’t be offended oranything, but neither of you are that good at chess —

“We’re not offended,” said Harry quickly. “Just tell uswhat to do.”

“Well, Harry, you take the place of that bishop, andHermione, you go there instead of that castle.”

“What about you?”

“I’m going to be a knight,” said Ron.

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

The chessmen seemed to have been listening, becauseat these words a knight, a bishop, and a castle turnedtheir backs on the white pieces and walked off theboard, leaving three empty squares that Harry, Ron,and Hermione took.

“White always plays first in chess,” said Ron, peeringacross the board. “Yes ... look ...”

A white pawn had moved forward two squares.

Ron started to direct the black pieces. They movedsilently wherever he sent them. Harry’s knees weretrembling. What if they lost?

“Harry — move diagonally four squares to the right.”

Their first real shock came when their other knightwas taken. The white queen smashed him to the floorand dragged him off the board, where he lay quitestill, facedown.

“Had to let that happen,” said Ron, looking shaken.“Leaves you free to take that bishop, Hermione, goon.”

Every time one of their men was lost, the white piecesshowed no mercy. Soon there was a huddle of limpblack players slumped along the wall. Twice, Ron onlyjust noticed in time that Harry and Hermione were indanger. He himself darted around the board, takingalmost as many white pieces as they had lost blackones.

“We’re nearly there,” he muttered suddenly. “Let methink — let me think ...”

The white queen turned her blank face toward him.

Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Yes ...” said Ron softly, “it’s the only way ... I’ve gotto be taken.”

“NO!” Harry and Hermione shouted.

“That’s chess!” snapped Ron. “You’ve got to makesome sacrifices! I make my move and she’ll take me —that leaves you free to checkmate the king, Harry!”

“But —”

“Do you want to stop Snape or not?”

“Ron —”

“Look, if you don’t hurry up, hell already have theStone!”

There was no alternative.

“Ready?” Ron called, his face pale but determined.“Here I go — now, don’t hang around once you’vewon.”

He stepped forward, and the white queen pounced.She struck Ron hard across the head with her stonearm, and he crashed to the floor — Hermionescreamed but stayed on her square — the whitequeen dragged Ron to one side. He looked as if he’dbeen knocked out.

Shaking, Harry moved three spaces to the left.

The white king took off his crown and threw it atHarry’s feet. They had won. The chessmen parted andbowed, leaving the door ahead clear. With one lastdesperate look back at Ron, Harry and Hermionecharged through the door and up the nextpassageway.

Page | 318 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“What if he’s — ?”

“He’ll be all right,” said Harry, trying to convincehimself. “What do you reckon’s next?”

“We’ve had Sprout’s, that was the Devil’s Snare;Flitwick must’ve put charms on the keys; McGonagalltransfigured the chessmen to make them alive; thatleaves Quirrell’s spell, and Snape’s ...”

They had reached another door.

“All right?” Harry whispered.

“Go on.”

Harry pushed it open.

A disgusting smell filled their nostrils, making both ofthem pull their robes up over their noses. Eyeswatering, they saw, flat on the floor in front of them, atroll even larger than the one they had tackled, outcold with a bloody lump on its head.

“I’m glad we didn’t have to fight that one,” Harrywhispered as they stepped carefully over one of itsmassive legs. “Come on, I can’t breathe.”

He pulled open the next door, both of them hardlydaring to look at what came next — but there wasnothing very frightening in here, just a table withseven differently shaped bottles standing on it in aline.

“Snape’s,” said Harry. “What do we have to do?”

They stepped over the threshold, and immediately afire sprang up behind them in the doorway. It wasn’tordinary fire either; it was purple. At the same

Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

instant, black flames shot up in the doorway leadingonward. They were trapped.

“Look!” Hermione seized a roll of paper lying next tothe bottles. Harry looked over her shoulder to read it:

Danger lies before you, while safety lies behind,

Two of us will help you, whichever you would find,

One among us seven will let you move ahead,

Another will transport the drinker back instead,

Two among our number hold only nettle wine,

Three of us are killers, waiting hidden in line.

Choose, unless you wish to stay here forevermore,

To help you in your choice, we give you these cluesfour:

First, however slyly the poison tries to hide

You will always find some on nettle wine’s left side;

Second, different are those who stand at either end,

But if you would move onward, neither is your friend;

Third, as you see clearly, all are different size,

Neither dwarf nor giant holds death in their insides;

Fourth, the second left and the second on the right

Are twins once you taste them, though different at firstsight

Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Hermione let out a great sigh and Harry, amazed, sawthat she was smiling, the very last thing he felt likedoing.

“Brilliant,” said Hermione. “This isn’t magic — it’slogic — a puzzle. A lot of the greatest wizards haven’tgot an ounce of logic, they’d be stuck in here forever.”

“But so will we, won’t we?”

“Of course not,” said Hermione. “Everything we needis here on this paper. Seven bottles: three are poison;two are wine; one will get us safely through the blackfire, and one will get us back through the purple.”

“But how do we know which to drink?”

“Give me a minute.”

Hermione read the paper several times. Then shewalked up and down the line of bottles, muttering toherself and pointing at them. At last, she clapped herhands.

“Got it,” she said. “The smallest bottle will get usthrough the black fire — toward the Stone.”

Harry looked at the tiny bottle.

“There’s only enough there for one of us,” he said.“That’s hardly one swallow.”

They looked at each other.

“Which one will get you back through the purpleflames?”

Hermione pointed at a rounded bottle at the right endof the line.

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“You drink that,” said Harry. “No, listen, get back andget Ron. Grab brooms from the flying-key room,they’ll get you out of the trapdoor and past Fluffy —go straight to the owlery and send Hedwig toDumbledore, we need him. I might be able to holdSnape off for a while, but I’m no match for him,really.”

“But Harry — what if You-Know-Who’s with him?”

“Well — I was lucky once, wasn’t I?” said Harry,pointing at his scar. “I might get lucky again.”

Hermione’s lip trembled, and she suddenly dashed atHarry and threw her arms around him.

“Hermionel”

“Harry — you’re a great wizard, you know.”

“I’m not as good as you,” said Harry, veryembarrassed, as she let go of him.

“Me!” said Hermione. “Books! And cleverness! Thereare more important things — friendship and braveryand — oh Harry — be carefull”

“You drink first,” said Harry. “You are sure which iswhich, aren’t you?”

“Positive,” said Hermione. She took a long drink fromthe round bottle at the end, and shuddered.

“It’s not poison?” said Harry anxiously.

“No — but it’s like ice.”

“Quick, go, before it wears off.”

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Good luck — take care —”

“GO!”

Hermione turned and walked straight through thepurple fire.

Harry took a deep breath and picked up the smallestbottle. He turned to face the black flames.

“Here I come,” he said, and he drained the little bottlein one gulp.

It was indeed as though ice was flooding his body. Heput the bottle down and walked forward; he bracedhimself, saw the black flames licking his body, butcouldn’t feel them — for a moment he could seenothing but dark fire — then he was on the otherside, in the last chamber.

There was already someone there — but it wasn’tSnape. It wasn’t even Voldemort.

Page | 323 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





THE MAN WITH TWO FACES

It was Quirrell.

“You\” gasped Harry.

Quirrell smiled. His face wasn’t twitching at all.

“Me,” he said calmly. “I wondered whether I’d bemeeting you here, Potter.”

“But I thought — Snape —”

“Severus?” Quirrell laughed, and it wasn’t his usualquivering treble, either, but cold and sharp. “Yes,Severus does seem the type, doesn’t he? So useful tohave him swooping around like an overgrown bat.

Next to him, who would suspect p-p-poor, st-stuttering P-Professor Quirrell?”

Harry couldn’t take it in. This couldn’t be true, itcouldn’t.

“But Snape tried to kill me!”

Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“No, no, no. / tried to kill you. Your friend MissGranger accidentally knocked me over as she rushedto set fire to Snape at that Quidditch match. Shebroke my eye contact with you. Another few secondsand I’d have got you off that broom. I’d have managedit before then if Snape hadn’t been muttering acountercurse, trying to save you.”

“Snape was trying to save me?”

“Of course,” said Quirrell coolly. “Why do you thinkhe wanted to referee your next match? He was tryingto make sure I didn’t do it again. Funny, really ... heneedn’t have bothered. I couldn’t do anything withDumbledore watching. All the other teachers thoughtSnape was trying to stop Gryffindor from winning, hedid make himself unpopular ... and what a waste oftime, when after all that, I’m going to kill you tonight.”

Quirrell snapped his fingers. Ropes sprang out of thinair and wrapped themselves tightly around Harry.

“You’re too nosy to live, Potter. Scurrying around theschool on Halloween like that, for all I knew you’dseen me coming to look at what was guarding theStone.”

“ You let the troll in?”

“Certainly. I have a special gift with trolls — you musthave seen what I did to the one in the chamber backthere? Unfortunately, while everyone else wasrunning around looking for it, Snape, who alreadysuspected me, went straight to the third floor to headme off — and not only did my troll fail to beat you todeath, that three-headed dog didn’t even manage tobite Snape’s leg off properly.

Page | 325 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Now, wait quietly, Potter. I need to examine thisinteresting mirror.”

It was only then that Harry realized what wasstanding behind Quirrell. It was the Mirror of Erised.

“This mirror is the key to finding the Stone,” Quirrellmurmured, tapping his way around the frame. “TrustDumbledore to come up with something like this ...but he’s in London ... I’ll be far away by the time hegets back. ...”

All Harry could think of doing was to keep Quirrelltalking and stop him from concentrating on themirror.

“I saw you and Snape in the forest —” he blurted out.

“Yes,” said Quirrell idly, walking around the mirror tolook at the back. “He was on to me by that time,trying to find out how far I’d got. He suspected me allalong. Tried to frighten me — as though he could,when I had Lord Voldemort on my side. ...”

Quirrell came back out from behind the mirror andstared hungrily into it.

“I see the Stone ... I’m presenting it to my master ...but where is it?”

Harry struggled against the ropes binding him, butthey didn’t give. He had to keep Quirrell from givinghis whole attention to the mirror.

“But Snape always seemed to hate me so much.”

“Oh, he does,” said Quirrell casually, “heavens, yes.He was at Hogwarts with your father, didn’t you

Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

know? They loathed each other. But he never wantedyou dead.”

“But I heard you a few days ago, sobbing — I thoughtSnape was threatening you.

For the first time, a spasm of fear flitted acrossQuirrell’s face.

“Sometimes,” he said, “I find it hard to follow mymaster’s instructions — he is a great wizard and I amweak —”

“You mean he was there in the classroom with you?”Harry gasped.

“He is with me wherever I go,” said Quirrell quietly. “Imet him when I traveled around the world. A foolishyoung man I was then, full of ridiculous ideas aboutgood and evil. Lord Voldemort showed me how wrongI was. There is no good and evil, there is only power,and those too weak to seek it. ... Since then, I haveserved him faithfully, although I have let him downmany times. He has had to be very hard on me.”Quirrell shivered suddenly. “He does not forgivemistakes easily. When I failed to steal the Stone fromGringotts, he was most displeased. He punished me... decided he would have to keep a closer watch onme. ...”

Quirrell’s voice trailed away. Harry was rememberinghis trip to Diagon Alley — how could he have been sostupid? He’d seen Quirrell there that very day, shakenhands with him in the Leaky Cauldron.

Quirrell cursed under his breath.

“I don’t understand ... is the Stone inside the mirror?Should I break it?”

Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s mind was racing.

What I want more than anything else in the world atthe moment, he thought, is to find the Stone beforeQuirrell does. So if I look in the mirror, I should seemy self finding it — which means I’ll see where it’shidden! But how can I look without Quirrell realizingwhat I’m up to?

He tried to edge to the left, to get in front of the glasswithout Quirrell noticing, but the ropes around hisankles were too tight: he tripped and fell over. Quirrellignored him. He was still talking to himself.

“What does this mirror do? How does it work? Helpme, Master!”

And to Harry’s horror, a voice answered, and the voiceseemed to come from Quirrell himself.

“Use the boy ... Use the boy ...”

Quirrell rounded on Harry.

“Yes — Potter — come here.”

He clapped his hands once, and the ropes bindingHarry fell off. Harry got slowly to his feet.

“Come here,” Quirrell repeated. “Look in the mirrorand tell me what you see.”

Harry walked toward him.

I must lie, he thought desperately. I must look and lieabout what I see, that’s all.

Quirrell moved close behind him. Harry breathed inthe funny smell that seemed to come from Quirrell’s

Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

turban. He closed his eyes, stepped in front of themirror, and opened them again.

He saw his reflection, pale and scared-looking at first.But a moment later, the reflection smiled at him. Itput its hand into its pocket and pulled out a blood-red stone. It winked and put the Stone back in itspocket — and as it did so, Harry felt something heavydrop into his real pocket. Somehow — incredibly —he’d gotten the Stone.

“Well?” said Quirrell impatiently. “What do you see?”Harry screwed up his courage.

“I see myself shaking hands with Dumbledore,” heinvented. “I — I’ve won the House Cup for Gryffindor.”

Quirrell cursed again.

“Get out of the way,” he said. As Harry moved aside,he felt the Sorcerer’s Stone against his leg. Dare hemake a break for it?

But he hadn’t walked five paces before a high voicespoke, though Quirrell wasn’t moving his lips.

“He lies ... He lies ...”

“Potter, come back here!” Quirrell shouted. “Tell methe truth! What did you just see?”

The high voice spoke again.

“Let me speak to him ... face-to-face. ...”

“Master, you are not strong enough!”

“I have strength enough ... for this. ...”

Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry felt as if Devil’s Snare was rooting him to thespot. He couldn’t move a muscle. Petrified, hewatched as Quirrell reached up and began to unwraphis turban. What was going on? The turban fell away.Quirrell’s head looked strangely small without it.

Then he turned slowly on the spot.

Harry would have screamed, but he couldn’t make asound. Where there should have been a back toQuirrell’s head, there was a face, the most terribleface Harry had ever seen. It was chalk white withglaring red eyes and slits for nostrils, like a snake.

“Harry Potter ...” it whispered.

Harry tried to take a step backward but his legswouldn’t move.

“See what I have become?” the face said. “Mereshadow and vapor ... I have form only when I canshare another’s body ... but there have always beenthose willing to let me into their hearts and minds. ...Unicorn blood has strengthened me, these past weeks... you saw faithful Quirrell drinking it for me in theforest ... and once I have the Elixir of Life, I will beable to create a body of my own. ... Now ... why don’tyou give me that Stone in your pocket?”

So he knew. The feeling suddenly surged back intoHarry’s legs. He stumbled backward.

“Don’t be a fool,” snarled the face. “Better save yourown life and join me ... or you’ll meet the same end asyour parents. ... They died begging me for mercy. ...”

“LIAR!” Harry shouted suddenly.

Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Quirrell was walking backward at him, so thatVoldemort could still see him. The evil face was nowsmiling.

“How touching ...” it hissed. “I always value bravery.

... Yes, boy, your parents were brave. ... I killed yourfather first, and he put up a courageous fight ... butyour mother needn’t have died ... she was trying toprotect you. ... Now give me the Stone, unless youwant her to have died in vain.”

“NEVER!”

Harry sprang toward the flame door, but Voldemortscreamed “SEIZE HIM!” and the next second, Harryfelt Quirrell’s hand close on his wrist. At once, aneedle-sharp pain seared across Harry’s scar; hishead felt as though it was about to split in two; heyelled, struggling with all his might, and to hissurprise, Quirrell let go of him. The pain in his headlessened — he looked around wildly to see whereQuirrell had gone, and saw him hunched in pain,looking at his fingers — they were blistering before hiseyes.

“Seize him! SEIZE HIM!” shrieked Voldemort again,and Quirrell lunged, knocking Harry clean off his feet,landing on top of him, both hands around Harry’sneck — Harry’s scar was almost blinding him withpain, yet he could see Quirrell howling in agony.

“Master, I cannot hold him — my hands — myhands!”

And Quirrell, though pinning Harry to the groundwith his knees, let go of his neck and stared,bewildered, at his own palms — Harry could see theylooked burned, raw, red, and shiny.

Page | 331 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Then kill him, fool, and be done!” screechedVoldemort.

Quirrell raised his hand to perform a deadly curse,but Harry, by instinct, reached up and grabbedQuirrell’s face —

“AAAARGH!”

Quirrell rolled off him, his face blistering, too, andthen Harry knew: Quirrell couldn’t touch his bareskin, not without suffering terrible pain — his onlychance was to keep hold of Quirrell, keep him inenough pain to stop him from doing a curse.

Harry jumped to his feet, caught Quirrell by the arm,and hung on as tight as he could. Quirrell screamedand tried to throw Harry off — the pain in Harry’shead was building — he couldn’t see — he could onlyhear Quirrell’s terrible shrieks and Voldemort’s yellsof, “KILL HIM! KILL HIM!” and other voices, maybe inHarry’s own head, crying, “Harry! Harry!”

He felt Quirrell’s arm wrenched from his grasp, knewall was lost, and fell into blackness, down ... down ...down ...

Something gold was glinting just above him. TheSnitch! He tried to catch it, but his arms were tooheavy.

He blinked. It wasn’t the Snitch at all. It was a pair ofglasses. How strange.

He blinked again. The smiling face of AlbusDumbledore swam into view above him.

“Good afternoon, Harry,” said Dumbledore.

Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

Harry stared at him. Then he remembered: “Sir! TheStone! It was Quirrell! He’s got the Stone! Sir, quick —

“Calm yourself, dear boy, you are a little behind thetimes,” said Dumbledore. “Quirrell does not have theStone.”

“Then who does? Sir, I —”

“Harry, please relax, or Madam Pomfrey will have methrown out.”

Harry swallowed and looked around him. He realizedhe must be in the hospital wing. He was lying in a bedwith white linen sheets, and next to him was a tablepiled high with what looked like half the candy shop.

“Tokens from your friends and admirers,” saidDumbledore, beaming. “What happened down in thedungeons between you and Professor Quirrell is acomplete secret, so, naturally, the whole schoolknows. I believe your friends Misters Fred and GeorgeWeasley were responsible for trying to send you atoilet seat. No doubt they thought it would amuseyou. Madam Pomfrey, however, felt it might not bevery hygienic, and confiscated it.”

“How long have I been in here?”

“Three days. Mr. Ronald Weasley and Miss Grangerwill be most relieved you have come round, they havebeen extremely worried.”

“But sir, the Stone —”

“I see you are not to be distracted. Very well, theStone. Professor Quirrell did not manage to take it

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

from you. I arrived in time to prevent that, althoughyou were doing very well on your own, I must say.”

“You got there? You got Hermione’s owl?”

“We must have crossed in midair. No sooner had Ireached London than it became clear to me that theplace I should be was the one I had just left. I arrivedjust in time to pull Quirrell off you —”

“It was you.”

“I feared I might be too late.”

“You nearly were, I couldn’t have kept him off theStone much longer —”

“Not the Stone, boy, you — the effort involved nearlykilled you. For one terrible moment there, I was afraidit had. As for the Stone, it has been destroyed.”

“Destroyed?” said Harry blankly. “But your friend —Nicolas Flamel —”

“Oh, you know about Nicolas?” said Dumbledore,sounding quite delighted. “You did do the thingproperly, didn’t you? Well, Nicolas and I have had alittle chat, and agreed it’s all for the best.”

“But that means he and his wife will die, won’t they?”

“They have enough Elixir stored to set their affairs inorder and then, yes, they will die.”

Dumbledore smiled at the look of amazement onHarry’s face.

“To one as young as you, I’m sure it seems incredible,but to Nicolas and Perenelle, it really is like going to

Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

bed after a very, very long day. After all, to the well-organized mind, death is but the next greatadventure. You know, the Stone was really not such awonderful thing. As much money and life as youcould want! The two things most human beings wouldchoose above all — the trouble is, humans do have aknack of choosing precisely those things that areworst for them.”

Harry lay there, lost for words. Dumbledore hummeda little and smiled at the ceiling.

“Sir?” said Harry. “I’ve been thinking ... Sir — even ifthe Stone’s gone, Vol-, I mean, You-Know-Who —”

“Call him Voldemort, Harry. Always use the propername for things. Fear of a name increases fear of thething itself.”

“Yes, sir. Well, Voldemort’s going to try other ways ofcoming back, isn’t he? I mean, he hasn’t gone, hashe?”

“No, Harry, he has not. He is still out theresomewhere, perhaps looking for another body toshare ... not being truly alive, he cannot be killed. Heleft Quirrell to die; he shows just as little mercy to hisfollowers as his enemies. Nevertheless, Harry, whileyou may only have delayed his return to power, it willmerely take someone else who is prepared to fightwhat seems a losing battle next time — and if he isdelayed again, and again, why, he may never returnto power.”

Harry nodded, but stopped quickly, because it madehis head hurt. Then he said, “Sir, there are someother things I’d like to know, if you can tell me ...things I want to know the truth about. ...”

Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“The truth.” Dumbledore sighed. “It is a beautiful andterrible thing, and should therefore be treated withgreat caution. However, I shall answer your questionsunless I have a very good reason not to, in which caseI beg you 11 forgive me. I shall not, of course, lie.”

“Well ... Voldemort said that he only killed my motherbecause she tried to stop him from killing me. Butwhy would he want to kill me in the first place?”

Dumbledore sighed very deeply this time.

“Alas, the first thing you ask me, I cannot tell you.

Not today. Not now. You will know, one day ... put itfrom your mind for now, Harry. When you are older ...I know you hate to hear this ... when you are ready,you will know.”

And Harry knew it would be no good to argue.

“But why couldn’t Quirrell touch me?”

“Your mother died to save you. If there is one thingVoldemort cannot understand, it is love. He didn’trealize that love as powerful as your mother’s for youleaves its own mark. Not a scar, no visible sign ... tohave been loved so deeply, even though the personwho loved us is gone, will give us some protectionforever. It is in your very skin. Quirrell, full of hatred,greed, and ambition, sharing his soul with Voldemort,could not touch you for this reason. It was agony totouch a person marked by something so good.”

Dumbledore now became very interested in a bird outon the windowsill, which gave Harry time to dry hiseyes on the sheet. When he had found his voice again,Harry said, “And the Invisibility Cloak — do you knowwho sent it to me?”

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Ah — your father happened to leave it in mypossession, and I thought you might like it.”Dumbledore’s eyes twinkled. “Useful things ... yourfather used it mainly for sneaking off to the kitchensto steal food when he was here.”

“And there’s something else ...”

“Fire away.”

“Quirrell said Snape —”

“Professor Snape, Harry.”

“Yes, him — Quirrell said he hates me because hehated my father. Is that true?”

“Well, they did rather detest each other. Not unlikeyourself and Mr. Malfoy. And then, your father didsomething Snape could never forgive.”

“What?”

“He saved his life.”

“What?”

“Yes ...” said Dumbledore dreamily. “Funny, the waypeople’s minds work, isn’t it? Professor Snapecouldn’t bear being in your father’s debt. ... I dobelieve he worked so hard to protect you this yearbecause he felt that would make him and your fathereven. Then he could go back to hating your father’smemory in peace. ...”

Harry tried to understand this but it made his headpound, so he stopped.

“And sir, there’s one more thing ...”

Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Just the one?”

“How did I get the Stone out of the mirror?”

“Ah, now, I’m glad you asked me that. It was one ofmy more brilliant ideas, and between you and me,that’s saying something. You see, only one whowanted to find the Stone — find it, but not use it —would be able to get it, otherwise they’d just seethemselves making gold or drinking Elixir of Life. Mybrain surprises even me sometimes. ... Now, enoughquestions. I suggest you make a start on thesesweets. Ah! Bertie Bott’s Every Flavor Beans! I wasunfortunate enough in my youth to come across avomit-flavored one, and since then I’m afraid I’verather lost my liking for them — but I think I’ll be safewith a nice toffee, don’t you?”

He smiled and popped the golden-brown bean into hismouth. Then he choked and said, “Alas! Ear wax!”

Madam Pomfrey, the nurse, was a nice woman, butvery strict.

“Just five minutes,” Harry pleaded.

“Absolutely not.”

“You let Professor Dumbledore in. ...”

“Well, of course, that was the headmaster, quitedifferent. You need rest.”

“I am resting, look, lying down and everything. Oh, goon, Madam Pomfrey ...”

“Oh, very well,” she said. “But five minutes only.”

And she let Ron and Hermione in.

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Harryl”

Hermione looked ready to fling her arms around himagain, but Harry was glad she held herself in as hishead was still very sore.

“Oh, Harry, we were sure you were going to —Dumbledore was so worried —”

“The whole school’s talking about it,” said Ron. “Whatreally happened?”

It was one of those rare occasions when the true storyis even more strange and exciting than the wildrumors. Harry told them everything: Quirrell; themirror; the Stone; and Voldemort. Ron and Hermionewere a very good audience; they gasped in all theright places, and when Harry told them what wasunder Quirrell’s turban, Hermione screamed out loud.

“So the Stone’s gone?” said Ron finally. “Flamel’s justgoing to die?”

“That’s what I said, but Dumbledore thinks that —what was it? — ‘to the well-organized mind, death isbut the next great adventure.’ ”

“I always said he was off his rocker,” said Ron,looking quite impressed at how crazy his hero was.

“So what happened to you two?” said Harry.

“Well, I got back all right,” said Hermione. “I broughtRon round — that took a while — and we weredashing up to the owlery to contact Dumbledore whenwe met him in the entrance hall — he already knew —he just said, ‘Harry’s gone after him, hasn’t he?’ andhurtled off to the third floor.”

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“D’you think he meant you to do it?” said Ron.“Sending you your fathers cloak and everything?”

“Well,” Hermione exploded, “if he did — I mean to say— that’s terrible — you could have been killed.”

“No, it isn’t,” said Harry thoughtfully. “He’s a funnyman, Dumbledore. I think he sort of wanted to giveme a chance. I think he knows more or lesseverything that goes on here, you know. I reckon hehad a pretty good idea we were going to try, andinstead of stopping us, he just taught us enough tohelp. I don’t think it was an accident he let me findout how the mirror worked. It’s almost like he thoughtI had the right to face Voldemort if I could. ...”

“Yeah, Dumbledore’s off his rocker, all right,” saidRon proudly. “Listen, you’ve got to be up for the end-of-year feast tomorrow. The points are all in andSlytherin won, of course — you missed the lastQuidditch match, we were steamrollered byRavenclaw without you — but the food’ll be good.”

At that moment, Madam Pomfrey bustled over.

“You’ve had nearly fifteen minutes, now OUT,” shesaid firmly.

•k k k

After a good night’s sleep, Harry felt nearly back tonormal.

“I want to go to the feast,” he told Madam Pomfrey asshe straightened his many candy boxes. “I can, can’tI?”

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Professor Dumbledore says you are to be allowed togo,” she said sniffily, as though in her opinionProfessor Dumbledore didn’t realize how risky feastscould be. “And you have another visitor.”

“Oh, good,” said Harry. “Who is it?”

Hagrid sidled through the door as he spoke. As usualwhen he was indoors, Hagrid looked too big to beallowed. He sat down next to Harry, took one look athim, and burst into tears.

“It’s — all — my — ruddy — fault!” he sobbed, hisface in his hands. “I told the evil git how ter get pastFluffy! I told him! It was the only thing he didn’tknow, an’ I told him! Yeh could’ve died! All fer adragon egg! I’ll never drink again! I should be chuckedout an’ made ter live as a Muggle!”

“Hagrid!” said Harry, shocked to see Hagrid shakingwith grief and remorse, great tears leaking down intohis beard. “Hagrid, he’d have found out somehow,this is Voldemort we’re talking about, he’d have foundout even if you hadn’t told him.”

“Yeh could’ve died!” sobbed Hagrid. “An’ don’ say thename!”

“VOLDEMORT!” Harry bellowed, and Hagrid was soshocked, he stopped crying. “I’ve met him and I’mcalling him by his name. Please cheer up, Hagrid, wesaved the Stone, it’s gone, he can’t use it. Have aChocolate Frog, I’ve got loads. ...”

Hagrid wiped his nose on the back of his hand andsaid, “That reminds me. I’ve got yeh a present.”

“It’s not a stoat sandwich, is it?” said Harryanxiously, and at last Hagrid gave a weak chuckle.

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Nah. Dumbledore gave me the day off yesterday terfix it. ’Course, he shoulda sacked me instead —anyway, got yeh this ...”

It seemed to be a handsome, leather-covered book.Harry opened it curiously. It was full of wizardphotographs. Smiling and waving at him from everypage were his mother and father.

“Sent owls off ter all yer parents’ old school friends,askin’ fer photos ... knew yeh didn’ have any ... d’yehlike it?”

Harry couldn’t speak, but Hagrid understood.

Harry made his way down to the end-of-year feastalone that night. He had been held up by MadamPomfrey’s fussing about, insisting on giving him onelast checkup, so the Great Hall was already full. Itwas decked out in the Slytherin colors of green andsilver to celebrate Slytherin’s winning the House Cupfor the seventh year in a row. A huge banner showingthe Slytherin serpent covered the wall behind theHigh Table.

When Harry walked in there was a sudden hush, andthen everybody started talking loudly at once. Heslipped into a seat between Ron and Hermione at theGryffindor table and tried to ignore the fact thatpeople were standing up to look at him.

Fortunately, Dumbledore arrived moments later. Thebabble died away.

“Another year gone!” Dumbledore said cheerfully.

“And I must trouble you with an old man’s wheezingwaffle before we sink our teeth into our deliciousfeast. What a year it has been! Hopefully your headsare all a little fuller than they were ... you have thePage | 342 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

whole summer ahead to get them nice and emptybefore next year starts. ...

“Now, as I understand it, the House Cup here needsawarding, and the points stand thus: In fourth place,Gryffindor, with three hundred and twelve points; inthird, Hufflepuff, with three hundred and fifty-two;Ravenclaw has four hundred and twenty-six andSlytherin, four hundred and seventy-two.”

A storm of cheering and stamping broke out from theSlytherin table. Harry could see Draco Malfoy banginghis goblet on the table. It was a sickening sight.

“Yes, yes, well done, Slytherin,” said Dumbledore.“However, recent events must be taken into account.”

The room went very still. The Slytherins’ smiles fadeda little.

“Ahem,” said Dumbledore. “I have a few last-minutepoints to dish out. Let me see. Yes ...

“First — to Mr. Ronald Weasley ...”

Ron went purple in the face; he looked like a radishwith a bad sunburn.

"... for the best-played game of chess Hogwarts hasseen in many years, I award Gryffindor House fiftypoints.”

Gryffindor cheers nearly raised the bewitched ceiling;the stars overhead seemed to quiver. Percy could beheard telling the other prefects, “My brother, youknow! My youngest brother! Got past McGonagall’sgiant chess set!”

At last there was silence again.

Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Second — to Miss Hermione Granger ... for the use ofcool logic in the face of fire, I award Gryffindor Housefifty points.”

Hermione buried her face in her arms; Harry stronglysuspected she had burst into tears. Gryffindors upand down the table were beside themselves — theywere a hundred points up.

“Third — to Mr. Harry Potter ...” said Dumbledore.

The room went deadly quiet. "... for pure nerve andoutstanding courage, I award Gryffindor House sixtypoints.”

The din was deafening. Those who could add up whileyelling themselves hoarse knew that Gryffindor nowhad four hundred and seventy-two points — exactlythe same as Slytherin. They had tied for the HouseCup — if only Dumbledore had given Harry just onemore point.

Dumbledore raised his hand. The room gradually fellsilent.

“There are all kinds of courage,” said Dumbledore,smiling. “It takes a great deal of bravery to stand upto our enemies, but just as much to stand up to ourfriends. I therefore award ten points to Mr. NevilleLongbottom.”

Someone standing outside the Great Hall might wellhave thought some sort of explosion had taken place,so loud was the noise that erupted from theGryffindor table. Harry, Ron, and Hermione stood upto yell and cheer as Neville, white with shock,disappeared under a pile of people hugging him. Hehad never won so much as a point for Gryffindorbefore. Harry, still cheering, nudged Ron in the ribsand pointed at Malfoy, who couldn’t have looked morePage | 344 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

stunned and horrified if he’d just had the Body-BindCurse put on him.

“Which means,” Dumbledore called over the storm ofapplause, for even Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff werecelebrating the downfall of Slytherin, “we need a littlechange of decoration.”

He clapped his hands. In an instant, the greenhangings became scarlet and the silver became gold;the huge Slytherin serpent vanished and a toweringGryffindor lion took its place. Snape was shakingProfessor McGonagall’s hand, with a horrible, forcedsmile. He caught Harry’s eye and Harry knew at oncethat Snape’s feelings toward him hadn’t changed onejot. This didn’t worry Harry. It seemed as though lifewould be back to normal next year, or as normal as itever was at Hogwarts.

It was the best evening of Harry’s life, better thanwinning at Quidditch, or Christmas, or knocking outmountain trolls ... he would never, ever forget tonight.

Harry had almost forgotten that the exam resultswere still to come, but come they did. To their greatsurprise, both he and Ron passed with good marks;Hermione, of course, had the best grades of the firstyears. Even Neville scraped through, his goodHerbology mark making up for his abysmal Potionsone. They had hoped that Goyle, who was almost asstupid as he was mean, might be thrown out, but hehad passed, too. It was a shame, but as Ron said, youcouldn’t have everything in life.

And suddenly, their wardrobes were empty, theirtrunks were packed, Neville’s toad was found lurkingin a corner of the toilets; notes were handed out to allstudents, warning them not to use magic over theholidays (“I always hope they’ll forget to give usPage | 345 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

these,” said Fred Weasley sadly); Hagrid was there totake them down to the fleet of boats that sailed acrossthe lake; they were boarding the Hogwarts Express;talking and laughing as the countryside becamegreener and tidier; eating Bertie Bott’s Every FlavorBeans as they sped past Muggle towns; pulling offtheir wizard robes and putting on jackets and coats;pulling into platform nine and three-quarters atKing’s Cross station.

It took quite a while for them all to get off theplatform. A wizened old guard was up by the ticketbarrier, letting them go through the gate in twos andthrees so they didn’t attract attention by all burstingout of a solid wall at once and alarming the Muggles.

“You must come and stay this summer,” said Ron,“both of you — I’ll send you an owl.”

“Thanks,” said Harry, “I’ll need something to lookforward to.”

People jostled them as they moved forward toward thegateway back to the Muggle world. Some of themcalled:

“Bye, Harry!”

“See you, Potter!”

“Still famous,” said Ron, grinning at him.

“Not where I’m going, I promise you,” said Harry.

He, Ron, and Hermione passed through the gatewaytogether.

“There he is, Mom, there he is, look!”

Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

It was Ginny Weasley, Ron’s younger sister, but shewasn’t pointing at Ron.

“Harry Potter!” she squealed. “Look, Mom! I can see“Be quiet, Ginny, and it’s rude to point.”

Mrs. Weasley smiled down at them.

“Busy year?” she said.

“Very,” said Harry. “Thanks for the fudge and thesweater, Mrs. Weasley.”

“Oh, it was nothing, dear.”

“Ready, are you?”

It was Uncle Vernon, still purple-faced, stillmustached, still looking furious at the nerve of Harry,carrying an owl in a cage in a station full of ordinarypeople. Behind him stood Aunt Petunia and Dudley,looking terrified at the very sight of Harry.

“You must be Harry’s family!” said Mrs. Weasley.

“In a manner of speaking,” said Uncle Vernon. “Hurryup, boy, we haven’t got all day.” He walked away.

Harry hung back for a last word with Ron andHermione.

“See you over the summer, then.”

“Hope you have — er — a good holiday,” saidHermione, looking uncertainly after Uncle Vernon,shocked that anyone could be so unpleasant.

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, I will,” said Harry, and they were surprised atthe grin that was spreading over his face. “They don’tknow we’re not allowed to use magic at home. I’mgoing to have a lot of fun with Dudley this summer...”

Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Philosophers Stone - J.K. Rowling





