Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


Harry Potter Series (PDFs)





Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


J.K. Rowling

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.5)



I

*

THE DARK LORD ASCENDING

The two men appeared out of nowhere, a few yardsapart in the narrow, moonlit lane. For a second theystood quite still, wands directed at each other’schests; then, recognizing each other, they stowedtheir wands beneath their cloaks and started walkingbriskly in the same direction.

“News?” asked the taller of the two.

“The best,” replied Severus Snape.

The lane was bordered on the left by wild, low-growing brambles, on the right by a high, neatlymanicured hedge. The men’s long cloaks flappedaround their ankles as they marched.

“Thought I might be late,” said Yaxley, his bluntfeatures sliding in and out of sight as the branches ofoverhanging trees broke the moonlight. “It was a littletrickier than I expected. But I hope he will besatisfied. You sound confident that your reception willbe good?”

Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



Snape nodded, but did not elaborate. They turnedright, into a wide driveway that led off the lane. Thehigh hedge curved with them, running off into thedistance beyond the pair of impressive wrought-irongates barring the men’s way. Neither of them brokestep: In silence both raised their left arms in a kind ofsalute and passed straight through, as though thedark metal were smoke.

The yew hedges muffled the sound of the men’sfootsteps. There was a rustle somewhere to theirright: Yaxley drew his wand again, pointing it over hiscompanion’s head, but the source of the noise provedto be nothing more than a pure-white peacock,strutting majestically along the top of the hedge.

“He always did himself well, Lucius. Peacocks ...”Yaxley thrust his wand back under his cloak with asnort.

A handsome manor house grew out of the darkness atthe end of the straight drive, lights glinting in thediamond-paned downstairs windows. Somewhere inthe dark garden beyond the hedge a fountain wasplaying. Gravel crackled beneath their feet as Snapeand Yaxley sped toward the front door, which swunginward at their approach, though nobody had visiblyopened it.

The hallway was large, dimly lit, and sumptuouslydecorated, with a magnificent carpet covering most ofthe stone floor. The eyes of the pale-faced portraits onthe walls followed Snape and Yaxley as they strodepast. The two men halted at a heavy wooden doorleading into the next room, hesitated for the space ofa heartbeat, then Snape turned the bronze handle.

The drawing room was full of silent people, sitting at along and ornate table. The room’s usual furniture had

Page | 3 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

been pushed carelessly up against the walls.Illumination came from a roaring fire beneath ahandsome marble mantelpiece surmounted by agilded mirror. Snape and Yaxley lingered for amoment on the threshold. As their eyes grewaccustomed to the lack of light, they were drawnupward to the strangest feature of the scene: anapparently unconscious human figure hanging upsidedown over the table, revolving slowly as if suspendedby an invisible rope, and reflected in the mirror and inthe bare, polished surface of the table below. None ofthe people seated underneath this singular sight waslooking at it except for a pale young man sittingalmost directly below it. He seemed unable to preventhimself from glancing upward every minute or so.

“Yaxley. Snape,” said a high, clear voice from the headof the table. “You are very nearly late.”

The speaker was seated directly in front of thefireplace, so that it was difficult, at first, for the newarrivals to make out more than his silhouette. As theydrew nearer, however, his face shone through thegloom, hairless, snakelike, with slits for nostrils andgleaming red eyes whose pupils were vertical. He wasso pale that he seemed to emit a pearly glow.

“Severus, here,” said Voldemort, indicating the seaton his immediate right. “Yaxley — beside Dolohov.”

The two men took their allotted places. Most of theeyes around the table followed Snape, and it was tohim that Voldemort spoke first.

“So?”

“My Lord, the Order of the Phoenix intends to moveHarry Potter from his current place of safety onSaturday next, at nightfall.”

Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The interest around the table sharpened palpably:Some stiffened, others fidgeted, all gazing at Snapeand Voldemort.

“Saturday ... at nightfall,” repeated Voldemort. Hisred eyes fastened upon Snape’s black ones with suchintensity that some of the watchers looked away,apparently fearful that they themselves would bescorched by the ferocity of the gaze. Snape, however,looked calmly back into Voldemort’s face and, after amoment or two, Voldemort’s lipless mouth curved intosomething like a smile.

“Good. Very good. And this information comes —”

“— from the source we discussed,” said Snape.

“My Lord.”

Yaxley had leaned forward to look down the long tableat Voldemort and Snape. All faces turned to him.

“My Lord, I have heard differently.”

Yaxley waited, but Voldemort did not speak, so hewent on, “Dawlish, the Auror, let slip that Potter willnot be moved until the thirtieth, the night before theboy turns seventeen.”

Snape was smiling.

“My source told me that there are plans to lay a falsetrail; this must be it. No doubt a Confundus Charmhas been placed upon Dawlish. It would not be thefirst time; he is known to be susceptible.”

“I assure you, my Lord, Dawlish seemed quitecertain,” said Yaxley.

Page | 5

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“If he has been Confunded, naturally he is certain,”said Snape. “I assure you, Yaxley, the Auror Officewill play no further part in the protection of HarryPotter. The Order believes that we have infiltrated theMinistry.”

“The Order’s got one thing right, then, eh?” said asquat man sitting a short distance from Yaxley; hegave a wheezy giggle that was echoed here and therealong the table.

Voldemort did not laugh. His gaze had wanderedupward to the body revolving slowly overhead, and heseemed to be lost in thought.

“My Lord,” Yaxley went on, “Dawlish believes anentire party of Aurors will be used to transfer the boy

Voldemort held up a large white hand, and Yaxleysubsided at once, watching resentfully as Voldemortturned back to Snape.

“Where are they going to hide the boy next?”

“At the home of one of the Order,” said Snape. “Theplace, according to the source, has been given everyprotection that the Order and Ministry together couldprovide. I think that there is little chance of takinghim once he is there, my Lord, unless, of course, theMinistry has fallen before next Saturday, which mightgive us the opportunity to discover and undo enoughof the enchantments to break through the rest.”

“Well, Yaxley?” Voldemort called down the table, thefirelight glinting strangely in his red eyes. “Will theMinistry have fallen by next Saturday?”

Page | 6

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Once again, all heads turned. Yaxley squared hisshoulders.

“My Lord, I have good news on that score. I have —with difficulty, and after great effort — suceeded inplacing an Imperius Curse upon Pius Thicknesse.”

Many of those sitting around Yaxley lookedimpressed; his neighbor, Dolohov, a man with a long,twisted face, clapped him on the back.

“It is a start,” said Voldemort. “But Thicknesse is onlyone man. Scrimgeour must be surrounded by ourpeople before I act. One failed attempt on theMinister’s life will set me back a long way.”

“Yes — my Lord, that is true — but you know, asHead of the Department of Magical Law Enforcement,Thicknesse has regular contact not only with theMinister himself, but also with the Heads of all theother Ministry departments. It will, I think, be easynow that we have such a high-ranking official underour control, to subjugate the others, and then theycan all work together to bring Scrimgeour down.”

“As long as our friend Thicknesse is not discoveredbefore he has converted the rest,” said Voldemort. “Atany rate, it remains unlikely that the Ministry will bemine before next Saturday. If we cannot touch theboy at his destination, then it must be done while hetravels.”

“We are at an advantage there, my Lord,” said Yaxley,who seemed determined to receive some portion ofapproval. “We now have several people planted withinthe Department of Magical Transport. If PotterApparates or uses the Floo Network, we shall knowimmediately.”

Page | 7

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“He will not do either,” said Snape. “The Order iseschewing any form of transport that is controlled orregulated by the Ministry; they mistrust everything todo with the place.”

“All the better,” said Voldemort. “He will have to movein the open. Easier to take, by far.”

Again, Voldemort looked up at the slowly revolvingbody as he went on, “I shall attend to the boy inperson. There have been too many mistakes whereHarry Potter is concerned. Some of them have beenmy own. That Potter lives is due more to my errorsthan to his triumphs.”

The company around the table watched Voldemortapprehensively, each of them, by his or herexpression, afraid that they might be blamed forHarry Potter’s continued existence. Voldemort,however, seemed to be speaking more to himself thanto any of them, still addressing the unconscious bodyabove him.

“I have been careless, and so have been thwarted byluck and chance, those wreckers of all but the best-laid plans. But I know better now. I understand thosethings that I did not understand before. I must be theone to kill Harry Potter, and I shall be.”

At these words, seemingly in response to them, asudden wail sounded, a terrible, drawn-out cry ofmisery and pain. Many of those at the table lookeddownward, startled, for the sound had seemed toissue from below their feet.

“Wormtail,” said Voldemort, with no change in hisquiet, thoughtful tone, and without removing his eyesfrom the revolving body above, “have I not spoken toyou about keeping our prisoner quiet?”

Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, m-my Lord,” gasped a small man halfway downthe table, who had been sitting so low in his chairthat it had appeared, at first glance, to beunoccupied. Now he scrambled from his seat andscurried from the room, leaving nothing behind himbut a curious gleam of silver.

“As I was saying,” continued Voldemort, looking againat the tense faces of his followers, “I understandbetter now. I shall need, for instance, to borrow awand from one of you before I go to kill Potter.”

The faces around him displayed nothing but shock;he might have announced that he wanted to borrowone of their arms.

“No volunteers?” said Voldemort. “Let’s see ... Lucius,I see no reason for you to have a wand anymore.”

Lucius Malfoy looked up. His skin appeared yellowishand waxy in the firelight, and his eyes were sunkenand shadowed. When he spoke, his voice was hoarse.

“My Lord?”

“Your wand, Lucius. I require your wand.”

Malfoy glanced sideways at his wife. She was staringstraight ahead, quite as pale as he was, her longblonde hair hanging down her back, but beneath thetable her slim fingers closed briefly on his wrist. Ather touch, Malfoy put his hand into his robes,withdrew a wand, and passed it along to Voldemort,who held it up in front of his red eyes, examining itclosely.

“What is it?”

Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the creature absently with long thin fingers, stilllooking at Lucius Malfoy.

“Why do the Malfoys look so unhappy with their lot?

Is my return, my rise to power, not the very thing theyprofessed to desire for so many years?”

“Of course, my Lord,” said Lucius Malfoy. His handshook as he wiped sweat from his upper lip. “We diddesire it — we do.”

To Malfoy’s left, his wife made an odd, stiff nod, hereyes averted from Voldemort and the snake. To hisright, his son, Draco, who had been gazing up at theinert body overhead, glanced quickly at Voldemortand away again, terrified to make eye contact.

“My Lord,” said a dark woman halfway down thetable, her voice constricted with emotion, “it is anhonor to have you here, in our family’s house. Therecan be no higher pleasure.”

She sat beside her sister, as unlike her in looks, withher dark hair and heavily lidded eyes, as she was inbearing and demeanor; where Narcissa sat rigid andimpassive, Bellatrix leaned toward Voldemort, formere words could not demonstrate her longing forcloseness.

“No higher pleasure,” repeated Voldemort, his headtilted a little to one side as he considered Bellatrix.“That means a great deal, Bellatrix, from you.”

Her face flooded with color; her eyes welled with tearsof delight.

“My Lord knows I speak nothing but the truth!”

Page | 11

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No higher pleasure ... even compared with the happyevent that, I hear, has taken place in your family thisweek?”

She stared at him, her lips parted, evidently confused.

“I don’t know what you mean, my Lord.”

“I’m talking about your niece, Bellatrix. And yours,Lucius and Narcissa. She has just married thewerewolf, Remus Lupin. You must be so proud.”

There was an eruption of jeering laughter fromaround the table. Many leaned forward to exchangegleeful looks; a few thumped the table with their fists.The great snake, disliking the disturbance, opened itsmouth wide and hissed angrily, but the Death Eatersdid not hear it, so jubilant were they at Bellatrix andthe Malfoys’ humiliation. Bellatrix’s face, so recentlyflushed with happiness, had turned an ugly, blotchyred.

“She is no niece of ours, my Lord,” she cried over theoutpouring of mirth. “We — Narcissa and I — havenever set eyes on our sister since she married theMudblood. This brat has nothing to do with either ofus, nor any beast she marries.”

“What say you, Draco?” asked Voldemort, and thoughhis voice was quiet, it carried clearly through thecatcalls and jeers. “Will you babysit the cubs?”

The hilarity mounted; Draco Malfoy looked in terror athis father, who was staring down into his own lap,then caught his mother’s eye. She shook her headalmost imperceptibly, then resumed her own deadpanstare at the opposite wall.

Page | 12

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Enough,” said Voldemort, stroking the angry snake.“Enough.”

And the laughter died at once.

“Many of our oldest family trees become a littlediseased over time,” he said as Bellatrix gazed at him,breathless and imploring. “You must prune yours,must you not, to keep it healthy? Cut away thoseparts that threaten the health of the rest.”

“Yes, my Lord,” whispered Bellatrix, and her eyesswam with tears of gratitude again. “At the firstchance!”

“You shall have it,” said Voldemort. “And in yourfamily, so in the world ... we shall cut away thecanker that infects us until only those of the trueblood remain. ...”

Voldemort raised Lucius Malfoy’s wand, pointed itdirectly at the slowly revolving figure suspended overthe table, and gave it a tiny flick. The figure came tolife with a groan and began to struggle againstinvisible bonds.

“Do you recognize our guest, Severus?” askedVoldemort.

Snape raised his eyes to the upside-down face. All ofthe Death Eaters were looking up at the captive now,as though they had been given permission to showcuriosity. As she revolved to face the firelight, thewoman said in a cracked and terrified voice, “Severus!Help me!”

“Ah, yes,” said Snape as the prisoner turned slowlyaway again.

Page | 13

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“And you, Draco?” asked Voldemort, stroking thesnake’s snout with his wand-free hand. Draco shookhis head jerkily. Now that the woman had woken, heseemed unable to look at her anymore.

“But you would not have taken her classes,” saidVoldemort. “For those of you who do not know, we arejoined here tonight by Charity Burbage who, untilrecently, taught at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft andWizardry.”

There were small noises of comprehension around thetable. A broad, hunched woman with pointed teethcackled.

“Yes ... Professor Burbage taught the children ofwitches and wizards all about Muggles ... how theyare not so different from us ...”

One of the Death Eaters spat on the floor. CharityBurbage revolved to face Snape again.

“Severus ... please ... please ...”

“Silence,” said Voldemort, with another twitch ofMalfoy’s wand, and Charity fell silent as if gagged.

“Not content with corrupting and polluting the mindsof Wizarding children, last week Professor Burbagewrote an impassioned defense of Mudbloods in theDaily Prophet Wizards, she says, must accept thesethieves of their knowledge and magic. The dwindlingof the purebloods is, says Professor Burbage, a mostdesirable circumstance. ... She would have us allmate with Muggles ... or, no doubt, werewolves. ...”

Nobody laughed this time: There was no mistakingthe anger and contempt in Voldemort’s voice. For thethird time, Charity Burbage revolved to face Snape.Tears were pouring from her eyes into her hair. Snape

Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

looked back at her, quite impassive, as she turnedslowly away from him again.

“Avada Kedavra.”

The flash of green light illuminated every corner of theroom. Charity fell, with a resounding crash, onto thetable below, which trembled and creaked. Several ofthe Death Eaters leapt back in their chairs. Draco fellout of his onto the floor.

“Dinner, Nagini,” said Voldemort softly, and the greatsnake swayed and slithered from his shoulders ontothe polished wood.

Page | 15

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





IN MEMORIAM

Harry was bleeding. Clutching his right hand in hisleft and swearing under his breath, he shoulderedopen his bedroom door. There was a crunch ofbreaking china: He had trodden on a cup of cold teathat had been sitting on the floor outside his bedroomdoor.

“What the — ?”

He looked around; the landing of number four, PrivetDrive, was deserted. Possibly the cup of tea wasDudley’s idea of a clever booby trap. Keeping hisbleeding hand elevated, Harry scraped the fragmentsof cup together with the other hand and threw theminto the already crammed bin just visible inside hisbedroom door. Then he tramped across to thebathroom to run his finger under the tap.

It was stupid, pointless, irritating beyond belief thathe still had four days left of being unable to performmagic ... but he had to admit to himself that thisjagged cut in his finger would have defeated him. He

Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

had never learned how to repair wounds, and now hecame to think of it — particularly in light of hisimmediate plans — this seemed a serious flaw in hismagical education. Making a mental note to askHermione how it was done, he used a large wad oftoilet paper to mop up as much of the tea as he could,before returning to his bedroom and slamming thedoor behind him.

Harry had spent the morning completely emptying hisschool trunk for the first time since he had packed itsix years ago. At the start of the intervening schoolyears, he had merely skimmed off the topmost threequarters of the contents and replaced or updatedthem, leaving a layer of general debris at the bottom— old quills, desiccated beetle eyes, single socks thatno longer fit. Minutes previously, Harry had plungedhis hand into this mulch, experienced a stabbing painin the fourth finger of his right hand, and withdrawnit to see a lot of blood.

He now proceeded a little more cautiously. Kneelingdown beside the trunk again, he groped around in thebottom and, after retrieving an old badge thatflickered feebly between Support CEDRIC DIGGORYand POTTER STINKS, a cracked and worn-outSneakoscope, and a gold locket inside which a notesigned R.A.B. had been hidden, he finally discoveredthe sharp edge that had done the damage. Herecognized it at once. It was a two-inch-long fragmentof the enchanted mirror that his dead godfather,Sirius, had given him. Harry laid it aside and feltcautiously around the trunk for the rest, but nothingmore remained of his godfather’s last gift exceptpowdered glass, which clung to the deepest layer ofdebris like glittering grit.

Harry sat up and examined the jagged piece on whichhe had cut himself, seeing nothing but his own bright

Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

green eye reflected back at him. Then he placed thefragment on top of that morning’s Daily Prophet,which lay unread on the bed, and attempted to stemthe sudden upsurge of bitter memories, the stabs ofregret and of longing the discovery of the brokenmirror had occasioned, by attacking the rest of therubbish in the trunk.

It took another hour to empty it completely, throwaway the useless items, and sort the remainder inpiles according to whether or not he would need themfrom now on. His school and Quidditch robes,cauldron, parchment, quills, and most of histextbooks were piled in a corner, to be left behind. Hewondered what his aunt and uncle would do withthem; burn them in the dead of night, probably, as ifthey were the evidence of some dreadful crime. HisMuggle clothing, Invisibility Cloak, potion-making kit,certain books, the photograph album Hagrid had oncegiven him, a stack of letters, and his wand had beenrepacked into an old rucksack. In a front pocket werethe Marauder’s Map and the locket with the notesigned R.A.B. inside it. The locket was accorded thisplace of honor not because it was valuable — in allusual senses it was worthless — but because of whatit had cost to attain it.

This left a sizable stack of newspapers sitting on hisdesk beside his snowy owl, Hedwig: one for each ofthe days Harry had spent at Privet Drive thissummer.

He got up off the floor, stretched, and moved across tohis desk. Hedwig made no movement as he began toflick through the newspapers, throwing them onto therubbish pile one by one. The owl was asleep, or elsefaking; she was angry with Harry about the limitedamount of time she was allowed out of her cage at themoment.

Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

As he neared the bottom of the pile of newspapers,Harry slowed down, searching for one particular issuethat he knew had arrived shortly after he hadreturned to Privet Drive for the summer; heremembered that there had been a small mention onthe front about the resignation of Charity Burbage,the Muggle Studies teacher at Hogwarts. At last hefound it. Turning to page ten, he sank into his deskchair and reread the article he had been looking for.

ALBUS DUMBLEDORE REMEMBERED

by Elphias Doge

I met Albus Dumbledore at the age of eleven, on ourfirst day at Hogwarts. Our mutual attraction wasundoubtedly due to the fact that we both feltourselves to be outsiders. I had contracted dragonpox shortly before arriving at school, and while I wasno longer contagious, my pockmarked visage andgreenish hue did not encourage many to approachme. For his part, Albus had arrived at Hogwartsunder the burden of unwanted notoriety. Scarcely ayear previously, his father, Percival, had beenconvicted of a savage and well-publicized attack uponthree young Muggles.

Albus never attempted to deny that his father (whowas to die in Azkaban) had committed this crime; onthe contrary, when I plucked up courage to ask him, heassured me that he knew his father to be guilty.Beyond that, Dumbledore refused to speak of the sadbusiness, though many attempted to make him do so.Some, indeed, were disposed to praise his father’saction and assumed that Albus too was a Muggle-hater. They could not have been more mistaken: Asanybody who knew Albus would attest, he neverrevealed the remotest anti-Muggle tendency. Indeed,

Page | 19

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

his determined support for Muggle rights gained himmany enemies in subsequent years.

In a matter of months, however, Albus’s own famehad begun to eclipse that of his father. By the end ofhis first year he would never again be known as theson of a Muggle-hater, but as nothing more or lessthan the most brilliant student ever seen at theschool. Those of us who were privileged to be hisfriends benefited from his example, not to mention hishelp and encouragement, with which he was alwaysgenerous. He confessed to me in later life that heknew even then that his greatest pleasure lay inteaching.

He not only won every prize of note that the schooloffered, he was soon in regular correspondence withthe most notable magical names of the day, includingNicolas Flamel, the celebrated alchemist; BathildaBagshot, the noted historian; and Adalbert Waffling,the magical theoretician. Several of his papers foundtheir way into learned publications such asTransfiguration Today, Challenges in Charming, andThe Practical Potioneer. Dumbledore’s future careerseemed likely to be meteoric, and the only questionthat remained was when he would become Minister ofMagic. Though it was often predicted in later years thathe was on the point of taking the job, however, henever had Ministerial ambitions.

Three years after we had started at Hogwarts, Albus’sbrother, Aberforth, arrived at school. They were notalike; Aberforth was never bookish and, unlike Albus,preferred to settle arguments by dueling rather thanthrough reasoned discussion. However, it is quitewrong to suggest, as some have, that the brotherswere not friends. They rubbed along as comfortably astwo such different boys could do. In fairness toAberforth, it must be admitted that living in Albus’sPage | 20 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

shadow cannot have been an altogether comfortableexperience. Being continually outshone was anoccupational hazard of being his friend and cannothave been any more pleasurable as a brother.

When Albus and I left Hogwarts we intended to takethe then-traditional tour of the world together, visitingand observing foreign wizards, before pursuing ourseparate careers. However, tragedy intervened. On thevery eve of our trip, Albus’s mother, Kendra, died,leaving Albus the head, and sole breadwinner, of thefamily. I postponed my departure long enough to paymy respects at Kendra’s funeral, then left for whatwas now to be a solitary journey. With a youngerbrother and sister to care for, and little gold left tothem, there could no longer be any question of Albusaccompanying me.

That was the period of our lives when we had leastcontact. I wrote to Albus, describing, perhapsinsensitively, the wonders of my journey, from narrowescapes from chimaeras in Greece to the experimentsof the Egyptian alchemists. His letters told me little ofhis day-to-day life, which I guessed to be frustratinglydull for such a brilliant wizard. Immersed in my ownexperiences, it was with horror that I heard, towardthe end of my year’s travels, that yet another tragedyhad struck the Dumbledores: the death of his sister,Ariana.

Though Ariana had been in poor health for a longtime, the blow, coming so soon after the loss of theirmother, had a profound effect on both of herbrothers. All those closest to Albus — and I countmyself one of that lucky number — agree thatAriana’s death, and Albus’s feeling of personalresponsibility for it (though, of course, he wasguiltless), left their mark upon him forevermore.

Page | 21

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

I returned home to find a young man who hadexperienced a much older person’s suffering. Albuswas more reserved than before, and much less light-hearted. To add to his misery, the loss of Ariana hadled, not to a renewed closeness between Albus andAberforth, but to an estrangement. (In time this wouldlift — in later years they reestablished, if not a closerelationship, then certainly a cordial one.) However,he rarely spoke of his parents or of Ariana from thenon, and his friends learned not to mention them.

Other quills will describe the triumphs of the followingyears. Dumbledore’s innumerable contributions to thestore of Wizarding knowledge, including his discoveryof the twelve uses of dragon’s blood, will benefitgenerations to come, as will the wisdom he displayedin the many judgments he made while Chief Warlock ofthe Wizengamot. They say, still, that no Wizarding duelever matched that between Dumbledore andGrindelwald in 1945. Those who witnessed it havewritten of the terror and the awe they felt as theywatched these two extraordinary wizards do battle.Dumbledore’s triumph, and its consequences for theWizarding world, are considered a turning point inmagical history to match the introduction of theInternational Statute of Secrecy or the downfall of He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named.

Albus Dumbledore was never proud or vain; he couldfind something to value in anyone, howeverapparently insignificant or wretched, and I believethat his early losses endowed him with greathumanity and sympathy. I shall miss his friendshipmore than I can say, but my loss is as nothingcompared to the Wizarding world’s. That he was themost inspiring and the best loved of all Hogwartsheadmasters cannot be in question. He died as helived: working always for the greater good and, to hislast hour, as willing to stretch out a hand to a smallPage | 22 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

boy with dragon pox as he was on the day that I methim.

Harry finished reading but continued to gaze at thepicture accompanying the obituary. Dumbledore waswearing his familiar, kindly smile, but as he peeredover the top of his half-moon spectacles, he gave theimpression, even in newsprint, of X-raying Harry,whose sadness mingled with a sense of humiliation.

He had thought he knew Dumbledore quite well, butever since reading this obituary he had been forced torecognize that he had barely known him at all. Neveronce had he imagined Dumbledore’s childhood oryouth; it was as though he had sprung into being asHarry had known him, venerable and silver-hairedand old. The idea of a teenage Dumbledore wassimply odd, like trying to imagine a stupid Hermioneor a friendly Blast-Ended Skrewt.

He had never thought to ask Dumbledore about hispast. No doubt it would have felt strange, impertinenteven, but after all, it had been common knowledgethat Dumbledore had taken part in that legendaryduel with Grindelwald, and Harry had not thought toask Dumbledore what that had been like, nor aboutany of his other famous achievements. No, they hadalways discussed Harry, Harry’s past, Harry’s future,Harry’s plans ... and it seemed to Harry now, despitethe fact that his future was so dangerous and souncertain, that he had missed irreplaceableopportunities when he had failed to ask Dumbledoremore about himself, even though the only personalquestion he had ever asked his headmaster was alsothe only one he suspected that Dumbledore had notanswered honestly:

“ What do you see when you look in the mirror?”

Page | 23

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“/? I see myself holding a pair of thick, woolen socks.”

After several minutes’ thought, Harry tore theobituary out of the Prophet, folded it carefully, andtucked it inside the first volume of Practical DefensiveMagic and Its Use Against the Dark Arts. Then hethrew the rest of the newspaper onto the rubbish pileand turned to face the room. It was much tidier. Theonly things left out of place were today’s DailyProphet, still lying on the bed, and on top of it, thepiece of broken mirror.

Harry moved across the room, slid the mirrorfragment off today’s Prophet, and unfolded thenewspaper. He had merely glanced at the headlinewhen he had taken the rolled-up paper from thedelivery owl early that morning and thrown it aside,after noting that it said nothing about Voldemort.Harry was sure that the Ministry was leaning on theProphet to suppress news about Voldemort. It wasonly now, therefore, that he saw what he had missed.

Across the bottom half of the front page a smallerheadline was set over a picture of Dumbledorestriding along looking harried:

DUMBLEDORE — THE TRUTH AT LAST?

Coming next week, the shocking story of the flawedgenius considered by many to be the greatest wizardof his generation. Stripping away the popular image ofserene, silver-bearded wisdom, Rita Skeeter revealsthe disturbed childhood, the lawless youth, thelifelong feuds, and the guilty secrets that Dumbledorecarried to his grave. WHY was the man tipped to beMinister of Magic content to remain a mereheadmaster? WHAT was the real purpose of the secretorganization known as the Order of the Phoenix?

HOW did Dumbledore really meet his end?

Page | 24 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The answers to these and many more questions areexplored in the explosive new biography, The Life andLies of Albus Dumbledore, by Rita Skeeter, exclusivelyinterviewed by Betty Braithwaite, page 13, inside.

Harry ripped open the paper and found page thirteen.The article was topped with a picture showinganother familiar face: a woman wearing jeweledglasses with elaborately curled blonde hair, her teethbared in what was clearly supposed to be a winningsmile, wiggling her fingers up at him. Doing his bestto ignore this nauseating image, Harry read on.

In person, Rita Skeeter is much warmer and softerthan her famously ferocious quill-portraits mightsuggest. Greeting me in the hallway of her cozy home,she leads me straight into the kitchen for a cup of tea,a slice of pound cake and, it goes without saying, asteaming vat of freshest gossip.

“Well, of course, Dumbledore is a biographer’s dream,”says Skeeter. “Such a long, full life. I’m sure my bookwill be the first of very, very many.”

Skeeter was certainly quick off the mark. Her nine-hundred-page book was completed a mere four weeksafter Dumbledore’s mysterious death in June. I askher how she managed this superfast feat.

“Oh, when you’ve been a journalist as long as I have,working to a deadline is second nature. I knew thatthe Wizarding world was clamoring for the full storyand I wanted to be the first to meet that need.”

I mention the recent, widely publicized remarks ofElphias Doge, Special Advisor to the Wizengamot andlongstanding friend of Albus Dumbledore’s, that“Skeeter’s book contains less fact than a ChocolateFrog card. ”

Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Skeeter throws back her head and laughs.

“Darling Dodgy! I remember interviewing him a fewyears back about merpeople rights, bless him.Completely gaga, seemed to think we were sitting atthe bottom of Lake Windermere, kept telling me towatch out for trout.”

And yet Elphias Doge’s accusations of inaccuracyhave been echoed in many places. Does Skeeter reallyfeel that four short weeks have been enough to gain afull picture of Dumbledore’s long and extraordinarylife?

“Oh, my dear,” beams Skeeter, rapping meaffectionately across the knuckles, “you know as wellas I do how much information can be generated by afat bag of Galleons, a refusal to hear the word ‘no,’and a nice sharp Quick-Quotes Quill! People werequeuing to dish the dirt on Dumbledore anyway. Noteveryone thought he was so wonderful, you know —he trod on an awful lot of important toes. But oldDodgy Doge can get off his high hippogriff, becauseI’ve had access to a source most journalists wouldswap their wands for, one who has never spoken inpublic before and who was close to Dumbledoreduring the most turbulent and disturbing phase ofhis youth.”

The advance publicity for Skeeter’s biography hascertainly suggested that there will be shocks in storefor those who believe Dumbledore to have led ablameless life. What were the biggest surprises sheuncovered, I ask?

“Now, come off it, Betty, I’m not giving away all thehighlights before anybody’s bought the book!” laughsSkeeter. “But I can promise that anybody who stillthinks Dumbledore was white as his beard is in for a

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

rude awakening! Let’s just say that nobody hearinghim rage against You-Know-Who would have dreamedthat he dabbled in the Dark Arts himself in his youth!And for a wizard who spent his later years pleadingfor tolerance, he wasn’t exactly broad-minded whenhe was younger! Yes, Albus Dumbledore had anextremely murky past, not to mention that very fishyfamily, which he worked so hard to keep hushed up.”

I ask whether Skeeter is referring to Dumbledore’sbrother, Aberforth, whose conviction by theWizengamot for misuse of magic caused a minorscandal fifteen years ago.

“Oh, Aberforth is just the tip of the dung heap, ” laughsSkeeter. “No, no, I’m talking about much worse than abrother with a fondness for fiddling about with goats,worse even than the Muggle-maiming father —Dumbledore couldn’t keep either of them quiet anyway,they were both charged by the Wizengamot. No, it’s themother and the sister that intrigued me, and a littledigging uncovered a positive nest of nastiness — but,as I say, you’ll have to wait for chapters nine to twelvefor full details. All I can say now is, it’s no wonderDumbledore never talked about how his nose gotbroken. ”

Family skeletons notwithstanding, does Skeeter denythe brilliance that led to Dumbledore’s many magicaldiscoveries?

“He had brains,” she concedes, “although many nowquestion whether he could really take full credit for allof his supposed achievements. As I reveal in chaptersixteen, Ivor Dillonsby claims he had alreadydiscovered eight uses of dragon’s blood whenDumbledore ‘borrowed’ his papers.”

Page | 27

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

But the importance of some of Dumbledore’sachievements cannot, I venture, be denied. What ofhis famous defeat of Grindelwald?

“Oh, now, I’m glad you mentioned Grindelwald,” saysSkeeter with a tantalizing smile. “I’m afraid those whogo dewy-eyed over Dumbledore’s spectacular victorymust brace themselves for a bombshell — or perhapsa Dungbomb. Very dirty business indeed. All I’ll sayis, don’t be so sure that there really was thespectacular duel of legend. After they’ve read mybook, people may be forced to conclude thatGrindelwald simply conjured a white handkerchieffrom the end of his wand and came quietly!”

Skeeter refuses to give any more away on thisintriguing subject, so we turn instead to therelationship that will undoubtedly fascinate herreaders more than any other.

“Oh yes,” says Skeeter, nodding briskly, “I devote anentire chapter to the whole Potter-Dumbledorerelationship. It’s been called unhealthy, even sinister.Again, your readers will have to buy my book for thewhole story, but there is no question thatDumbledore took an unnatural interest in Potter fromthe word go. Whether that was really in the boy’s bestinterests — well, we’ll see. It’s certainly an open secretthat Potter has had a most troubled adolescence.”

I ask whether Skeeter is still in touch with HarryPotter, whom she so famously interviewed last year: abreakthrough piece in which Potter spoke exclusivelyof his conviction that You-Know-Who had returned.

“Oh, yes, we’ve developed a close bond,” says Skeeter.“Poor Potter has few real friends, and we met at one ofthe most testing moments of his life — the TriwizardTournament. I am probably one of the only people

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

alive who can say that they know the real HarryPotter.”

Which leads us neatly to the many rumors stillcirculating about Dumbledore’s final hours. DoesSkeeter believe that Potter was there whenDumbledore died?

“Well, I don’t want to say too much — it’s all in thebook — but eyewitnesses inside Hogwarts castle sawPotter running away from the scene moments afterDumbledore fell, jumped, or was pushed. Potter latergave evidence against Severus Snape, a man againstwhom he has a notorious grudge. Is everything as itseems? That is for the Wizarding community to decide— once they’ve read my book.”

On that intriguing note, I take my leave. There can beno doubt that Skeeter has quilled an instantbestseller. Dumbledore’s legions of admirers,meanwhile, may well be trembling at what is soon toemerge about their hero.

Harry reached the bottom of the article, butcontinued to stare blankly at the page. Revulsion andfury rose in him like vomit; he balled up thenewspaper and threw it, with all his force, at the wall,where it joined the rest of the rubbish heaped aroundhis overflowing bin.

He began to stride blindly around the room, openingempty drawers and picking up books only to replacethem on the same piles, barely conscious of what hewas doing, as random phrases from Rita’s articleechoed in his head: An entire chapter to the wholePotter-Dumbledore relationship ... It’s been calledunhealthy, even sinister. ... He dabbled in the DarkArts himself in his youth ... I’ve had access to a sourcemost journalists would swap their wands for ...

Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Lies!” Harry bellowed, and through the window hesaw the next-door neighbor, who had paused torestart his lawn mower, look up nervously.

Harry sat down hard on the bed. The broken bit ofmirror danced away from him; he picked it up andturned it over in his fingers, thinking, thinking ofDumbledore and the lies with which Rita Skeeter wasdefaming him. ...

A flash of brightest blue. Harry froze, his cut fingerslipping on the jagged edge of the mirror again. Hehad imagined it, he must have done. He glanced overhis shoulder, but the wall was a sickly peach color ofAunt Petunia’s choosing: There was nothing bluethere for the mirror to reflect. He peered into themirror fragment again, and saw nothing but his ownbright green eye looking back at him.

He had imagined it, there was no other explanation;imagined it, because he had been thinking of his deadheadmaster. If anything was certain, it was that thebright blue eyes of Albus Dumbledore would neverpierce him again.

Page | 30

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



THE DURSLEYS DEPARTING

The sound of the front door slamming echoed up thestairs and a voice yelled, “Oi! You!”

Sixteen years of being addressed thus left Harry in nodoubt whom his uncle was calling; nevertheless, hedid not immediately respond. He was still gazing atthe mirror fragment in which, for a split second, hehad thought he saw Dumbledore’s eye. It was notuntil his uncle bellowed, “BOY!” that Harry got slowlyto his feet and headed for the bedroom door, pausingto add the piece of broken mirror to the rucksackfilled with things he would be taking with him.

“You took your time!” roared Vernon Dursley whenHarry appeared at the top of the stairs. “Get downhere, I want a word!”

Harry strolled downstairs, his hands deep in his jeanspockets. When he reached the living room he foundall three Dursleys. They were dressed for traveling:Uncle Vernon in a fawn zip-up jacket, Aunt Petunia in

Page | 31

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

a neat salmon-colored coat, and Dudley, Harry’slarge, blond, muscular cousin, in his leather jacket.

“Yes?” asked Harry.

“Sit down!” said Uncle Vernon. Harry raised hiseyebrows. “Please!” added Uncle Vernon, wincingslightly as though the word was sharp in his throat.

Harry sat. He thought he knew what was coming. Hisuncle began to pace up and down, Aunt Petunia andDudley following his movements with anxiousexpressions. Finally, his large purple face crumpledwith concentration, Uncle Vernon stopped in front ofHarry and spoke.

“I’ve changed my mind,” he said.

“What a surprise,” said Harry.

“Don’t you take that tone —” began Aunt Petunia in ashrill voice, but Vernon Dursley waved her down.

“It’s all a lot of claptrap,” said Uncle Vernon, glaringat Harry with piggy little eyes. “I’ve decided I don’tbelieve a word of it. We’re staying put, we’re not goinganywhere.”

Harry looked up at his uncle and felt a mixture ofexasperation and amusement. Vernon Dursley hadbeen changing his mind every twenty-four hours forthe past four weeks, packing and unpacking andrepacking the car with every change of heart. Harry’sfavorite moment had been the one when UncleVernon, unaware that Dudley had added hisdumbbells to his case since the last time it had beenunpacked, had attempted to hoist it back into theboot and collapsed with roars of pain and muchswearing.

Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“According to you,” Vernon Dursley said now,resuming his pacing up and down the living room,“we — Petunia, Dudley, and I — are in danger. From

— from —”

“Some of ‘my lot,’ right,” said Harry.

“Well, I don’t believe it,” repeated Uncle Vernon,coming to a halt in front of Harry again. “I was awakehalf the night thinking it all over, and I believe it’s aplot to get the house.”

“The house?” repeated Harry. “What house?”

“This house!” shrieked Uncle Vernon, the vein in hisforehead starting to pulse. “Our house! House pricesare skyrocketing around here! You want us out of theway and then you’re going to do a bit of hocus-pocusand before we know it the deeds will be in your nameand —”

“Are you out of your mind?” demanded Harry. “A plotto get this house? Are you actually as stupid as youlook?”

“Don’t you dare — !” squealed Aunt Petunia, butagain, Vernon waved her down: Slights on hispersonal appearance were, it seemed, as nothing tothe danger he had spotted.

“Just in case you’ve forgotten,” said Harry, “I’vealready got a house, my godfather left me one. So whywould I want this one? All the happy memories?”

There was silence. Harry thought he had ratherimpressed his uncle with this argument.

“You claim,” said Uncle Vernon, starting to pace yetagain, “that this Lord Thing —”

Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“— Voldemort,” said Harry impatiently, “and we’vebeen through this about a hundred times already.

This isn’t a claim, it’s fact, Dumbledore told you lastyear, and Kingsley and Mr. Weasley —”

Vernon Dursley hunched his shoulders angrily, andHarry guessed that his uncle was attempting to wardoff recollections of the unannounced visit, a few daysinto Harry’s summer holidays, of two fully grownwizards. The arrival on the doorstep of KingsleyShacklebolt and Arthur Weasley had come as a mostunpleasant shock to the Dursleys. Harry had toadmit, however, that as Mr. Weasley had oncedemolished half of the living room, his reappearancecould not have been expected to delight UncleVernon.

“— Kingsley and Mr. Weasley explained it all as well,”Harry pressed on remorselessly. “Once I’m seventeen,the protective charm that keeps me safe will break,and that exposes you as well as me. The Order is sureVoldemort will target you, whether to torture you totry and find out where I am, or because he thinks byholding you hostage I’d come and try to rescue you.”

Uncle Vernon’s and Harry’s eyes met. Harry was surethat in that instant they were both wondering thesame thing. Then Uncle Vernon walked on and Harryresumed, “You’ve got to go into hiding and the Orderwants to help. You’re being offered serious protection,the best there is.”

Uncle Vernon said nothing, but continued to pace upand down. Outside the sun hung low over the privethedges. The next-door neighbor’s lawn mower stalledagain.

“I thought there was a Ministry of Magic?” askedVernon Dursley abruptly.

Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“There is,” said Harry, surprised.

“Well, then, why can’t they protect us? It seems to methat, as innocent victims, guilty of nothing more thanharboring a marked man, we ought to qualify forgovernment protection!”

Harry laughed; he could not help himself. It was sovery typical of his uncle to put his hopes in theestablishment, even within this world that hedespised and mistrusted.

“You heard what Mr. Weasley and Kingsley said,”Harry replied. “We think the Ministry has beeninfiltrated.”

Uncle Vernon strode to the fireplace and back,breathing so heavily that his great black mustacherippled, his face still purple with concentration.

“All right,” he said, stopping in front of Harry yetagain. “All right, let’s say, for the sake of argument,we accept this protection. I still don’t see why we can’thave that Kingsley bloke.”

Harry managed not to roll his eyes, but with difficulty.This question had also been addressed half a dozentimes.

“As I’ve told you,” he said through gritted teeth,“Kingsley is protecting the Mug — I mean, your PrimeMinister.”

“Exactly — he’s the best!” said Uncle Vernon, pointingat the blank television screen. The Dursleys hadspotted Kingsley on the news, walking alongdiscreetly behind the Muggle Prime Minister as hevisited a hospital. This, and the fact that Kingsley hadmastered the knack of dressing like a Muggle, not toPage | 35 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

mention a certain reassuring something in his slow,deep voice, had caused the Dursleys to take toKingsley in a way that they had certainly not donewith any other wizard, although it was true that theyhad never seen him with his earring in.

“Well, he’s taken,” said Harry. “But Hestia Jones andDedalus Diggle are more than up to the job —”

“If we’d even seen CVs ...” began Uncle Vernon, butHarry lost patience. Getting to his feet, he advancedon his uncle, now pointing at the TV set himself.

“These accidents aren’t accidents — the crashes andexplosions and derailments and whatever else hashappened since we last watched the news. People aredisappearing and dying and he’s behind it —Voldemort. I’ve told you this over and over again, hekills Muggles for fun. Even the fogs — they’re causedby dementors, and if you can’t remember what theyare, ask your son!”

Dudley’s hands jerked upward to cover his mouth.With his parents’ and Harry’s eyes upon him, heslowly lowered them again and asked, “There are ...more of them?”

“More?” laughed Harry. “More than the two thatattacked us, you mean? Of course there are, there arehundreds, maybe thousands by this time, seeing asthey feed off fear and despair —”

“All right, all right,” blustered Vernon Dursley.

“You’ve made your point —”

“I hope so,” said Harry, “because once I’m seventeen,all of them — Death Eaters, dementors, maybe evenInferi — which means dead bodies enchanted by aDark wizard — will be able to find you and will

Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

certainly attack you. And if you remember the lasttime you tried to outrun wizards, I think you 11 agreeyou need help.”

There was a brief silence in which the distant echo ofHagrid smashing down a wooden front door seemedto reverberate through the intervening years. AuntPetunia was looking at Uncle Vernon; Dudley wasstaring at Harry. Finally Uncle Vernon blurted out,“But what about my work? What about Dudley’sschool? I don’t suppose those things matter to abunch of layabout wizards —”

“Don’t you understand?” shouted Harry. “They willtorture and kill you like they did my parents!”

“Dad,” said Dudley in a loud voice, “Dad — I’m goingwith these Order people.”

“Dudley,” said Harry, “for the first time in your life,you’re talking sense.”

He knew that the battle was won. If Dudley wasfrightened enough to accept the Order’s help, hisparents would accompany him: There could be noquestion of being separated from their Diddykins.Harry glanced at the carriage clock on themantelpiece.

“They’ll be here in about five minutes,” he said, andwhen none of the Dursleys replied, he left the room.The prospect of parting — probably forever — fromhis aunt, uncle, and cousin was one that he was ableto contemplate quite cheerfully, but there wasnevertheless a certain awkwardness in the air. Whatdid you say to one another at the end of sixteen years’solid dislike?

Page | 37

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Back in his bedroom, Harry fiddled aimlessly with hisrucksack, then poked a couple of owl nuts throughthe bars of Hedwig’s cage. They fell with dull thuds tothe bottom, where she ignored them.

“We’re leaving soon, really soon,” Harry told her. “Andthen you’ll be able to fly again.”

The doorbell rang. Harry hesitated, then headed backout of his room and downstairs. It was too much toexpect Hestia and Dedalus to cope with the Dursleyson their own.

“Harry Potter!” squeaked an excited voice, themoment Harry had opened the door; a small man in amauve top hat was sweeping him a deep bow. “Anhonor, as ever!”

“Thanks, Dedalus,” said Harry, bestowing a small andembarrassed smile upon the dark-haired Hestia. “It’sreally good of you to do this. ... They’re through here,my aunt and uncle and cousin. ...”

“Good day to you, Harry Potter’s relatives!” saidDedalus happily, striding into the living room. TheDursleys did not look at all happy to be addressedthus; Harry half expected another change of mind.Dudley shrank nearer to his mother at the sight ofthe witch and wizard.

“I see you are packed and ready. Excellent! The plan,as Harry has told you, is a simple one,” said Dedalus,pulling an immense pocket watch out of his waistcoatand examining it. “We shall be leaving before Harrydoes. Due to the danger of using magic in your house— Harry being still underage, it could provide theMinistry with an excuse to arrest him — we shall bedriving, say, ten miles or so, before Disapparating tothe safe location we have picked out for you. YouPage | 38 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

know how to drive, I take it?” he asked Uncle Vernonpolitely.

“Know how to — ? Of course I ruddy well know how todrive!” spluttered Uncle Vernon.

“Very clever of you, sir, very clever, I personally wouldbe utterly bamboozled by all those buttons andknobs,” said Dedalus. He was clearly under theimpression that he was flattering Vernon Dursley,who was visibly losing confidence in the plan withevery word Dedalus spoke.

“Can’t even drive,” he muttered under his breath, hismustache rippling indignantly, but fortunately neitherDedalus nor Hestia seemed to hear him.

“You, Harry,” Dedalus continued, “will wait here foryour guard. There has been a little change in thearrangements —”

“What d’you mean?” said Harry at once. “I thoughtMad-Eye was going to come and take me by Side-Along-Apparition?”

“Can’t do it,” said Hestia tersely. “Mad-Eye willexplain.”

The Dursleys, who had listened to all of this withlooks of utter incomprehension on their faces, jumpedas a loud voice screeched, “Hurry up\” Harry lookedall around the room before realizing that the voicehad issued from Dedalus’s pocket watch.

“Quite right, we’re operating to a very tight schedule,”said Dedalus, nodding at his watch and tucking itback into his waistcoat. “We are attempting to timeyour departure from the house with your family’sDisapparition, Harry; thus, the charm breaks at thePage | 39 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

moment you all head for safety.” He turned to theDursleys. “Well, are we all packed and ready to go?”

None of them answered him. Uncle Vernon was stillstaring, appalled, at the bulge in Dedalus’s waistcoatpocket.

“Perhaps we should wait outside in the hall,

Dedalus,” murmured Hestia. She clearly felt that itwould be tactless for them to remain in the roomwhile Harry and the Dursleys exchanged loving,possibly tearful farewells.

“There’s no need,” Harry muttered, but Uncle Vernonmade any further explanation unnecessary by sayingloudly,

“Well, this is good-bye, then, boy.”

He swung his right arm upward to shake Harry’shand, but at the last moment seemed unable to faceit, and merely closed his fist and began swinging itbackward and forward like a metronome.

“Ready, Diddy?” asked Aunt Petunia, fussily checkingthe clasp of her handbag so as to avoid looking atHarry altogether.

Dudley did not answer, but stood there with hismouth slightly ajar, reminding Harry a little of thegiant, Grawp.

“Come along, then,” said Uncle Vernon.

He had already reached the living room door whenDudley mumbled, “I don’t understand.”

“What don’t you understand, popkin?” asked AuntPetunia, looking up at her son.

Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Dudley raised a large, hamlike hand to point atHarry.

“Why isn’t he coming with us?”

Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia froze where theystood, staring at Dudley as though he had justexpressed a desire to become a ballerina.

“What?” said Uncle Vernon loudly.

“Why isn’t he coming too?” asked Dudley.

“Well, he — he doesn’t want to,” said Uncle Vernon,turning to glare at Harry and adding, “You don’t wantto, do you?”

“Not in the slightest,” said Harry.

“There you are,” Uncle Vernon told Dudley. “Nowcome on, we’re off.”

He marched out of the room. They heard the frontdoor open, but Dudley did not move and after a fewfaltering steps Aunt Petunia stopped too.

“What now?” barked Uncle Vernon, reappearing in thedoorway.

It seemed that Dudley was struggling with conceptstoo difficult to put into words. After several momentsof apparently painful internal struggle he said, “Butwhere’s he going to go?”

Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon looked at each other.It was clear that Dudley was frightening them. HestiaJones broke the silence.

Page | 41

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But ... surely you know where your nephew isgoing?” she asked, looking bewildered.

“Certainly we know,” said Vernon Dursley. “He’s offwith some of your lot, isn’t he? Right, Dudley, let’s getin the car, you heard the man, we’re in a hurry.”

Again, Vernon Dursley marched as far as the frontdoor, but Dudley did not follow.

“Off with some of our lot?”

Hestia looked outraged. Harry had met this attitudebefore: Witches and wizards seemed stunned that hisclosest living relatives took so little interest in thefamous Harry Potter.

“It’s fine,” Harry assured her. “It doesn’t matter,honestly.”

“Doesn’t matter?” repeated Hestia, her voice risingominously. “Don’t these people realize what you’vebeen through? What danger you are in? The uniqueposition you hold in the hearts of the anti-Voldemortmovement?”

“Er — no, they don’t,” said Harry. “They think I’m awaste of space, actually, but I’m used to —”

“I don’t think you’re a waste of space.”

If Harry had not seen Dudley’s lips move, he mightnot have believed it. As it was, he stared at Dudley forseveral seconds before accepting that it must havebeen his cousin who had spoken; for one thing,

Dudley had turned red. Harry was embarrassed andastonished himself.

“Well ... er ... thanks, Dudley.”

Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Again, Dudley appeared to grapple with thoughts toounwieldy for expression before mumbling, “You savedmy life.”

“Not really,” said Harry. “It was your soul thedementor would have taken. ...”

He looked curiously at his cousin. They had hadvirtually no contact during this summer or last, asHarry had come back to Privet Drive so briefly andkept to his room so much. It now dawned on Harry,however, that the cup of cold tea on which he hadtrodden that morning might not have been a boobytrap at all. Although rather touched, he wasnevertheless quite relieved that Dudley appeared tohave exhausted his ability to express his feelings.After opening his mouth once or twice more, Dudleysubsided into scarlet-faced silence.

Aunt Petunia burst into tears. Hestia Jones gave heran approving look that changed to outrage as AuntPetunia ran forward and embraced Dudley ratherthan Harry.

“S-so sweet, Dudders ...” she sobbed into his massivechest. “S-such a lovely b-boy ... s-saying thank you

“But he hasn’t said thank you at all!” said Hestiaindignantly. “He only said he didn’t think Harry was awaste of space!”

“Yeah, but coming from Dudley that’s like ‘I love you,’” said Harry, torn between annoyance and a desire tolaugh as Aunt Petunia continued to clutch at Dudleyas if he had just saved Harry from a burning building.

Page | 43

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Are we going or not?” roared Uncle Vernon,reappearing yet again at the living room door. “Ithought we were on a tight schedule!”

“Yes — yes, we are,” said Dedalus Diggle, who hadbeen watching these exchanges with an air ofbemusement and now seemed to pull himselftogether. “We really must be off. Harry —”

He tripped forward and wrung Harry’s hand with bothof his own.

“— good luck. I hope we meet again. The hopes of theWizarding world rest upon your shoulders.”

“Oh,” said Harry, “right. Thanks.”

“Farewell, Harry,” said Hestia, also clasping his hand.“Our thoughts go with you.”

“I hope everything’s okay,” said Harry with a glancetoward Aunt Petunia and Dudley.

“Oh, I’m sure we shall end up the best of chums,”said Diggle brightly, waving his hat as he left theroom. Hestia followed him.

Dudley gently released himself from his mother’sclutches and walked toward Harry, who had torepress an urge to threaten him with magic. ThenDudley held out his large, pink hand.

“Blimey, Dudley,” said Harry over Aunt Petunia’srenewed sobs, “did the dementors blow a differentpersonality into you?”

“Dunno,” muttered Dudley. “See you, Harry.”

Page | 44

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah ...” said Harry, taking Dudley’s hand andshaking it. “Maybe. Take care, Big D.”

Dudley nearly smiled, then lumbered from the room.Harry heard his heavy footfalls on the graveled drive,and then a car door slammed.

Aunt Petunia, whose face had been buried in herhandkerchief, looked around at the sound. She didnot seem to have expected to find herself alone withHarry. Hastily stowing her wet handkerchief into herpocket, she said, “Well — good-bye,” and marchedtoward the door without looking at him.

“Good-bye,” said Harry.

She stopped and looked back. For a moment Harryhad the strangest feeling that she wanted to saysomething to him: She gave him an odd, tremulouslook and seemed to teeter on the edge of speech, butthen, with a little jerk of her head, she bustled out ofthe room after her husband and son.

Page | 45

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE SEVEN POTTERS

Harry ran back upstairs to his bedroom, arriving atthe window just in time to see the Dursleys’ carswinging out of the drive and off up the road.Dedalus’s top hat was visible between Aunt Petuniaand Dudley in the backseat. The car turned right atthe end of Privet Drive, its windows burned scarlet fora moment in the now setting sun, and then it wasgone.

Harry picked up Hedwig’s cage, his Firebolt, and hisrucksack, gave his unnaturally tidy bedroom one lastsweeping look, and then made his ungainly way backdownstairs to the hall, where he deposited cage,broomstick, and bag near the foot of the stairs. Thelight was fading rapidly now, the hall full of shadowsin the evening light. It felt most strange to stand herein the silence and know that he was about to leavethe house for the last time. Long ago, when he hadbeen left alone while the Dursleys went out to enjoythemselves, the hours of solitude had been a raretreat: Pausing only to sneak something tasty from thefridge, he had rushed upstairs to play on Dudley’s

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

computer, or put on the television and flicked throughthe channels to his heart’s content. It gave him anodd, empty feeling to remember those times; it waslike remembering a younger brother whom he hadlost.

“Don’t you want to take a last look at the place?” heasked Hedwig, who was still sulking with her headunder her wing. “We’ll never be here again. Don’t youwant to remember all the good times? I mean, look atthis doormat. What memories ... Dudley puked on itafter I saved him from the dementors. ... Turns out hewas grateful after all, can you believe it? ... And lastsummer, Dumbledore walked through that front door.

Harry lost the thread of his thoughts for a momentand Hedwig did nothing to help him retrieve it, butcontinued to sit with her head under her wing. Harryturned his back on the front door.

“And under here, Hedwig” — Harry pulled open a doorunder the stairs — “is where I used to sleep! Younever knew me then — Blimey, it’s small, I’dforgotten. ...”

Harry looked around at the stacked shoes andumbrellas, remembering how he used to wake everymorning looking up at the underside of the staircase,which was more often than not adorned with a spideror two. Those had been the days before he had knownanything about his true identity; before he had foundout how his parents had died or why such strangethings often happened around him. But Harry couldstill remember the dreams that had dogged him, evenin those days: confused dreams involving flashes ofgreen light and once — Uncle Vernon had nearlycrashed the car when Harry had recounted it — aflying motorbike ...

Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There was a sudden, deafening roar from somewherenearby. Harry straightened up with a jerk andsmacked the top of his head on the low door frame.Pausing only to employ a few of Uncle Vernon’schoicest swear words, he staggered back into thekitchen, clutching his head and staring out of thewindow into the back garden.

The darkness seemed to be rippling, the air itselfquivering. Then, one by one, figures began to pop intosight as their Disillusionment Charms lifted.Dominating the scene was Hagrid, wearing a helmetand goggles and sitting astride an enormousmotorbike with a black sidecar attached. All aroundhim other people were dismounting from brooms and,in two cases, skeletal, black winged horses.

Wrenching open the back door, Harry hurtled intotheir midst. There was a general cry of greeting asHermione flung her arms around him, Ron clappedhim on the back, and Hagrid said, “All righ’, Harry?Ready fer the off?”

“Definitely,” said Harry, beaming around at them all.“But I wasn’t expecting this many of you!”

“Change of plan,” growled Mad-Eye, who was holdingtwo enormous, bulging sacks, and whose magical eyewas spinning from darkening sky to house to gardenwith dizzying rapidity. “Let’s get undercover before wetalk you through it.”

Harry led them all back into the kitchen where,laughing and chattering, they settled on chairs, satthemselves upon Aunt Petunia’s gleaming worksurfaces, or leaned up against her spotlessappliances: Ron, long and lanky; Hermione, herbushy hair tied back in a long plait; Fred and George,grinning identically; Bill, badly scarred and long-P a g e | 48 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

haired; Mr. Weasley, kind-faced, balding, hisspectacles a little awry; Mad-Eye, battle-worn, one-legged, his bright blue magical eye whizzing in itssocket; Tonks, whose short hair was her favoriteshade of bright pink; Lupin, grayer, more lined; Fleur,slender and beautiful, with her long silvery blondehair; Kingsley, bald, black, broad-shouldered; Hagrid,with his wild hair and beard, standing hunchbackedto avoid hitting his head on the ceiling; andMundungus Fletcher, small, dirty, and hangdog, withhis droopy basset hound’s eyes and matted hair.Harry’s heart seemed to expand and glow at the sight:He felt incredibly fond of all of them, evenMundungus, whom he had tried to strangle the lasttime they had met.

“Kingsley, I thought you were looking after the MugglePrime Minister?” he called across the room.

“He can get along without me for one night,” saidKingsley. “You’re more important.”

“Harry, guess what?” said Tonks from her perch ontop of the washing machine, and she wiggled her lefthand at him; a ring glittered there.

“You got married?” Harry yelped, looking from her toLupin.

“I’m sorry you couldn’t be there, Harry, it was veryquiet.”

“That’s brilliant, congrat —”

“All right, all right, we’ll have time for a cozy catch-uplater!” roared Moody over the hubbub, and silence fellin the kitchen. Moody dropped his sacks at his feetand turned to Harry. “As Dedalus probably told you,we had to abandon Plan A. Pius Thicknesse has gonePage | 49 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

over, which gives us a big problem. He’s made it animprisonable offense to connect this house to the FlooNetwork, place a Portkey here, or Apparate in or out.All done in the name of your protection, to preventYou-Know-Who getting in at you. Absolutelypointless, seeing as your mother’s charm does thatalready. What he’s really done is to stop you gettingout of here safely.

“Second problem: You’re underage, which meansyou’ve still got the Trace on you.”

“I don’t —”

“The Trace, the Trace!” said Mad-Eye impatiently.

“The charm that detects magical activity aroundunder-seventeens, the way the Ministry finds outabout underage magic! If you, or anyone around you,casts a spell to get you out of here, Thicknesse isgoing to know about it, and so will the Death Eaters.

“We can’t wait for the Trace to break, because themoment you turn seventeen you’ll lose all theprotection your mother gave you. In short: PiusThicknesse thinks he’s got you cornered good andproper.”

Harry could not help but agree with the unknownThicknesse.

“So what are we going to do?”

“We’re going to use the only means of transport left tous, the only ones the Trace can’t detect, because wedon’t need to cast spells to use them: brooms,thestrals, and Hagrid’s motorbike.”

Page | 50

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry could see flaws in this plan; however, he heldhis tongue to give Mad-Eye the chance to addressthem.

“Now, your mother’s charm will only break under twoconditions: when you come of age, or” — Moodygestured around the pristine kitchen — “you nolonger call this place home. You and your aunt anduncle are going your separate ways tonight, in the fullunderstanding that you’re never going to live togetheragain, correct?”

Harry nodded.

“So this time, when you leave, there’ll be no goingback, and the charm will break the moment you getoutside its range. We’re choosing to break it early,because the alternative is waiting for You-Know-Whoto come and seize you the moment you turnseventeen.

“The one thing we’ve got on our side is that You-Know-Who doesn’t know we’re moving you tonight.We’ve leaked a fake trail to the Ministry: They thinkyou’re not leaving until the thirtieth. However, this isYou-Know-Who we’re dealing with, so we can’t justrely on him getting the date wrong; he’s bound tohave a couple of Death Eaters patrolling the skies inthis general area, just in case. So, we’ve given a dozendifferent houses every protection we can throw atthem. They all look like they could be the place we’regoing to hide you, they’ve all got some connectionwith the Order: my house, Kingsley’s place, Molly’sAuntie Muriel’s — you get the idea.”

“Yeah,” said Harry, not entirely truthfully, because hecould still spot a gaping hole in the plan.

Page | 51

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’ll be going to Tonks’s parents. Once you’rewithin the boundaries of the protective enchantmentswe’ve put on their house, you’ll be able to use aPortkey to the Burrow. Any questions?”

“Er — yes,” said Harry. “Maybe they won’t knowwhich of the twelve secure houses I’m heading for atfirst, but won’t it be sort of obvious once” — heperformed a quick headcount — “fourteen of us fly offtoward Tonks’s parents’?”

“Ah,” said Moody, “I forgot to mention the key point.Fourteen of us won’t be flying to Tonks’s parents’.There will be seven Harry Potters moving through theskies tonight, each of them with a companion, eachpair heading for a different safe house.”

From inside his cloak Moody now withdrew a flask ofwhat looked like mud. There was no need for him tosay another word; Harry understood the rest of theplan immediately.

“No!” he said loudly, his voice ringing through thekitchen. “No way!”

“I told them you’d take it like this,” said Hermionewith a hint of complacency.

“If you think I’m going to let six people risk their lives

— !”

“— because it’s the first time for all of us,” said Ron.

“This is different, pretending to be me —”

“Well, none of us really fancy it, Harry,” said Fredearnestly. “Imagine if something went wrong and wewere stuck as specky, scrawny gits forever.”

Page | 52

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry did not smile.

“You can’t do it if I don’t cooperate, you need me togive you some hair.”

“Well, that’s that plan scuppered,” said George.“Obviously there’s no chance at all of us getting a bitof your hair unless you cooperate.”

“Yeah, thirteen of us against one bloke who’s notallowed to use magic; we’ve got no chance,” said Fred.

“Funny,” said Harry, “really amusing.”

“If it has to come to force, then it will,” growledMoody, his magical eye now quivering a little in itssocket as he glared at Harry. “Everyone here’soverage, Potter, and they’re all prepared to take therisk.”

Mundungus shrugged and grimaced; the magical eyeswerved sideways to glare at him out of the side ofMoody’s head.

“Let’s have no more arguments. Time’s wearing on. Iwant a few of your hairs, boy, now.”

“But this is mad, there’s no need —”

“No need!” snarled Moody. “With You-Know-Who outthere and half the Ministry on his side? Potter, ifwe’re lucky hell have swallowed the fake bait andhe’ll be planning to ambush you on the thirtieth, buthe’d be mad not to have a Death Eater or two keepingan eye out, it’s what I’d do. They might not be able toget at you or this house while your mother’s charmholds, but it’s about to break and they know therough position of the place. Our only chance is to use

Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

decoys. Even You-Know-Who can’t split himself intoseven.”

Harry caught Hermione’s eye and looked away atonce.

“So, Potter — some of your hair, if you please.”

Harry glanced at Ron, who grimaced at him in a just-do-it sort of way.

“Now!” barked Moody.

With all of their eyes upon him, Harry reached up tothe top of his head, grabbed a hank of hair, andpulled.

“Good,” said Moody, limping forward as he pulled thestopper out of the flask of potion. “Straight in here, ifyou please.”

Harry dropped the hair into the mudlike liquid. Themoment it made contact with its surface, the potionbegan to froth and smoke, then, all at once, it turneda clear, bright gold.

“Ooh, you look much tastier than Crabbe and Goyle,Harry,” said Hermione, before catching sight of Ron’sraised eyebrows, blushing slightly, and saying, “Oh,you know what I mean — Goyle’s potion looked likebogies.”

“Right then, fake Potters line up over here, please,”said Moody.

Ron, Hermione, Fred, George, and Fleur lined up infront of Aunt Petunia’s gleaming sink.

“We’re one short,” said Lupin.

Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Here,” said Hagrid gruffly, and he lifted Mundungusby the scruff of the neck and dropped him downbeside Fleur, who wrinkled her nose pointedly andmoved along to stand between Fred and Georgeinstead.

“I’ve toldjer, I’d sooner be a protector,” saidMundungus.

“Shut it,” growled Moody. “As I’ve already told you,you spineless worm, any Death Eaters we run intowill be aiming to capture Potter, not kill him.Dumbledore always said You-Know-Who would wantto finish Potter in person. It’ll be the protectors whohave got the most to worry about, the Death Eaters’llwant to kill them.”

Mundungus did not look particularly reassured, butMoody was already pulling half a dozen eggcup-sizedglasses from inside his cloak, which he handed out,before pouring a little Polyjuice Potion into each one.

“Altogether, then ...”

Ron, Hermione, Fred, George, Fleur, and Mundungusdrank. All of them gasped and grimaced as the potionhit their throats: At once, their features began tobubble and distort like hot wax. Hermione andMundungus were shooting upward; Ron, Fred, andGeorge were shrinking; their hair was darkening,Hermione’s and Fleur’s appearing to shoot backwardinto their skulls.

Moody, quite unconcerned, was now loosening theties of the large sacks he had brought with him. Whenhe straightened up again, there were six Harry Pottersgasping and panting in front of him.

Page | 55

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Fred and George turned to each other and saidtogether, “Wow — we’re identical!”

“I dunno, though, I think I’m still better-looking,” saidFred, examining his reflection in the kettle.

“Bah,” said Fleur, checking herself in the microwavedoor, “Bill, don’t look at me — I’m ’ideous.”

“Those whose clothes are a bit roomy, I’ve got smallerhere,” said Moody, indicating the first sack, “and viceversa. Don’t forget the glasses, there’s six pairs in theside pocket. And when you’re dressed, there’s luggagein the other sack.”

The real Harry thought that this might just be themost bizarre thing he had ever seen, and he had seensome extremely odd things. He watched as his sixdoppelgangers rummaged in the sacks, pulling outsets of clothes, putting on glasses, stuffing their ownthings away. He felt like asking them to show a littlemore respect for his privacy as they all beganstripping off with impunity, clearly much more at easewith displaying his body than they would have beenwith their own.

“I knew Ginny was lying about that tattoo,” said Ron,looking down at his bare chest.

“Harry, your eyesight really is awful,” said Hermione,as she put on glasses.

Once dressed, the fake Harrys took rucksacks andowl cages, each containing a stuffed snowy owl, fromthe second sack.

“Good,” said Moody, as at last seven dressed,bespectacled, and luggage-laden Harrys faced him.

Page | 56

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“The pairs will be as follows: Mundungus will betraveling with me, by broom —”

“Why’m I with you?” grunted the Harry nearest theback door.

“Because you’re the one that needs watching,”growled Moody, and sure enough, his magical eye didnot waver from Mundungus as he continued, “Arthurand Fred —”

“I’m George,” said the twin at whom Moody waspointing. “Can’t you even tell us apart when we’reHarry?”

“Sorry, George —”

“I’m only yanking your wand, I’m Fred really —”

“Enough messing around!” snarled Moody. “The otherone — George or Fred or whoever you are — you’rewith Remus. Miss Delacour —”

“I’m taking Fleur on a thestral,” said Bill. “She’s notthat fond of brooms.”

Fleur walked over to stand beside him, giving him asoppy, slavish look that Harry hoped with all hisheart would never appear on his face again.

“Miss Granger with Kingsley, again by thestral —”

Hermione looked reassured as she answeredKingsley’s smile; Harry knew that Hermione toolacked confidence on a broomstick.

“Which leaves you and me, Ron!” said Tonks brightly,knocking over a mug tree as she waved at him.

Page | 57

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron did not look quite as pleased as Hermione.

“An’ you’re with me, Harry. That all righ’?” saidHagrid, looking a little anxious. “We’ll be on the bike,brooms an’ thestrals can’t take me weight, see. Not alot o’ room on the seat with me on it, though, so you’llbe in the sidecar.”

“That’s great,” said Harry, not altogether truthfully.

“We think the Death Eaters will expect you to be on abroom,” said Moody, who seemed to guess how Harrywas feeling. “Snape’s had plenty of time to tell themeverything about you he’s never mentioned before, soif we do run into any Death Eaters, we’re bettingthey’ll choose one of the Potters who look at home ona broomstick. All right then,” he went on, tying up thesack with the fake Potters’ clothes in it and leadingthe way back to the door, “I make it three minutesuntil we’re supposed to leave. No point locking theback door, it won’t keep the Death Eaters out whenthey come looking. ... Come on. ...”

Harry hurried into the hall to fetch his rucksack,Firebolt, and Hedwig’s cage before joining the othersin the dark back garden. On every side broomstickswere leaping into hands; Hermione had already beenhelped up onto a great black thestral by Kingsley,Fleur onto the other by Bill. Hagrid was standingready beside the motorbike, goggles on.

“Is this it? Is this Sirius’s bike?”

“The very same,” said Hagrid, beaming down at Harry.“An’ the last time yeh was on it, Harry, I could fit yehin one hand!”

Harry could not help but feel a little humiliated as hegot into the sidecar. It placed him several feet below

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

everybody else: Ron smirked at the sight of himsitting there like a child in a bumper car. Harrystuffed his rucksack and broomstick down by his feetand rammed Hedwig’s cage between his knees. It wasextremely uncomfortable.

“Arthur’s done a bit o’ tinkerin’,” said Hagrid, quiteoblivious to Harry’s discomfort. He settled himselfastride the motorcycle, which creaked slightly andsank inches into the ground. “It’s got a few tricks upits handlebars now. Tha’ one was my idea.”

He pointed a thick finger at a purple button near thespeedometer.

“Please be careful, Hagrid,” said Mr. Weasley, whowas standing beside them, holding his broomstick.“I’m still not sure that was advisable and it’s certainlyonly to be used in emergencies.”

“All right then,” said Moody. “Everyone ready, please;

I want us all to leave at exactly the same time or thewhole point of the diversion’s lost.”

Everybody mounted their brooms.

“Hold tight now, Ron,” said Tonks, and Harry sawRon throw a furtive, guilty look at Lupin beforeplacing his hands on either side of her waist. Hagridkicked the motorbike into life: It roared like a dragon,and the sidecar began to vibrate.

“Good luck, everyone,” shouted Moody. “See you all inabout an hour at the Burrow. On the count of three.One ... two ... THREE.”

There was a great roar from the motorbike, and Harryfelt the sidecar give a nasty lurch: He was risingthrough the air fast, his eyes watering slightly, hair

Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

whipped back off his face. Around him brooms weresoaring upward too; the long black tail of a thestralflicked past. His legs, jammed into the sidecar byHedwig’s cage and his rucksack, were already soreand starting to go numb. So great was his discomfortthat he almost forgot to take a last glimpse of numberfour, Privet Drive; by the time he looked over the edgeof the sidecar he could no longer tell which one itwas. Higher and higher they climbed into the sky —

And then, out of nowhere, out of nothing, they weresurrounded. At least thirty hooded figures, suspendedin midair, formed a vast circle in the midst of whichthe Order members had risen, oblivious —

Screams, a blaze of green light on every side: Hagridgave a yell and the motorbike rolled over. Harry lostany sense of where they were: Streetlights above him,yells around him, he was clinging to the sidecar fordear life. Hedwig’s cage, the Firebolt, and hisrucksack slipped from beneath his knees —

“No — HEDWIG!”

The broomstick spun to earth, but he just managedto seize the strap of his rucksack and the top of thecage as the motorbike swung the right way up again.A second’s relief, and then another burst of greenlight. The owl screeched and fell to the floor of thecage.

“No — NO!”

The motorbike zoomed forward; Harry glimpsedhooded Death Eaters scattering as Hagrid blastedthrough their circle.

“Hedwig — Hedwig —”

Page | 60

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

But the owl lay motionless and pathetic as a toy onthe floor of her cage. He could not take it in, and histerror for the others was paramount. He glanced overhis shoulder and saw a mass of people moving, flaresof green light, two pairs of people on brooms soaringoff into the distance, but he could not tell who theywere —

“Hagrid, we’ve got to go back, we’ve got to go back!” heyelled over the thunderous roar of the engine, pullingout his wand, ramming Hedwig’s cage onto the floor,refusing to believe that she was dead. “Hagrid, TURNAROUND!”

“My job’s ter get you there safe, Harry!” bellowedHagrid, and he opened the throttle.

“Stop — STOP!” Harry shouted, but as he looked backagain two jets of green light flew past his left ear: FourDeath Eaters had broken away from the circle andwere pursuing them, aiming for Hagrid’s broad back.Hagrid swerved, but the Death Eaters were keepingup with the bike; more curses shot after them, andHarry had to sink low into the sidecar to avoid them.Wriggling around he cried, “Stupefy\” and a red bolt oflight shot from his own wand, cleaving a gap betweenthe four pursuing Death Eaters as they scattered toavoid it.

“Hold on, Harry, this’ll do for ’em!” roared Hagrid, andHarry looked up just in time to see Hagrid slamminga thick finger into a green button near the fuel gauge.

A wall, a solid brick wall, erupted out of the exhaustpipe. Craning his neck, Harry saw it expand intobeing in midair. Three of the Death Eaters swervedand avoided it, but the fourth was not so lucky: Hevanished from view and then dropped like a boulderfrom behind it, his broomstick broken into pieces.Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

One of his fellows slowed up to save him, but theyand the airborne wall were swallowed by darkness asHagrid leaned low over the handlebars and sped up.

More Killing Curses flew past Harry’s head from thetwo remaining Death Eaters’ wands; they were aimingfor Hagrid. Harry responded with further StunningSpells: Red and green collided in midair in a showerof multicolored sparks, and Harry thought wildly offireworks, and the Muggles below who would have noidea what was happening —

“Here we go again, Harry, hold on!” yelled Hagrid, andhe jabbed at a second button. This time a great netburst from the bike’s exhaust, but the Death Eaterswere ready for it. Not only did they swerve to avoid it,but the companion who had slowed to save theirunconscious friend had caught up. He bloomedsuddenly out of the darkness and now three of themwere pursuing the motorbike, all shooting curses afterit.

“This’ll do it, Harry, hold on tight!” yelled Hagrid, andHarry saw him slam his whole hand onto the purplebutton beside the speedometer.

With an unmistakable bellowing roar, dragon fireburst from the exhaust, white-hot and blue, and themotorbike shot forward like a bullet with a sound ofwrenching metal. Harry saw the Death Eaters swerveout of sight to avoid the deadly trail of flame, and atthe same time felt the sidecar sway ominously: Itsmetal connections to the bike had splintered with theforce of acceleration.

“It’s all righ’, Harry!” bellowed Hagrid, now thrown flatonto his back by the surge of speed; nobody wassteering now, and the sidecar was starting to twistviolently in the bike’s slipstream.

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm on it, Harry, don’ worry!” Hagrid yelled, and frominside his jacket pocket he pulled his flowery pinkumbrella.

“Hagrid! No! Let me!”

“REPAROl”

There was a deafening bang and the sidecar brokeaway from the bike completely: Harry sped forward,propelled by the impetus of the bike’s flight, then thesidecar began to lose height —

In desperation Harry pointed his wand at the sidecarand shouted, “Wingardium Leviosal”

The sidecar rose like a cork, unsteerable but at leaststill airborne: He had but a split second’s relief,however, as more curses streaked past him: The threeDeath Eaters were closing in.

“I’m cornin’, Harry!” Hagrid yelled from out of thedarkness, but Harry could feel the sidecar beginningto sink again: Crouching as low as he could, hepointed at the middle of the oncoming figures andyelled, “Impedimental”

The jinx hit the middle Death Eater in the chest: Fora moment the man was absurdly spread-eagled inmidair as though he had hit an invisible barrier: Oneof his fellows almost collided with him —

Then the sidecar began to fall in earnest, and theremaining Death Eater shot a curse so close to Harrythat he had to duck below the rim of the car,knocking out a tooth on the edge of his seat —

“I’m cornin’, Harry, I’m cornin’!”

Page | 63

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

A huge hand seized the back of Harry’s robes andhoisted him out of the plummeting sidecar; Harrypulled his rucksack with him as he dragged himselfonto the motorbike’s seat and found himself back-to-back with Hagrid. As they soared upward, away fromthe two remaining Death Eaters, Harry spat blood outof his mouth, pointed his wand at the falling sidecar,and yelled, “Confringo\”

He knew a dreadful, gut-wrenching pang for Hedwigas it exploded; the Death Eater nearest it was blastedoff his broom and fell from sight; his companion fellback and vanished.

“Harry, I’m sorry, I’m sorry,” moaned Hagrid, “Ishouldn’ta tried ter repair it meself— yeh’ve got noroom —”

“It’s not a problem, just keep flying!” Harry shoutedback, as two more Death Eaters emerged out of thedarkness, drawing closer.

As the curses came shooting across the interveningspace again, Hagrid swerved and zigzagged: Harryknew that Hagrid did not dare use the dragon-firebutton again, with Harry seated so insecurely. Harrysent Stunning Spell after Stunning Spell back at theirpursuers, barely holding them off. He shot anotherblocking jinx at them: The closest Death Eaterswerved to avoid it and his hood slipped, and by thered light of his next Stunning Spell, Harry saw thestrangely blank face of Stanley Shunpike — Stan —

“ExpelliarmusV’ Harry yelled.

“That’s him, it’s him, it’s the real one!”

The hooded Death Eater’s shout reached Harry evenabove the thunder of the motorbike’s engine: Next

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

moment, both pursuers had fallen back anddisappeared from view.

“Harry, what’s happened?” bellowed Hagrid.

“Where Ve they gone?”

“I don’t know!”

But Harry was afraid: The hooded Death Eater hadshouted “It’s the real one!”; how had he known? Hegazed around at the apparently empty darkness andfelt its menace. Where were they?

He clambered around on the seat to face forward andseized hold of the back of Hagrid’s jacket.

“Hagrid, do the dragon-fire thing again, let’s get out ofhere!”

“Hold on tight, then, Harry!”

There was a deafening, screeching roar again and thewhite-blue fire shot from the exhaust: Harry felthimself slipping backward off what little of the seat hehad, Hagrid flung backward upon him, barelymaintaining his grip on the handlebars —

“I think we’ve lost ’em Harry, I think we’ve done it!”yelled Hagrid.

But Harry was not convinced: Fear lapped at him ashe looked left and right for pursuers he was surewould come. ... Why had they fallen back? One ofthem had still had a wand. ... It’s him ... it’s the realone. ... They had said it right after he had tried toDisarm Stan. ...

“We’re nearly there, Harry, we’ve nearly made it!”shouted Hagrid.

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry felt the bike drop a little, though the lightsdown on the ground still seemed remote as stars.

Then the scar on his forehead burned like fire; as aDeath Eater appeared on either side of the bike, twoKilling Curses missed Harry by millimeters, cast frombehind —

And then Harry saw him. Voldemort was flying likesmoke on the wind, without broomstick or thestral tohold him, his snakelike face gleaming out of theblackness, his white fingers raising his wand again —

Hagrid let out a bellow of fear and steered themotorbike into a vertical dive. Clinging on for dearlife, Harry sent Stunning Spells flying at random intothe whirling night. He saw a body fly past him andknew he had hit one of them, but then he heard abang and saw sparks from the engine; the motorbikespiraled through the air, completely out of control —

Green jets of light shot past them again. Harry had noidea which way was up, which down: His scar wasstill burning; he expected to die at any second. Ahooded figure on a broomstick was feet from him, hesaw it raise its arm —

“NO!”

With a shout of fury Hagrid launched himself off thebike at the Death Eater; to his horror, Harry saw bothHagrid and the Death Eater falling out of sight, theircombined weight too much for the broomstick —

Barely gripping the plummeting bike with his knees,Harry heard Voldemort scream, “Mine\”

Page | 66

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

It was over: He could not see or hear where Voldemortwas; he glimpsed another Death Eater swooping outof the way and heard, “Avada —”

As the pain from Harry’s scar forced his eyes shut,his wand acted of its own accord. He felt it drag hishand around like some great magnet, saw a spurt ofgolden fire through his half-closed eyelids, heard acrack and a scream of fury. The remaining DeathEater yelled; Voldemort screamed, “No\Somehow,Harry found his nose an inch from the dragon-firebutton. He punched it with his wand-free hand andthe bike shot more flames into the air, hurtlingstraight toward the ground.

“Hagrid!” Harry called, holding on to the bike for dearlife. “Hagrid — Accio Hagridl”

The motorbike sped up, sucked toward the earth.

Face level with the handlebars, Harry could seenothing but distant lights growing nearer and nearer:He was going to crash and there was nothing he coulddo about it. Behind him came another scream, “Yourwand, Selwyn, give me your wand\”

He felt Voldemort before he saw him. Lookingsideways, he stared into the red eyes and was surethey would be the last thing he ever saw: Voldemortpreparing to curse him once more —

And then Voldemort vanished. Harry looked downand saw Hagrid spread-eagled on the ground belowhim. He pulled hard at the handlebars to avoid hittinghim, groped for the brake, but with an earsplitting,ground-trembling crash, he smashed into a muddypond.

Page | 67

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



FALLEN WARRIOR

“Hagrid?”

Harry struggled to raise himself out of the debris ofmetal and leather that surrounded him; his handssank into inches of muddy water as he tried to stand.He could not understand where Voldemort had goneand expected him to swoop out of the darkness at anymoment. Something hot and wet was trickling downhis chin and from his forehead. He crawled out of thepond and stumbled toward the great dark mass onthe ground that was Hagrid.

“Hagrid? Hagrid, talk to me —”

But the dark mass did not stir.

“Who’s there? Is it Potter? Are you Harry Potter?”

Harry did not recognize the man’s voice. Then awoman shouted, “They’ve crashed, Ted! Crashed inthe garden!”

Page | 68

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s head was swimming.

“Hagrid,” he repeated stupidly, and his kneesbuckled.

The next thing he knew, he was lying on his back onwhat felt like cushions, with a burning sensation inhis ribs and right arm. His missing tooth had beenregrown. The scar on his forehead was still throbbing.

“Hagrid?”

He opened his eyes and saw that he was lying on asofa in an unfamiliar, lamplit sitting room. Hisrucksack lay on the floor a short distance away, wetand muddy. A fair-haired, big-bellied man waswatching Harry anxiously.

“Hagrid’s fine, son,” said the man, “the wife’s seeingto him now. How are you feeling? Anything elsebroken? I’ve fixed your ribs, your tooth, and yourarm. I’m Ted, by the way, Ted Tonks — Dora’s father.”

Harry sat up too quickly: Lights popped in front of hiseyes and he felt sick and giddy.

“Voldemort —”

“Easy, now,” said Ted Tonks, placing a hand onHarry’s shoulder and pushing him back against thecushions. “That was a nasty crash you just had. Whathappened, anyway? Something go wrong with thebike? Arthur Weasley overstretch himself again, himand his Muggle contraptions?”

“No,” said Harry, as his scar pulsed like an openwound. “Death Eaters, loads of them — we werechased —”

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Death Eaters?” said Ted sharply. “What d’you mean,Death Eaters? I thought they didn’t know you werebeing moved tonight, I thought —”

“They knew,” said Harry.

Ted Tonks looked up at the ceiling as though he couldsee through it to the sky above.

“Well, we know our protective charms hold, then,don’t we? They shouldn’t be able to get within ahundred yards of the place in any direction.”

Now Harry understood why Voldemort had vanished;it had been at the point when the motorbike crossedthe barrier of the Order’s charms. He only hoped theywould continue to work: He imagined Voldemort, ahundred yards above them as they spoke, looking fora way to penetrate what Harry visualized as a greattransparent bubble.

He swung his legs off the sofa; he needed to seeHagrid with his own eyes before he would believe thathe was alive. He had barely stood up, however, whena door opened and Hagrid squeezed through it, hisface covered in mud and blood, limping a little butmiraculously alive.

“Harry!”

Knocking over two delicate tables and an aspidistra,he covered the floor between them in two strides andpulled Harry into a hug that nearly cracked his newlyrepaired ribs. “Blimey, Harry, how did yeh get out o’that? I thought we were both goners.”

“Yeah, me too. I can’t believe —”

Page | 70

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry broke off. He had just noticed the woman whohad entered the room behind Hagrid.

“You!” he shouted, and he thrust his hand into hispocket, but it was empty.

“Your wand’s here, son,” said Ted, tapping it onHarry’s arm. “It fell right beside you, I picked it up.And that’s my wife you’re shouting at.”

“Oh, I’m — I’m sorry.”

As she moved forward into the room, Mrs. Tonks’sresemblance to her sister Bellatrix became much lesspronounced: Her hair was a light, soft brown and hereyes were wider and kinder. Nevertheless, she lookeda little haughty after Harry’s exclamation.

“What happened to our daughter?” she asked. “Hagridsaid you were ambushed; where is Nymphadora?”

“I don’t know,” said Harry. “We don’t know whathappened to anyone else.”

She and Ted exchanged looks. A mixture of fear andguilt gripped Harry at the sight of their expressions; ifany of the others had died, it was his fault, all hisfault. He had consented to the plan, given them hishair. ...

“The Portkey,” he said, remembering all of a sudden.“We’ve got to get back to the Burrow and find out —then well be able to send you word, or — or Tonkswill, once she’s —”

“Dora’ll be okay, ’Dromeda,” said Ted. “She knows herstuff, she’s been in plenty of tight spots with theAurors. The Portkey’s through here,” he added to

Page | 71

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry. “It’s supposed to leave in three minutes, if youwant to take it.”

“Yeah, we do,” said Harry. He seized his rucksack,swung it onto his shoulders. “I —”

He looked at Mrs. Tonks, wanting to apologize for thestate of fear in which he left her and for which he feltso terribly responsible, but no words occurred to himthat did not seem hollow and insincere.

“Ill tell Tonks — Dora — to send word, when she ...Thanks for patching us up, thanks for everything. I —

He was glad to leave the room and follow Ted Tonksalong a short hallway and into a bedroom. Hagridcame after them, bending low to avoid hitting hishead on the door lintel.

“There you go, son. That’s the Portkey.”

Mr. Tonks was pointing to a small, silver-backedhairbrush lying on the dressing table.

“Thanks,” said Harry, reaching out to place a fingeron it, ready to leave.

“Wait a moment,” said Hagrid, looking around.

“Harry, where’s Hedwig?”

“She ... she got hit,” said Harry.

The realization crashed over him: He felt ashamed ofhimself as the tears stung his eyes. The owl had beenhis companion, his one great link with the magicalworld whenever he had been forced to return to theDursleys.

Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid reached out a great hand and patted himpainfully on the shoulder.

“Never mind,” he said gruffly. “Never mind. She had agreat old life —”

“Hagrid!” said Ted Tonks warningly, as the hairbrushglowed bright blue, and Hagrid only just got hisforefinger to it in time.

With a jerk behind the navel as though an invisiblehook and line had dragged him forward, Harry waspulled into nothingness, spinning uncontrollably, hisfinger glued to the Portkey as he and Hagrid hurtledaway from Mr. Tonks. Seconds later Harry’s feetslammed onto hard ground and he fell onto his handsand knees in the yard of the Burrow. He heardscreams. Throwing aside the no longer glowinghairbrush, Harry stood up, swaying slightly, and sawMrs. Weasley and Ginny running down the steps bythe back door as Hagrid, who had also collapsed onlanding, clambered laboriously to his feet.

“Harry? You are the real Harry? What happened?Where are the others?” cried Mrs. Weasley.

“What d’you mean? Isn’t anyone else back?” Harrypanted.

The answer was clearly etched in Mrs. Weasley’s paleface.

“The Death Eaters were waiting for us,” Harry toldher. “We were surrounded the moment we took off —they knew it was tonight — I don’t know whathappened to anyone else, four of them chased us, itwas all we could do to get away, and then Voldemortcaught up with us —”

Page | 73

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He could hear the self-justifying note in his voice, theplea for her to understand why he did not know whathad happened to her sons, but —

“Thank goodness you’re all right,” she said, pullinghim into a hug he did not feel he deserved.

“Haven’t go’ any brandy, have yeh, Molly?” askedHagrid a little shakily. “Fer medicinal purposes?”

She could have summoned it by magic, but as shehurried back toward the crooked house, Harry knewthat she wanted to hide her face. He turned to Ginnyand she answered his unspoken plea for informationat once.

“Ron and Tonks should have been back first, but theymissed their Portkey, it came back without them,” shesaid, pointing at a rusty oil can lying on the groundnearby. “And that one,” she pointed at an ancientsneaker, “should have been Dad and Fred’s, theywere supposed to be second. You and Hagrid werethird and,” she checked her watch, “if they made it,George and Lupin ought to be back in about aminute.”

Mrs. Weasley reappeared carrying a bottle of brandy,which she handed to Hagrid. He uncorked it anddrank it straight down in one.

“Mum!” shouted Ginny, pointing to a spot several feetaway.

A blue light had appeared in the darkness: It grewlarger and brighter, and Lupin and George appeared,spinning and then falling. Harry knew immediatelythat there was something wrong: Lupin wassupporting George, who was unconscious and whoseface was covered in blood.

Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry ran forward and seized George’s legs. Together,he and Lupin carried George into the house andthrough the kitchen to the sitting room, where theylaid him on the sofa. As the lamplight fell acrossGeorge’s head, Ginny gasped and Harry’s stomachlurched: One of George’s ears was missing. The sideof his head and neck were drenched in wet,shockingly scarlet blood.

No sooner had Mrs. Weasley bent over her son thanLupin grabbed Harry by the upper arm and draggedhim, none too gently, back into the kitchen, whereHagrid was still attempting to ease his bulk throughthe back door.

“Oi!” said Hagrid indignantly. “Le’ go of him! Le’ go ofHarry!”

Lupin ignored him.

“What creature sat in the corner the first time thatHarry Potter visited my office at Hogwarts?” he said,giving Harry a small shake. “Answer me!”

“A — a grindylow in a tank, wasn’t it?”

Lupin released Harry and fell back against a kitchencupboard.

“Wha’ was tha’ about?” roared Hagrid.

“I’m sorry, Harry, but I had to check,” said Lupintersely. “We’ve been betrayed. Voldemort knew thatyou were being moved tonight and the only peoplewho could have told him were directly involved in theplan. You might have been an impostor.”

“So why aren’ you checkin’ me?” panted Hagrid, stillstruggling to fit through the door.

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’re half-giant,” said Lupin, looking up at Hagrid.“The Polyjuice Potion is designed for human useonly.”

“None of the Order would have told Voldemort wewere moving tonight,” said Harry. The idea wasdreadful to him, he could not believe it of any of them.“Voldemort only caught up with me toward the end,he didn’t know which one I was in the beginning. Ifhe’d been in on the plan he’d have known from thestart I was the one with Hagrid.”

“Voldemort caught up with you?” said Lupin sharply.“What happened? How did you escape?”

Harry explained briefly how the Death Eaterspursuing them had seemed to recognize him as thetrue Harry, how they had abandoned the chase, howthey must have summoned Voldemort, who hadappeared just before he and Hagrid had reached thesanctuary of Tonks’s parents.

“They recognized you? But how? What had youdone?”

“I ...” Harry tried to remember; the whole journeyseemed like a blur of panic and confusion. “I sawStan Shunpike. ... You know, the bloke who was theconductor on the Knight Bus? And I tried to Disarmhim instead of— well, he doesn’t know what he’sdoing, does he? He must be Imperiused!”

Lupin looked aghast.

“Harry, the time for Disarming is past! These peopleare trying to capture and kill you! At least Stun if youaren’t prepared to kill!”

Page | 76

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We were hundreds of feet up! Stan’s not himself, andif I Stunned him and he’d fallen, he’d have died thesame as if I’d used Avada Kedavra! Expelliarmussaved me from Voldemort two years ago,” Harry addeddefiantly. Lupin was reminding him of the sneeringHufflepuff Zacharias Smith, who had jeered at Harryfor wanting to teach Dumbledore’s Army how toDisarm.

“Yes, Harry,” said Lupin with painful restraint, “and agreat number of Death Eaters witnessed thathappening! Forgive me, but it was a very unusualmove then, under imminent threat of death.

Repeating it tonight in front of Death Eaters whoeither witnessed or heard about the first occasion wasclose to suicidal!”

“So you think I should have killed Stan Shunpike?”said Harry angrily.

“Of course not,” said Lupin, “but the Death Eaters —frankly, most people! — would have expected you toattack back! Expelliarmus is a useful spell, Harry, butthe Death Eaters seem to think it is your signaturemove, and I urge you not to let it become so!”

Lupin was making Harry feel idiotic, and yet therewas still a grain of defiance inside him.

“I won’t blast people out of my way just becausethey’re there,” said Harry. “That’s Voldemort’s job.”

Lupin’s retort was lost: Finally succeeding insqueezing through the door, Hagrid staggered to achair and sat down; it collapsed beneath him.

Ignoring his mingled oaths and apologies, Harryaddressed Lupin again.

“Will George be okay?”

Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

All Lupin’s frustration with Harry seemed to drainaway at the question.

“I think so, although there’s no chance of replacinghis ear, not when it’s been cursed off—”

There was a scuffling from outside. Lupin dived forthe back door; Harry leapt over Hagrid’s legs andsprinted into the yard.

Two figures had appeared in the yard, and as Harryran toward them he realized they were Hermione, nowreturning to her normal appearance, and Kingsley,both clutching a bent coat hanger. Hermione flungherself into Harry’s arms, but Kingsley showed nopleasure at the sight of any of them. Over Hermione’sshoulder Harry saw him raise his wand and point itat Lupin’s chest.

“The last words Albus Dumbledore spoke to the pairof us?”

“ ‘Harry is the best hope we have. Trust him,’ ” saidLupin calmly.

Kingsley turned his wand on Harry, but Lupin said,“It’s him, I’ve checked!”

“All right, all right!” said Kingsley, stowing his wandback beneath his cloak. “But somebody betrayed us!They knew, they knew it was tonight!”

“So it seems,” replied Lupin, “but apparently they didnot realize that there would be seven Harrys.”

“Small comfort!” snarled Kingsley. “Who else is back?”

“Only Harry, Hagrid, George, and me.”

Page | 78

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hermione stifled a little moan behind her hand.

“What happened to you?” Lupin asked Kingsley.

“Followed by five, injured two, might’ve killed one,”Kingsley reeled off, “and we saw You-Know-Who aswell, he joined the chase halfway through butvanished pretty quickly. Remus, he can —”

“Fly,” supplied Harry. “I saw him too, he came afterHagrid and me.”

“So that’s why he left, to follow you!” said Kingsley. “Icouldn’t understand why he’d vanished. But whatmade him change targets?”

“Harry behaved a little too kindly to Stan Shunpike,”said Lupin.

“Stan?” repeated Hermione. “But I thought he was inAzkaban?”

Kingsley let out a mirthless laugh.

“Hermione, there’s obviously been a mass breakoutwhich the Ministry has hushed up. Travers’s hood felloff when I cursed him, he’s supposed to be inside too.But what happened to you, Remus? Where’s George?”

“He lost an ear,” said Lupin.

“Lost an — ?” repeated Hermione in a high voice.

“Snape’s work,” said Lupin.

“Snape?” shouted Harry. “You didn’t say —”

“He lost his hood during the chase. Sectumsemprawas always a specialty of Snape’s. I wish I could say

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

I’d paid him back in kind, but it was all I could do tokeep George on the broom after he was injured, hewas losing so much blood.”

Silence fell between the four of them as they lookedup at the sky. There was no sign of movement; thestars stared back, unblinking, indifferent,unobscured by flying friends. Where was Ron? Wherewere Fred and Mr. Weasley? Where were Bill, Fleur,Tonks, Mad-Eye, and Mundungus?

“Harry, give us a hand!” called Hagrid hoarsely fromthe door, in which he was stuck again. Glad ofsomething to do, Harry pulled him free, then headedthrough the empty kitchen and back into the sittingroom, where Mrs. Weasley and Ginny were stilltending to George. Mrs. Weasley had staunched hisbleeding now, and by the lamplight Harry saw aclean, gaping hole where George’s ear had been.

“How is he?”

Mrs. Weasley looked around and said, “I can’t make itgrow back, not when it’s been removed by DarkMagic. But it could have been so much worse. ... He’salive.”

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Thank God.”

“Did I hear someone else in the yard?” Ginny asked.

“Hermione and Kingsley,” said Harry.

“Thank goodness,” Ginny whispered. They looked ateach other; Harry wanted to hug her, hold on to her;he did not even care much that Mrs. Weasley wasthere, but before he could act on the impulse therewas a great crash from the kitchen.

Page | 80

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll prove who I am, Kingsley, after I’ve seen my son,now back off if you know what’s good for you!”

Harry had never heard Mr. Weasley shout like thatbefore. He burst into the living room, his bald patchgleaming with sweat, his spectacles askew, Fred rightbehind him, both pale but uninjured.

“Arthur!” sobbed Mrs. Weasley. “Oh thank goodness!”

“How is he?”

Mr. Weasley dropped to his knees beside George. Forthe first time since Harry had known him, Fredseemed to be lost for words. He gaped over the backof the sofa at his twin’s wound as if he could notbelieve what he was seeing.

Perhaps roused by the sound of Fred and theirfather’s arrival, George stirred.

“How do you feel, Georgie?” whispered Mrs. Weasley.George’s fingers groped for the side of his head.“Saintlike,” he murmured.

“What’s wrong with him?” croaked Fred, lookingterrified. “Is his mind affected?”

“Saintlike,” repeated George, opening his eyes andlooking up at his brother. “You see ... I’m holy. Holev,Fred, geddit?”

Mrs. Weasley sobbed harder than ever. Color floodedFred’s pale face.

Page | 81

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Pathetic,” he told George. “Pathetic! With the wholewide world of ear-related humor before you, you go forholey?”

“Ah well,” said George, grinning at his tear-soakedmother. “You’ll be able to tell us apart now, anyway,Mum.”

He looked around.

“Hi, Harry — you are Harry, right?”

“Yeah, I am,” said Harry, moving closer to the sofa.

“Well, at least we got you back okay,” said George.“Why aren’t Ron and Bill huddled round my sickbed?”

“They’re not back yet, George,” said Mrs. Weasley.George’s grin faded.

Harry glanced at Ginny and motioned to her toaccompany him back outside. As they walked throughthe kitchen she said in a low voice, “Ron and Tonksshould be back by now. They didn’t have a longjourney; Auntie Muriel’s not that far from here.”

Harry said nothing. He had been trying to keep fear atbay ever since reaching the Burrow, but now itenveloped him, seeming to crawl over his skin,throbbing in his chest, clogging his throat. As theywalked down the back steps into the dark yard, Ginnytook his hand.

Kingsley was striding backward and forward, glancingup at the sky every time he turned. Harry wasreminded of Uncle Vernon pacing the living room amillion years ago. Hagrid, Hermione, and Lupin stoodshoulder to shoulder, gazing upward in silence. None

Page | 82

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

of them looked around when Harry and Ginny joinedtheir silent vigil.

The minutes stretched into what might as well havebeen years. The slightest breath of wind made themall jump and turn toward the whispering bush or treein the hope that one of the missing Order membersmight leap unscathed from its leaves —

And then a broom materialized directly above themand streaked toward the ground —

“It’s them!” screamed Hermione.

Tonks landed in a long skid that sent earth andpebbles everywhere.

“Remus!” Tonks cried as she staggered off the broominto Lupin’s arms. His face was set and white: Heseemed unable to speak. Ron tripped dazedly towardHarry and Hermione.

“You’re okay,” he mumbled, before Hermione flew athim and hugged him tightly.

“I thought — I thought —”

“ ’M all right,” said Ron, patting her on the back. “ ’Mfine.”

“Ron was great,” said Tonks warmly, relinquishingher hold on Lupin. “Wonderful. Stunned one of theDeath Eaters, straight to the head, and when you’reaiming at a moving target from a flying broom —”

“You did?” said Hermione, gazing up at Ron with herarms still around his neck.

Page | 83

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Always the tone of surprise,” he said a littlegrumpily, breaking free. “Are we the last back?”

“No,” said Ginny, “we’re still waiting for Bill and Fleurand Mad-Eye and Mundungus. I’m going to tell Mumand Dad you’re okay, Ron —”

She ran back inside.

“So what kept you? What happened?” Lupin soundedalmost angry at Tonks.

“Bellatrix,” said Tonks. “She wants me quite as muchas she wants Harry, Remus, she tried very hard to killme. I just wish I’d got her, I owe Bellatrix. But wedefinitely injured Rodolphus. ... Then we got to Ron’sAuntie Muriel’s and we’d missed our Portkey and shewas fussing over us —”

A muscle was jumping in Lupin’s jaw. He nodded, butseemed unable to say anything else.

“So what happened to you lot?” Tonks asked, turningto Harry, Hermione, and Kingsley.

They recounted the stories of their own journeys, butall the time the continued absence of Bill, Fleur, Mad-Eye, and Mundungus seemed to lie upon them like afrost, its icy bite harder and harder to ignore.

“I’m going to have to get back to Downing Street, Ishould have been there an hour ago,” said Kingsleyfinally, after a last sweeping gaze at the sky. “Let meknow when they’re back.”

Lupin nodded. With a wave to the others, Kingsleywalked away into the darkness toward the gate. Harrythought he heard the faintest pop as KingsleyDisapparated just beyond the Burrow’s boundaries.

Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Mr. and Mrs. Weasley came racing down the backsteps, Ginny behind them. Both parents hugged Ronbefore turning to Lupin and Tonks.

“Thank you,” said Mrs. Weasley, “for our sons.”

“Don’t be silly, Molly,” said Tonks at once.

“How’s George?” asked Lupin.

“What’s wrong with him?” piped up Ron.

“He’s lost —”

But the end of Mrs. Weasley’s sentence was drownedin a general outcry: A thestral had just soared intosight and landed a few feet from them. Bill and Fleurslid from its back, windswept but unhurt.

“Bill! Thank God, thank God —”

Mrs. Weasley ran forward, but the hug Bill bestowedupon her was perfunctory. Looking directly at hisfather, he said, “Mad-Eye’s dead.”

Nobody spoke, nobody moved. Harry felt as thoughsomething inside him was falling, falling through theearth, leaving him forever.

“We saw it,” said Bill; Fleur nodded, tear tracksglittering on her cheeks in the light from the kitchenwindow. “It happened just after we broke out of thecircle: Mad-Eye and Dung were close by us, they wereheading north too. Voldemort — he can fly — wentstraight for them. Dung panicked, I heard him cryout, Mad-Eye tried to stop him, but he Disapparated.Voldemort’s curse hit Mad-Eye full in the face, he fellbackward off his broom and — there was nothing we

Page | 85

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

could do, nothing, we had half a dozen of them on ourown tail —”

Bill’s voice broke.

“Of course you couldn’t have done anything,” saidLupin.

They all stood looking at each other. Harry could notquite comprehend it. Mad-Eye dead; it could not be.

... Mad-Eye, so tough, so brave, the consummatesurvivor ...

At last it seemed to dawn on everyone, though nobodysaid it, that there was no point waiting in the yardanymore, and in silence they followed Mr. and Mrs.Weasley back into the Burrow, and into the livingroom, where Fred and George were laughing together.

“What’s wrong?” said Fred, scanning their faces asthey entered. “What’s happened? Who’s — ?”

“Mad-Eye,” said Mr. Weasley. “Dead.”

The twins’ grins turned to grimaces of shock. Nobodyseemed to know what to do. Tonks was crying silentlyinto a handkerchief: She had been close to Mad-Eye,Harry knew, his favorite and his protegee at theMinistry of Magic. Hagrid, who had sat down on thefloor in the corner where he had most space, wasdabbing at his eyes with his tablecloth-sizedhandkerchief.

Bill walked over to the sideboard and pulled out abottle of fire-whisky and some glasses.

“Here,” he said, and with a wave of his wand he senttwelve full glasses soaring through the room to eachof them, holding the thirteenth aloft. “Mad-Eye.”

Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Mad-Eye,” they all said, and drank.

“Mad-Eye,” echoed Hagrid, a little late, with a hiccup.

The firewhisky seared Harry’s throat. It seemed toburn feeling back into him, dispelling the numbnessand sense of unreality, firing him with something thatwas like courage.

“So Mundungus disappeared?” said Lupin, who haddrained his own glass in one.

The atmosphere changed at once. Everybody lookedtense, watching Lupin, both wanting him to go on, itseemed to Harry, and slightly afraid of what theymight hear.

“I know what you’re thinking,” said Bill, “and Iwondered that too, on the way back here, becausethey seemed to be expecting us, didn’t they? ButMundungus can’t have betrayed us. They didn’t knowthere would be seven Harrys, that confused them themoment we appeared, and in case you’ve forgotten, itwas Mundungus who suggested that little bit ofskullduggery. Why wouldn’t he have told them theessential point? I think Dung panicked, it’s as simpleas that. He didn’t want to come in the first place, butMad-Eye made him, and You-Know-Who wentstraight for them. It was enough to make anyonepanic.”

“You-Know-Who acted exactly as Mad-Eye expectedhim to,” sniffed Tonks. “Mad-Eye said he’d expect thereal Harry to be with the toughest, most skilledAurors. He chased Mad-Eye first, and whenMundungus gave them away he switched to Kingsley.

Page | 87

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, and zat eez all very good,” snapped Fleur, “butstill eet does not explain ’ow zey knew we were moving’Arry tonight, does eet? Somebody must ’ave beencareless. Somebody let slip ze date to an outsider. It isze only explanation for zem knowing ze date but notze ’ole plan.”

She glared around at them all, tear tracks still etchedon her beautiful face, silently daring any of them tocontradict her. Nobody did. The only sound to breakthe silence was that of Hagrid hiccuping from behindhis handkerchief. Harry glanced at Hagrid, who hadjust risked his own life to save Harry’s — Hagrid,whom he loved, whom he trusted, who had once beentricked into giving Voldemort crucial information inexchange for a dragon’s egg. ...

“No,” Harry said aloud, and they all looked at him,surprised: The firewhisky seemed to have amplifiedhis voice. “I mean ... if somebody made a mistake,”Harry went on, “and let something slip, I know theydidn’t mean to do it. It’s not their fault,” he repeated,again a little louder than he would usually havespoken. “We’ve got to trust each other. I trust all ofyou, I don’t think anyone in this room would ever sellme to Voldemort.”

More silence followed his words. They were all lookingat him; Harry felt a little hot again, and drank somemore firewhisky for something to do. As he drank, hethought of Mad-Eye. Mad-Eye had always beenscathing about Dumbledore’s willingness to trustpeople.

“Well said, Harry,” said Fred unexpectedly.

“Yeah, ’ear, ’ear,” said George, with half a glance atFred, the corner of whose mouth twitched.

Page | 88

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Lupin was wearing an odd expression as he looked atHarry. It was close to pitying.

“You think I’m a fool?” demanded Harry.

“No, I think you’re like James,” said Lupin, “whowould have regarded it as the height of dishonor tomistrust his friends.”

Harry knew what Lupin was getting at: that his fatherhad been betrayed by his friend, Peter Pettigrew. Hefelt irrationally angry. He wanted to argue, but Lupinhad turned away from him, set down his glass upon aside table, and addressed Bill, “There’s work to do. Ican ask Kingsley whether —”

“No,” said Bill at once, “I’ll do it, I’ll come.”

“Where are you going?” said Tonks and Fleurtogether.

“Mad-Eye’s body,” said Lupin. “We need to recover it.”

“Can’t it — ?” began Mrs. Weasley with an appealinglook at Bill.

“Wait?” said Bill. “Not unless you’d rather the DeathEaters took it?”

Nobody spoke. Lupin and Bill said good-bye and left.

The rest of them now dropped into chairs, all exceptfor Harry, who remained standing. The suddennessand completeness of death was with them like apresence.

“I’ve got to go too,” said Harry.

Ten pairs of startled eyes looked at him.

Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t be silly, Harry,” said Mrs. Weasley. “What areyou talking about?”

“I can’t stay here.”

He rubbed his forehead; it was prickling again, it hadnot hurt like this for more than a year.

“You’re all in danger while I’m here. I don’t want —”

“But don’t be so silly!” said Mrs. Weasley. “The wholepoint of tonight was to get you here safely, and thankgoodness it worked. And Fleur’s agreed to get marriedhere rather than in France, we’ve arranged everythingso that we can all stay together and look after you —”

She did not understand; she was making him feelworse, not better.

“If Voldemort finds out I’m here —”

“But why should he?” asked Mrs. Weasley.

“There are a dozen places you might be now, Harry,”said Mr. Weasley. “He’s got no way of knowing whichsafe house you’re in.”

“It’s not me I’m worried for!” said Harry.

“We know that,” said Mr. Weasley quietly, “but itwould make our efforts tonight seem rather pointlessif you left.”

“Yer not goin’ anywhere,” growled Hagrid. “Blimey,Harry, after all we wen’ through ter get you here?”

“Yeah, what about my bleeding ear?” said George,hoisting himself up on his cushions.

Page | 90

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I know that —”

“Mad-Eye wouldn’t want —”

“I KNOW!” Harry bellowed.

He felt beleaguered and blackmailed: Did they thinkhe did not know what they had done for him, didn’tthey understand that it was for precisely that reasonthat he wanted to go now, before they had to sufferany more on his behalf? There was a long andawkward silence in which his scar continued toprickle and throb, and which was broken at last byMrs. Weasley.

“Where’s Hedwig, Harry?” she said coaxingly. “We canput her up with Pigwidgeon and give her something toeat.”

His insides clenched like a fist. He could not tell herthe truth. He drank the last of his firewhisky to avoidanswering.

“Wait till it gets out yeh did it again, Harry,” saidHagrid. “Escaped him, fought him off when he wasright on top of yeh!”

“It wasn’t me,” said Harry flatly. “It was my wand. Mywand acted of its own accord.”

After a few moments, Hermione said gently, “Butthat’s impossible, Harry. You mean that you didmagic without meaning to; you reacted instinctively.”

“No,” said Harry. “The bike was falling, I couldn’t havetold you where Voldemort was, but my wand spun inmy hand and found him and shot a spell at him, andit wasn’t even a spell I recognized. I’ve never madegold flames appear before.”

Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Often,” said Mr. Weasley, “when you’re in apressured situation you can produce magic you neverdreamed of. Small children often find, before they’retrained —”

“It wasn’t like that,” said Harry through gritted teeth.His scar was burning: He felt angry and frustrated; hehated the idea that they were all imagining him tohave power to match Voldemort’s.

No one said anything. He knew that they did notbelieve him. Now that he came to think of it, he hadnever heard of a wand performing magic on its ownbefore.

His scar seared with pain; it was all he could do notto moan aloud. Muttering about fresh air, he setdown his glass and left the room.

As he crossed the dark yard, the great skeletalthestral looked up, rustled its enormous batlikewings, then resumed its grazing. Harry stopped at thegate into the garden, staring out at its overgrownplants, rubbing his pounding forehead and thinkingof Dumbledore.

Dumbledore would have believed him, he knew it.Dumbledore would have known how and why Harry’swand had acted independently, because Dumbledorealways had the answers; he had known about wands,had explained to Harry the strange connection thatexisted between his wand and Voldemort’s. ... ButDumbledore, like Mad-Eye, like Sirius, like hisparents, like his poor owl, all were gone where Harrycould never talk to them again. He felt a burning inhis throat that had nothing to do with firewhisky ...

Page | 92

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

And then, out of nowhere, the pain in his scarpeaked. As he clutched his forehead and closed hiseyes, a voice screamed inside his head.

“ You told me the problem would be solved by usinganother’s wand\”

And into his mind burst the vision of an emaciatedold man lying in rags upon a stone floor, screaming, ahorrible, drawn-out scream, a scream of unendurableagony. ...

“No! No! I beg you, I beg you. ...”

“You lied to Lord Voldemort, Ollivander!”

“I did not. ... I swear I did not. ...”

“You sought to help Potter, to help him escape me!”

“I swear I did not. ... I believed a different wand wouldwork. ...”

“Explain, then, what happened. Lucius’s wand isdestroyed!”

“I cannot understand. ... The connection ... existsonly ... between your two wands. ...”

“Lies!”

“Please ... I beg you. ...”

And Harry saw the white hand raise its wand and feltVoldemort’s surge of vicious anger, saw the frail oldman on the floor writhe in agony —

“Harry?”

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

It was over as quickly as it had come: Harry stoodshaking in the darkness, clutching the gate into thegarden, his heart racing, his scar still tingling. It wasseveral moments before he realized that Ron andHermione were at his side.

“Harry, come back in the house,” Hermionewhispered. “You aren’t still thinking of leaving?”

“Yeah, you’ve got to stay, mate,” said Ron, thumpingHarry on the back.

“Are you all right?” Hermione asked, close enoughnow to look into Harry’s face. “You look awful!”

“Well,” said Harry shakily, “I probably look betterthan Ollivander. ...”

When he had finished telling them what he had seen,Ron looked appalled, but Hermione downrightterrified.

“But it was supposed to have stopped! Your scar — itwasn’t supposed to do this anymore! You mustn’t letthat connection open up again — Dumbledore wantedyou to close your mind!”

When he did not reply, she gripped his arm.

“Harry, he’s taking over the Ministry and thenewspapers and half the Wizarding world! Don’t lethim inside your head too!”

Page | 94

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



THE GHOUL IN PAJAMAS

The shock of losing Mad-Eye hung over the house inthe days that followed; Harry kept expecting to seehim stumping in through the back door like the otherOrder members, who passed in and out to relay news.Harry felt that nothing but action would assuage hisfeelings of guilt and grief and that he ought to set outon his mission to find and destroy Horcruxes as soonas possible.

“Well, you can’t do anything about the” — Ronmouthed the word Horcruxes — “till you’re seventeen.You’ve still got the Trace on you. And we can planhere as well as anywhere, can’t we? Or,” he droppedhis voice to a whisper, “d’you reckon you alreadyknow where the You-Know-Whats are?”

“No,” Harry admitted.

“I think Hermione’s been doing a bit of research,” saidRon. “She said she was saving it for when you gothere.”

Page | 95

Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

They were sitting at the breakfast table; Mr. Weasleyand Bill had just left for work. Mrs. Weasley had goneupstairs to wake Hermione and Ginny, while Fleurhad drifted off to take a bath.

“The Trace’ll break on the thirty-first,” said Harry.“That means I only need to stay here four days. ThenI can —”

“Five days,” Ron corrected him firmly. “We’ve got tostay for the wedding. They’ll kill us if we miss it.”

Harry understood “they” to mean Fleur and Mrs.Weasley.

“It’s one extra day,” said Ron, when Harry lookedmutinous.

“Don’t they realize how important — ?”

“ ’Course they don’t,” said Ron. “They haven’t got aclue. And now you mention it, I wanted to talk to youabout that.”

Ron glanced toward the door into the hall to checkthat Mrs. Weasley was not returning yet, then leanedin closer to Harry.

“Mum’s been trying to get it out of Hermione and me.What we’re off to do. She’ll try you next, so braceyourself. Dad and Lupin’ve both asked as well, butwhen we said Dumbledore told you not to tell anyoneexcept us, they dropped it. Not Mum, though. She’sdetermined.”

Ron’s prediction came true within hours. Shortlybefore lunch, Mrs. Weasley detached Harry from theothers by asking him to help identify a lone man’ssock that she thought might have come out of his

Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

rucksack. Once she had him cornered in the tinyscullery off the kitchen, she started.

“Ron and Hermione seem to think that the three ofyou are dropping out of Hogwarts,” she began in alight, casual tone.

“Oh,” said Harry. “Well, yeah. We are.”

The mangle turned of its own accord in a corner,wringing out what looked like one of Mr. Weasley’svests.

“May I ask why you are abandoning your education?”said Mrs. Weasley.

“Well, Dumbledore left me ... stuff to do,” mumbledHarry. “Ron and Hermione know about it, and theywant to come too.”

“What sort of ‘stuff’?”

“I’m sorry, I can’t —”

“Well, frankly, I think Arthur and I have a right toknow, and I’m sure Mr. and Mrs. Granger wouldagree!” said Mrs. Weasley. Harry had been afraid ofthe “concerned parent” attack. He forced himself tolook directly into her eyes, noticing as he did so thatthey were precisely the same shade of brown asGinny’s. This did not help.

“Dumbledore didn’t want anyone else to know, Mrs.Weasley. I’m sorry. Ron and Hermione don’t have tocome, it’s their choice —”

“I don’t see that you have to go either!” she snapped,dropping all pretense now. “You’re barely of age, anyof you! It’s utter nonsense, if Dumbledore needed

Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

work doing, he had the whole Order at his command!Harry, you must have misunderstood him. Probablyhe was telling you something he wanted done, andyou took it to mean that he wanted you —”

“I didn’t misunderstand,” said Harry flatly. “It’s got tobe me.”

He handed her back the single sock he was supposedto be identifying, which was patterned with goldenbulrushes.

“And that’s not mine, I don’t support PuddlemereUnited.”

“Oh, of course not,” said Mrs. Weasley with a suddenand rather unnerving return to her casual tone. “Ishould have realized. Well, Harry, while we’ve still gotyou here, you won’t mind helping with thepreparations for Bill and Fleur’s wedding, will you?There’s still so much to do.”

“No — I — of course not,” said Harry, disconcerted bythis sudden change of subject.

“Sweet of you,” she replied, and she smiled as she leftthe scullery.

From that moment on, Mrs. Weasley kept Harry, Ron,and Hermione so busy with preparations for thewedding that they hardly had any time to think. Thekindest explanation of this behavior would have beenthat Mrs. Weasley wanted to distract them all fromthoughts of Mad-Eye and the terrors of their recentjourney. After two days of nonstop cutlery cleaning, ofcolor-matching favors, ribbons, and flowers, of de-gnoming the garden and helping Mrs. Weasley cookvast batches of canapes, however, Harry started tosuspect her of a different motive. All the jobs shePage | 98 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

handed out seemed to keep him, Ron, and Hermioneaway from one another; he had not had a chance tospeak to the two of them alone since the first night,when he had told them about Voldemort torturingOllivander.

“I think Mum thinks that if she can stop the three ofyou getting together and planning, she’ll be able todelay you leaving,” Ginny told Harry in an undertone,as they laid the table for dinner on the third night ofhis stay.

“And then what does she think’s going to happen?”Harry muttered. “Someone else might kill offVoldemort while she’s holding us here making vol-au-vents?”

He had spoken without thinking, and saw Ginny’sface whiten.

“So it’s true?” she said. “That’s what you’re trying todo?”

“I — not — I was joking,” said Harry evasively.

They stared at each other, and there was somethingmore than shock in Ginny’s expression. SuddenlyHarry became aware that this was the first time thathe had been alone with her since those stolen hoursin secluded corners of the Hogwarts grounds. He wassure she was remembering them too. Both of themjumped as the door opened, and Mr. Weasley,Kingsley, and Bill walked in.

They were often joined by other Order members fordinner now, because the Burrow had replacednumber twelve, Grimmauld Place as theheadquarters. Mr. Weasley had explained that afterthe death of Dumbledore, their Secret-Keeper, each ofPage | 99 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the people to whom Dumbledore had confidedGrimmauld Place’s location had become a Secret-Keeper in turn.

“And as there are around twenty of us, that greatlydilutes the power of the Fidelius Charm. Twenty timesas many opportunities for the Death Eaters to get thesecret out of somebody. We can’t expect it to holdmuch longer.”

“But surely Snape will have told the Death Eaters theaddress by now?” asked Harry.

“Well, Mad-Eye set up a couple of curses againstSnape in case he turns up there again. We hopethey’ll be strong enough both to keep him out and tobind his tongue if he tries to talk about the place, butwe can’t be sure. It would have been insane to keepusing the place as headquarters now that itsprotection has become so shaky.”

The kitchen was so crowded that evening it wasdifficult to maneuver knives and forks. Harry foundhimself crammed beside Ginny; the unsaid thingsthat had just passed between them made him wishthey had been separated by a few more people. Hewas trying so hard to avoid brushing her arm hecould barely cut his chicken.

“No news about Mad-Eye?” Harry asked Bill.

“Nothing,” replied Bill.

They had not been able to hold a funeral for Moody,because Bill and Lupin had failed to recover his body.It had been difficult to know where he might havefallen, given the darkness and the confusion of thebattle.

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“The Daily Prophet hasn’t said a word about himdying or about finding the body,” Bill went on. “Butthat doesn’t mean much. It’s keeping a lot quiet thesedays.”

“And they still haven’t called a hearing about all theunderage magic I used escaping the Death Eaters?”Harry called across the table to Mr. Weasley, whoshook his head.

“Because they know I had no choice or because theydon’t want me to tell the world Voldemort attackedme?”

“The latter, I think. Scrimgeour doesn’t want to admitthat You-Know-Who is as powerful as he is, nor thatAzkaban’s seen a mass breakout.”

“Yeah, why tell the public the truth?” said Harry,clenching his knife so tightly that the faint scars onthe back of his right hand stood out, white against hisskin: I must not tell lies.

“Isn’t anyone at the Ministry prepared to stand up tohim?” asked Ron angrily.

“Of course, Ron, but people are terrified,” Mr. Weasleyreplied, “terrified that they will be next to disappear,their children the next to be attacked! There are nastyrumors going around; I for one don’t believe theMuggle Studies professor at Hogwarts resigned. Shehasn’t been seen for weeks now. MeanwhileScrimgeour remains shut up in his office all day: Ijust hope he’s working on a plan.”

There was a pause in which Mrs. Weasley magickedthe empty plates onto the work surface and servedapple tart.

Page | 101 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We must decide ’ow you will be disguised, ’Arry,” saidFleur, once everyone had pudding. “For ze wedding,”she added, when he looked confused. “Of course,none of our guests are Death Eaters, but we cannotguarantee zat zey will not let something slip after zey’ave ’ad champagne.”

From this, Harry gathered that she still suspectedHagrid.

“Yes, good point,” said Mrs. Weasley from the top ofthe table, where she sat, spectacles perched on theend of her nose, scanning an immense list of jobs thatshe had scribbled on a very long piece of parchment.“Now, Ron, have you cleaned out your room yet?”

“ Why?” exclaimed Ron, slamming his spoon down andglaring at his mother. “Why does my room have to becleaned out? Harry and I are fine with it the way it is!”

“We are holding your brother’s wedding here in a fewdays’ time, young man —”

“And are they getting married in my bedroom?” askedRon furiously. “No! So why in the name of Merlin’ssaggy left —”

“Don’t talk to your mother like that,” said Mr. Weasleyfirmly. “And do as you’re told.”

Ron scowled at both his parents, then picked up hisspoon and attacked the last few mouthfuls of hisapple tart.

“I can help, some of it’s my mess,” Harry told Ron,but Mrs. Weasley cut across him.

“No, Harry, dear, I’d much rather you helped Arthurmuck out the chickens, and Hermione, I’d be ever so

Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

grateful if you’d change the sheets for Monsieur andMadame Delacour; you know they’re arriving ateleven tomorrow morning.”

But as it turned out, there was very little to do for thechickens. “There’s no need to, er, mention it to Molly,”Mr. Weasley told Harry, blocking his access to thecoop, “but, er, Ted Tonks sent me most of what wasleft of Sirius’s bike and, er, I’m hiding — that’s to say,keeping — it in here. Fantastic stuff: There’s anexhaust gaskin, as I believe it’s called, the mostmagnificent battery, and it’ll be a great opportunity tofind out how brakes work. I’m going to try and put itall back together again when Molly’s not — I mean,when I’ve got time.”

When they returned to the house, Mrs. Weasley wasnowhere to be seen, so Harry slipped upstairs toRon’s attic bedroom.

“I’m doing it, I’m doing — ! Oh, it’s you,” said Ron inrelief, as Harry entered the room. Ron lay back downon the bed, which he had evidently just vacated. Theroom was just as messy as it had been all week; theonly change was that Hermione was now sitting in thefar corner, her fluffy ginger cat, Crookshanks, at herfeet, sorting books, some of which Harry recognizedas his own, into two enormous piles.

“Hi, Harry,” she said, as he sat down on his campbed.

“And how did you manage to get away?”

“Oh, Ron’s mum forgot that she asked Ginny and meto change the sheets yesterday,” said Hermione. Shethrew Numerology and Grammatica onto one pile andThe Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts onto the other.

Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We were just talking about Mad-Eye,” Ron toldHarry. “I reckon he might have survived.”

“But Bill saw him hit by the Killing Curse,” saidHarry.

“Yeah, but Bill was under attack too,” said Ron. “Howcan he be sure what he saw?”

“Even if the Killing Curse missed, Mad-Eye still fellabout a thousand feet,” said Hermione, now weighingQuidditch Teams of Britain and Ireland in her hand.

“He could have used a Shield Charm —”

“Fleur said his wand was blasted out of his hand,”said Harry.

“Well, all right, if you want him to be dead,” said Rongrumpily, punching his pillow into a morecomfortable shape.

“Of course we don’t want him to be dead!” saidHermione, looking shocked. “It’s dreadful that he’sdead! But we’re being realistic!”

For the first time, Harry imagined Mad-Eye’s body,broken as Dumbledore’s had been, yet with that oneeye still whizzing in its socket. He felt a stab ofrevulsion mixed with a bizarre desire to laugh.

“The Death Eaters probably tidied up afterthemselves, that’s why no one’s found him,” said Ronwisely.

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Like Barty Crouch, turned into abone and buried in Hagrid’s front garden. Theyprobably transfigured Moody and stuffed him —”

Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t!” squealed Hermione. Startled, Harry lookedover just in time to see her burst into tears over hercopy of Spellman’s Syllabary.

“Oh no,” said Harry, struggling to get up from the oldcamp bed. “Hermione, I wasn’t trying to upset —”

But with a great creaking of rusty bedsprings, Ronbounded off the bed and got there first. One armaround Hermione, he fished in his jeans pocket andwithdrew a revolting-looking handkerchief that hehad used to clean out the oven earlier. Hastily pullingout his wand, he pointed it at the rag and said,

“Tergeo.”

The wand siphoned off most of the grease. Lookingrather pleased with himself, Ron handed the slightlysmoking handkerchief to Hermione.

“Oh ... thanks, Ron. ... I’m sorry. ...” She blew hernose and hiccuped. “It’s just so awf-ful, isn’t it? R-right after Dumbledore ... I j-just n-never imaginedMad-Eye dying, somehow, he seemed so tough!”

“Yeah, I know,” said Ron, giving her a squeeze. “Butyou know what he’d say to us if he was here?”

“ ‘C-constant vigilance,’ ” said Hermione, mopping hereyes.

“That’s right,” said Ron, nodding. “He’d tell us to learnfrom what happened to him. And what I’ve learned isnot to trust that cowardly little squit, Mundungus.”

Hermione gave a shaky laugh and leaned forward topick up two more books. A second later, Ron hadsnatched his arm back from around her shoulders;she had dropped The Monster Book of Monsters on his

Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

foot. The book had broken free from its restrainingbelt and snapped viciously at Ron’s ankle.

“I’m sorry, I’m sorry!” Hermione cried as Harrywrenched the book from Ron’s leg and retied it shut.

“What are you doing with all those books anyway?”Ron asked, limping back to his bed.

“Just trying to decide which ones to take with us,”said Hermione. “When we’re looking for theHorcruxes.”

“Oh, of course,” said Ron, clapping a hand to hisforehead. “I forgot we’ll be hunting down Voldemort ina mobile library.”

“Ha ha,” said Hermione, looking down at Spellman’sSyllabary. “I wonder ... will we need to translaterunes? It’s possible. ... I think we’d better take it, tobe safe.”

She dropped the syllabary onto the larger of the twopiles and picked up Hogwarts, A History.

“Listen,” said Harry.

He had sat up straight. Ron and Hermione looked athim with similar mixtures of resignation and defiance.

“I know you said after Dumbledore’s funeral that youwanted to come with me,” Harry began.

“Here he goes,” Ron said to Hermione, rolling his eyes.

“As we knew he would,” she sighed, turning back tothe books. “You know, I think I will take Hogwarts, AHistory. Even if we’re not going back there, I don’tthink I’d feel right if I didn’t have it with —”

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Listen!” said Harry again.

“No, Harry, you listen,” said Hermione. “We’re comingwith you. That was decided months ago — years,really.”

“But —”

“Shut up,” Ron advised him.

“— are you sure you’ve thought this through?” Harrypersisted.

“Let’s see,” said Hermione, slamming Travels withTrolls onto the discarded pile with a rather fierce look.“I’ve been packing for days, so we’re ready to leave ata moment’s notice, which for your information hasincluded doing some pretty difficult magic, not tomention smuggling Mad-Eye’s whole stock ofPolyjuice Potion right under Ron’s mum’s nose.

“I’ve also modified my parents’ memories so thatthey’re convinced they’re really called Wendell andMonica Wilkins, and that their life’s ambition is tomove to Australia, which they have now done. That’sto make it more difficult for Voldemort to track themdown and interrogate them about me — or you,because unfortunately, I’ve told them quite a bitabout you.

“Assuming I survive our hunt for the Horcruxes, I’llfind Mum and Dad and lift the enchantment. If I don’t— well, I think I’ve cast a good enough charm to keepthem safe and happy. Wendell and Monica Wilkinsdon’t know that they’ve got a daughter, you see.”

Hermione’s eyes were swimming with tears again. Rongot back off the bed, put his arm around her oncemore, and frowned at Harry as though reproaching

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

him for lack of tact. Harry could not think of anythingto say, not least because it was highly unusual forRon to be teaching anyone else tact.

“I — Hermione, I’m sorry — I didn’t —”

“Didn’t realize that Ron and I know perfectly wellwhat might happen if we come with you? Well, we do.Ron, show Harry what you’ve done.”

“Nah, he’s just eaten,” said Ron.

“Go on, he needs to know!”

“Oh, all right. Harry, come here.”

For the second time Ron withdrew his arm fromaround Hermione and stumped over to the door.

“C’mon.”

“Why?” Harry asked, following Ron out of the roomonto the tiny landing.

“Descendo,” muttered Ron, pointing his wand at thelow ceiling. A hatch opened right over their heads anda ladder slid down to their feet. A horrible, half-sucking, half-moaning sound came out of the squarehole, along with an unpleasant smell like open drains.

“That’s your ghoul, isn’t it?” asked Harry, who hadnever actually met the creature that sometimesdisrupted the nightly silence.

“Yeah, it is,” said Ron, climbing the ladder. “Comeand have a look at him.”

Harry followed Ron up the few short steps into thetiny attic space. His head and shoulders were in the

Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

room before he caught sight of the creature curled upa few feet from him, fast asleep in the gloom with itslarge mouth wide open.

“But it ... it looks ... do ghouls normally wearpajamas?”

“No,” said Ron. “Nor have they usually got red hair orthat number of pustules.”

Harry contemplated the thing, slightly revolted. It washuman in shape and size, and was wearing what, nowthat Harry’s eyes became used to the darkness, wasclearly an old pair of Ron’s pajamas. He was also surethat ghouls were generally rather slimy and bald,rather than distinctly hairy and covered in angrypurple blisters.

“He’s me, see?” said Ron.

“No,” said Harry. “I don’t.”

“I’ll explain it back in my room, the smell’s getting tome,” said Ron. They climbed back down the ladder,which Ron returned to the ceiling, and rejoinedHermione, who was still sorting books.

“Once we’ve left, the ghoul’s going to come and livedown here in my room,” said Ron. “I think he’s reallylooking forward to it — well, it’s hard to tell, becauseall he can do is moan and drool — but he nods a lotwhen you mention it. Anyway, he’s going to be mewith spattergroit. Good, eh?”

Harry merely looked his confusion.

“It is!” said Ron, clearly frustrated that Harry had notgrasped the brilliance of the plan. “Look, when wethree don’t turn up at Hogwarts again, everyone’s

Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

going to think Hermione and I must be with you,right? Which means the Death Eaters will go straightfor our families to see if they’ve got information onwhere you are.”

“But hopefully it’ll look like I’ve gone away with Mumand Dad; a lot of Muggle-borns are talking aboutgoing into hiding at the moment,” said Hermione.

“We can’t hide my whole family, it’ll look too fishy andthey can’t all leave their jobs,” said Ron. “So we’regoing to put out the story that I’m seriously ill withspattergroit, which is why I can’t go back to school. Ifanyone comes calling to investigate, Mum or Dad canshow them the ghoul in my bed, covered in pustules.Spattergroit’s really contagious, so they’re not goingto want to go near him. It won’t matter that he can’tsay anything, either, because apparently you can’tonce the fungus has spread to your uvula.”

“And your mum and dad are in on this plan?” askedHarry.

“Dad is. He helped Fred and George transform theghoul. Mum ... well, you’ve seen what she’s like. Shewon’t accept we’re going till we’ve gone.”

There was silence in the room, broken only by gentlethuds as Hermione continued to throw books ontoone pile or the other. Ron sat watching her, and Harrylooked from one to the other, unable to say anything.The measures they had taken to protect their familiesmade him realize, more than anything else could havedone, that they really were going to come with himand that they knew exactly how dangerous that wouldbe. He wanted to tell them what that meant to him,but he simply could not find words important enough.

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Through the silence came the muffled sounds of Mrs.Weasley shouting from four floors below.

“Ginny’s probably left a speck of dust on a poxynapkin ring,” said Ron. “I dunno why the Delacourshave got to come two days before the wedding.”

“Fleur’s sister’s a bridesmaid, she needs to be here forthe rehearsal, and she’s too young to come on herown,” said Hermione, as she pored indecisively overBreak with a Banshee.

“Well, guests aren’t going to help Mum’s stress levels,”said Ron.

“What we really need to decide,” said Hermione,tossing Defensive Magical Theory into the bin withouta second glance and picking up An Appraisal ofMagical Education in Europe, “is where we’re goingafter we leave here. I know you said you wanted to goto Godric’s Hollow first, Harry, and I understand why,but ... well ... shouldn’t we make the Horcruxes ourpriority?”

“If we knew where any of the Horcruxes were, I’dagree with you,” said Harry, who did not believe thatHermione really understood his desire to return toGodric’s Hollow. His parents’ graves were only part ofthe attraction: He had a strong, though inexplicable,feeling that the place held answers for him. Perhaps itwas simply because it was there that he had survivedVoldemort’s Killing Curse; now that he was facing thechallenge of repeating the feat, Harry was drawn tothe place where it had happened, wanting tounderstand.

“Don’t you think there’s a possibility that Voldemort’skeeping a watch on Godric’s Hollow?” Hermioneasked. “He might expect you to go back and visit your

Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

parents’ graves once you’re free to go wherever youlike?”

This had not occurred to Harry. While he struggled tofind a counterargument, Ron spoke up, evidentlyfollowing his own train of thought.

“This R.A.B. person,” he said. “You know, the one whostole the real locket?”

Hermione nodded.

“He said in his note he was going to destroy it, didn’the?”

Harry dragged his rucksack toward him and pulledout the fake Horcrux in which R.A.B.’s note was stillfolded.

“ ‘I have stolen the real Horcrux and intend to destroyit as soon as I can,’ ” Harry read out.

“Well, what if he did finish it off?” said Ron.

“Or she,” interposed Hermione.

“Whichever,” said Ron, “it’d be one less for us to do!”

“Yes, but we’re still going to have to try and trace thereal locket, aren’t we?” said Hermione, “to find outwhether or not it’s destroyed.”

“And once we get hold of it, how do you destroy aHorcrux?” asked Ron.

“Well,” said Hermione, “I’ve been researching that.”

“How?” asked Harry. “I didn’t think there were anybooks on Horcruxes in the library?”

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“There weren’t,” said Hermione, who had turned pink.“Dumbledore removed them all, but he — he didn’tdestroy them.”

Ron sat up straight, wide-eyed.

“How in the name of Merlin’s pants have youmanaged to get your hands on those Horcrux books?”

“It — it wasn’t stealing!” said Hermione, looking fromHarry to Ron with a kind of desperation. “They werestill library books, even if Dumbledore had takenthem off the shelves. Anyway, if he really didn’t wantanyone to get at them, I’m sure he would have madeit much harder to —”

“Get to the point!” said Ron.

“Well ... it was easy,” said Hermione in a small voice.

“I just did a Summoning Charm. You know — Accio.And — they zoomed out of Dumbledore’s studywindow right into the girls’ dormitory.”

“But when did you do this?” Harry asked, regardingHermione with a mixture of admiration andincredulity.

“Just after his — Dumbledore’s — funeral,” saidHermione in an even smaller voice. “Right after weagreed we’d leave school and go and look for theHorcruxes. When I went back upstairs to get mythings it — it just occurred to me that the more weknew about them, the better it would be ... and I wasalone in there ... so I tried ... and it worked. They flewstraight in through the open window and I — I packedthem.”

She swallowed and then said imploringly, “I can’tbelieve Dumbledore would have been angry, it’s not

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

as though we’re going to use the information to makea Horcrux, is it?”

“Can you hear us complaining?” said Ron. “Where arethese books anyway?”

Hermione rummaged for a moment and thenextracted from the pile a large volume, bound in fadedblack leather. She looked a little nauseated and heldit as gingerly as if it were something recently dead.

“This is the one that gives explicit instructions on howto make a Horcrux. Secrets of the Darkest Art— it’s ahorrible book, really awful, full of evil magic. I wonderwhen Dumbledore removed it from the library. ... If hedidn’t do it until he was headmaster, I bet Voldemortgot all the instruction he needed from here.”

“Why did he have to ask Slughorn how to make aHorcrux, then, if he’d already read that?” asked Ron.

“He only approached Slughorn to find out what wouldhappen if you split your soul into seven,” said Harry.“Dumbledore was sure Riddle already knew how tomake a Horcrux by the time he asked Slughorn aboutthem. I think you’re right, Hermione, that could easilyhave been where he got the information.”

“And the more I’ve read about them,” said Hermione,“the more horrible they seem, and the less I canbelieve that he actually made six. It warns in thisbook how unstable you make the rest of your soul byripping it, and that’s just by making one Horcrux!”

Harry remembered what Dumbledore had said aboutVoldemort moving beyond “usual evil.”

“Isn’t there any way of putting yourself backtogether?” Ron asked.

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Hermione with a hollow smile, “but itwould be excruciatingly painful.”

“Why? How do you do it?” asked Harry.

“Remorse,” said Hermione. “You’ve got to really feelwhat you’ve done. There’s a footnote. Apparently thepain of it can destroy you. I can’t see Voldemortattempting it somehow, can you?”

“No,” said Ron, before Harry could answer. “So does itsay how to destroy Horcruxes in that book?”

“Yes,” said Hermione, now turning the fragile pages asif examining rotting entrails, “because it warns Darkwizards how strong they have to make theenchantments on them. From all that I’ve read, whatHarry did to Riddle’s diary was one of the few reallyfoolproof ways of destroying a Horcrux.”

“What, stabbing it with a basilisk fang?” asked Harry.

“Oh well, lucky we’ve got such a large supply ofbasilisk fangs, then,” said Ron. “I was wonderingwhat we were going to do with them.”

“It doesn’t have to be a basilisk fang,” said Hermionepatiently. “It has to be something so destructive thatthe Horcrux can’t repair itself. Basilisk venom onlyhas one antidote, and it’s incredibly rare —-□

“— phoenix tears,” said Harry, nodding.

“Exactly,” said Hermione. “Our problem is that thereare very few substances as destructive as basiliskvenom, and they’re all dangerous to carry aroundwith you. That’s a problem we’re going to have tosolve, though, because ripping, smashing, or

Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

crushing a Horcrux won’t do the trick. You’ve got toput it beyond magical repair.”

“But even if we wreck the thing it lives in,” said Ron,“why can’t the bit of soul in it just go and live insomething else?”

“Because a Horcrux is the complete opposite of ahuman being.”

Seeing that Harry and Ron looked thoroughlyconfused, Hermione hurried on, “Look, if I picked upa sword right now, Ron, and ran you through with it,

I wouldn’t damage your soul at all.”

“Which would be a real comfort to me, I’m sure,” saidRon. Harry laughed.

“It should be, actually! But my point is that whateverhappens to your body, your soul will survive,untouched,” said Hermione. “But it’s the other wayround with a Horcrux. The fragment of soul inside itdepends on its container, its enchanted body, forsurvival. It can’t exist without it.”

“That diary sort of died when I stabbed it,” said Harry,remembering ink pouring like blood from thepunctured pages, and the screams of the piece ofVoldemort’s soul as it vanished.

“And once the diary was properly destroyed, the bit ofsoul trapped in it could no longer exist. Ginny tried toget rid of the diary before you did, flushing it away,but obviously it came back good as new.”

“Hang on,” said Ron, frowning. “The bit of soul in thatdiary was possessing Ginny, wasn’t it? How does thatwork, then?”

Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“While the magical container is still intact, the bit ofsoul inside it can flit in and out of someone if they gettoo close to the object. I don’t mean holding it for toolong, it’s nothing to do with touching it,” she addedbefore Ron could speak. “I mean close emotionally.Ginny poured her heart out into that diary, she madeherself incredibly vulnerable. You’re in trouble if youget too fond of or dependent on the Horcrux.”

“I wonder how Dumbledore destroyed the ring?” saidHarry. “Why didn’t I ask him? I never really ...”

His voice tailed away: He was thinking of all thethings he should have asked Dumbledore, and ofhow, since the headmaster had died, it seemed toHarry that he had wasted so many opportunitieswhen Dumbledore had been alive, to find out more ...to find out everything. ...

The silence was shattered as the bedroom door flewopen with a wall-shaking crash. Hermione shriekedand dropped Secrets of the Darkest Art; Crookshanksstreaked under the bed, hissing indignantly; Ronjumped off the bed, skidded on a discarded ChocolateFrog wrapper, and smacked his head on the oppositewall; and Harry instinctively dived for his wand beforerealizing that he was looking up at Mrs. Weasley,whose hair was disheveled and whose face wascontorted with rage.

“I’m so sorry to break up this cozy little gathering,”she said, her voice trembling. “I’m sure you all needyour rest ... but there are wedding presents stackedin my room that need sorting out and I was under theimpression that you had agreed to help.”

“Oh yes,” said Hermione, looking terrified as she leaptto her feet, sending books flying in every direction,

“we will ... we’re sorry ...”

Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

With an anguished look at Harry and Ron, Hermionehurried out of the room after Mrs. Weasley.

“It’s like being a house-elf,” complained Ron in anundertone, still massaging his head as he and Harryfollowed. “Except without the job satisfaction. Thesooner this wedding’s over, the happier I’ll be.”

“Yeah,” said Harry, “then we’ll have nothing to doexcept find Horcruxes. ... It’ll be like a holiday, won’tit?”

Ron started to laugh, but at the sight of the enormouspile of wedding presents waiting for them in Mrs.Weasley’s room, stopped quite abruptly.

The Delacours arrived the following morning at eleveno’clock. Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny were feelingquite resentful toward Fleur’s family by this time, andit was with ill grace that Ron stumped back upstairsto put on matching socks, and Harry attempted toflatten his hair. Once they had all been deemed smartenough, they trooped out into the sunny backyard toawait the visitors.

Harry had never seen the place looking so tidy. Therusty cauldrons and old Wellington boots that usuallylittered the steps by the back door were gone,replaced by two new Flutterby bushes standing eitherside of the door in large pots; though there was nobreeze, the leaves waved lazily, giving an attractiverippling effect. The chickens had been shut away, theyard had been swept, and the nearby garden hadbeen pruned, plucked, and generally spruced up,although Harry, who liked it in its overgrown state,thought that it looked rather forlorn without its usualcontingent of capering gnomes.

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He had lost track of how many security enchantmentshad been placed upon the Burrow by both the Orderand the Ministry; all he knew was that it was nolonger possible for anybody to travel by magic directlyinto the place. Mr. Weasley had therefore gone tomeet the Delacours on top of a nearby hill, where theywere to arrive by Portkey. The first sound of theirapproach was an unusually high-pitched laugh,which turned out to be coming from Mr. Weasley, whoappeared at the gate moments later, laden withluggage and leading a beautiful blonde woman inlong, leaf-green robes, who could only be Fleur’smother.

“Maman!” cried Fleur, rushing forward to embraceher. “Papa!”

Monsieur Delacour was nowhere near as attractive ashis wife; he was a head shorter and extremely plump,with a little, pointed black beard. However, he lookedgood-natured. Bouncing toward Mrs. Weasley onhigh-heeled boots, he kissed her twice on each cheek,leaving her flustered.

“You ’ave been to much trouble,” he said in a deepvoice. “Fleur tells us you ’ave been working very ’ard.”

“Oh, it’s been nothing, nothing!” trilled Mrs. Weasley.“No trouble at all!”

Ron relieved his feelings by aiming a kick at a gnomewho was peering out from behind one of the newFlutterby bushes.

“Dear lady!” said Monsieur Delacour, still holdingMrs. Weasley’s hand between his own two plumpones and beaming. “We are most honored at theapproaching union of our two families! Let me presentmy wife, Apolline.”

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Madame Delacour glided forward and stooped to kissMrs. Weasley too.

“Enchantee,” she said. “Your ’usband ’as been tellingus such amusing stories!”

Mr. Weasley gave a maniacal laugh; Mrs. Weasleythrew him a look, upon which he became immediatelysilent and assumed an expression appropriate to thesickbed of a close friend.

“And, of course, you ’ave met my leetle daughter,Gabrielle!” said Monsieur Delacour. Gabrielle wasFleur in miniature; eleven years old, with waist-lengthhair of pure, silvery blonde, she gave Mrs. Weasley adazzling smile and hugged her, then threw Harry aglowing look, batting her eyelashes. Ginny cleared herthroat loudly.

“Well, come in, do!” said Mrs. Weasley brightly, andshe ushered the Delacours into the house, with many“No, please!”s and “After you!”s and “Not at all!”s.

The Delacours, it soon transpired, were helpful,pleasant guests. They were pleased with everythingand keen to assist with the preparations for thewedding. Monsieur Delacour pronounced everythingfrom the seating plan to the bridesmaids’ shoes“Charmanti” Madame Delacour was mostaccomplished at household spells and had the ovenproperly cleaned in a trice; Gabrielle followed herelder sister around, trying to assist in any way shecould and jabbering away in rapid French.

On the downside, the Burrow was not built toaccommodate so many people. Mr. and Mrs. Weasleywere now sleeping in the sitting room, having shouteddown Monsieur and Madame Delacour’s protests andinsisted they take their bedroom. Gabrielle wasPage | 120 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

sleeping with Fleur in Percy’s old room, and Billwould be sharing with Charlie, his best man, onceCharlie arrived from Romania. Opportunities to makeplans together became virtually nonexistent, and itwas in desperation that Harry, Ron, and Hermionetook to volunteering to feed the chickens just toescape the overcrowded house.

“But she still won’t leave us alone!” snarled Ron, astheir second attempt at a meeting in the yard wasfoiled by the appearance of Mrs. Weasley carrying alarge basket of laundry in her arms.

“Oh, good, you’ve fed the chickens,” she called as sheapproached them. “We’d better shut them away againbefore the men arrive tomorrow ... to put up the tentfor the wedding,” she explained, pausing to leanagainst the henhouse. She looked exhausted.“Millamant’s Magic Marquees ... they’re very good,Bill’s escorting them. ... You’d better stay inside whilethey’re here, Harry. I must say it does complicateorganizing a wedding, having all these security spellsaround the place.”

“I’m sorry,” said Harry humbly.

“Oh, don’t be silly, dear!” said Mrs. Weasley at once. “Ididn’t mean — well, your safety’s much moreimportant! Actually, I’ve been wanting to ask you howyou want to celebrate your birthday, Harry.

Seventeen, after all, it’s an important day. ...”

“I don’t want a fuss,” said Harry quickly, envisagingthe additional strain this would put on them all.“Really, Mrs. Weasley, just a normal dinner would befine. ... It’s the day before the wedding. ...”

“Oh, well, if you’re sure, dear. I’ll invite Remus andTonks, shall I? And how about Hagrid?”

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“That’d be great,” said Harry. “But please don’t go toloads of trouble.”

“Not at all, not at all ... It’s no trouble. ...”

She looked at him, a long, searching look, then smileda little sadly, straightened up, and walked away.

Harry watched as she waved her wand near thewashing line, and the damp clothes rose into the airto hang themselves up, and suddenly he felt a greatwave of remorse for the inconvenience and the painhe was giving her.

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



THE WILL OF ALBUS DUMBLEDORE

He was walking along a mountain road in the coolblue light of dawn. Far below, swathed in mist, wasthe shadow of a small town. Was the man he soughtdown there, the man he needed so badly he couldthink of little else, the man who held the answer, theanswer to his problem ... ?

“Oi, wake up.”

Harry opened his eyes. He was lying again on thecamp bed in Ron’s dingy attic room. The sun had notyet risen and the room was still shadowy. Pigwidgeonwas asleep with his head under his tiny wing. Thescar on Harry’s forehead was prickling.

“You were muttering in your sleep.”

“Was I?”

“Yeah. ‘Gregorovitch.’ You kept saying ‘Gregorovitch.’

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry was not wearing his glasses; Ron’s faceappeared slightly blurred.

“Who’s Gregorovitch?”

“I dunno, do I? You were the one saying it.”

Harry rubbed his forehead, thinking. He had a vagueidea he had heard the name before, but he could notthink where.

“I think Voldemort’s looking for him.”

“Poor bloke,” said Ron fervently.

Harry sat up, still rubbing his scar, now wide awake.He tried to remember exactly what he had seen in thedream, but all that came back was a mountainoushorizon and the outline of the little village cradled in adeep valley.

“I think he’s abroad.”

“Who, Gregorovitch?”

“Voldemort. I think he’s somewhere abroad, lookingfor Gregorovitch. It didn’t look like anywhere inBritain.”

“You reckon you were seeing into his mind again?”Ron sounded worried.

“Do me a favor and don’t tell Hermione,” said Harry.“Although how she expects me to stop seeing stuff inmy sleep ...”

He gazed up at little Pigwidgeon’s cage, thinking ...Why was the name “Gregorovitch” familiar?

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I think,” he said slowly, “he’s got something to dowith Quidditch. There’s some connection, but I can’t— I can’t think what it is.”

“Quidditch?” said Ron. “Sure you’re not thinking ofGorgovitch?”

“Who?”

“Dragomir Gorgovitch, Chaser, transferred to theChudley Cannons for a record fee two years ago.Record holder for most Quaffle drops in a season.”

“No,” said Harry. “I’m definitely not thinking ofGorgovitch.”

“I try not to either,” said Ron. “Well, happy birthdayanyway.”

“Wow — that’s right, I forgot! I’m seventeen!”

Harry seized the wand lying beside his camp bed,pointed it at the cluttered desk where he had left hisglasses, and said, “Accio Glasses!” Although they wereonly around a foot away, there was somethingimmensely satisfying about seeing them zoom towardhim, at least until they poked him in the eye.

“Slick,” snorted Ron.

Reveling in the removal of his Trace, Harry sent Ron’spossessions flying around the room, causingPigwidgeon to wake up and flutter excitedly aroundhis cage. Harry also tried tying the laces of histrainers by magic (the resultant knot took severalminutes to untie by hand) and, purely for thepleasure of it, turned the orange robes on Ron’sChudley Cannons posters bright blue.

Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I’d do your fly by hand, though,” Ron advised Harry,sniggering when Harry immediately checked it.

“Here’s your present. Unwrap it up here, it’s not formy mother’s eyes.”

“A book?” said Harry as he took the rectangularparcel. “Bit of a departure from tradition, isn’t it?”

“This isn’t your average book,” said Ron. “It’s puregold: Twelve Fail-Safe Ways to Charm Witches.Explains everything you need to know about girls. Ifonly I’d had this last year I’d have known exactly howto get rid of Lavender and I would’ve known how toget going with ... Well, Fred and George gave me acopy, and I’ve learned a lot. You’d be surprised, it’snot all about wandwork, either.”

When they arrived in the kitchen they found a pile ofpresents waiting on the table. Bill and MonsieurDelacour were finishing their breakfasts, while Mrs.Weasley stood chatting to them over the frying pan.

“Arthur told me to wish you a happy seventeenth,Harry,” said Mrs. Weasley, beaming at him. “He hadto leave early for work, but hell be back for dinner.That’s our present on top.”

Harry sat down, took the square parcel she hadindicated, and unwrapped it. Inside was a watch verylike the one Mr. and Mrs. Weasley had given Ron forhis seventeenth; it was gold, with stars circlingaround the face instead of hands.

“It’s traditional to give a wizard a watch when hecomes of age,” said Mrs. Weasley, watching himanxiously from beside the cooker. “I’m afraid that oneisn’t new like Ron’s, it was actually my brotherFabian’s and he wasn’t terribly careful with hispossessions, it’s a bit dented on the back, but —”Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The rest of her speech was lost; Harry had got up andhugged her. He tried to put a lot of unsaid things intothe hug and perhaps she understood them, becauseshe patted his cheek clumsily when he released her,then waved her wand in a slightly random way,causing half a pack of bacon to flop out of the fryingpan onto the floor.

“Happy birthday, Harry!” said Hermione, hurryinginto the kitchen and adding her own present to thetop of the pile. “It’s not much, but I hope you like it.What did you get him?” she added to Ron, whoseemed not to hear her.

“Come on, then, open Hermione’s!” said Ron.

She had bought him a new Sneakoscope. The otherpackages contained an enchanted razor from Bill andFleur (“Ah yes, zis will give you ze smoothest shaveyou will ever ’ave,” Monsieur Delacour assured him,“but you must tell it clearly what you want ...ozzerwise you might find you ’ave a leetle less hairzan you would like. ...”), chocolates from theDelacours, and an enormous box of the latestWeasleys’ Wizard Wheezes merchandise from Fredand George.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione did not linger at the table,as the arrival of Madame Delacour, Fleur, andGabrielle made the kitchen uncomfortably crowded.

“I’ll pack these for you,” Hermione said brightly,taking Harry’s presents out of his arms as the three ofthem headed back upstairs. “I’m nearly done, I’m justwaiting for the rest of your underpants to come out ofthe wash, Ron —”

Ron’s splutter was interrupted by the opening of adoor on the first-floor landing.

Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, will you come in here a moment?”

It was Ginny. Ron came to an abrupt halt, butHermione took him by the elbow and tugged him onup the stairs. Feeling nervous, Harry followed Ginnyinto her room.

He had never been inside it before. It was small, butbright. There was a large poster of the Wizardingband the Weird Sisters on one wall, and a picture ofGwenog Jones, Captain of the all-witch Quidditchteam the Holyhead Harpies, on the other. A deskstood facing the open window, which looked out overthe orchard where he and Ginny had once playedtwo-a-side Quidditch with Ron and Hermione, andwhich now housed a large, pearly white marquee. Thegolden flag on top was level with Ginny’s window.

Ginny looked up into Harry’s face, took a deep breath,and said, “Happy seventeenth.”

“Yeah ... thanks.”

She was looking at him steadily; he, however, found itdifficult to look back at her; it was like gazing into abrilliant light.

“Nice view,” he said feebly, pointing toward thewindow.

She ignored this. He could not blame her.

“I couldn’t think what to get you,” she said.

“You didn’t have to get me anything.”

She disregarded this too.

Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I didn’t know what would be useful. Nothing too big,because you wouldn’t be able to take it with you.”

He chanced a glance at her. She was not tearful; thatwas one of the many wonderful things about Ginny,she was rarely weepy. He had sometimes thought thathaving six brothers must have toughened her up.

She took a step closer to him.

“So then I thought, I’d like you to have something toremember me by, you know, if you meet some veelawhen you’re off doing whatever you’re doing.”

“I think dating opportunities are going to be prettythin on the ground, to be honest.”

“There’s the silver lining I’ve been looking for,” shewhispered, and then she was kissing him as she hadnever kissed him before, and Harry was kissing herback, and it was blissful oblivion, better thanfirewhisky; she was the only real thing in the world,Ginny, the feel of her, one hand at her back and onein her long, sweet-smelling hair —

The door banged open behind them and they jumpedapart.

“Oh,” said Ron pointedly. “Sorry.”

“Ron!” Hermione was just behind him, slightly out ofbreath. There was a strained silence, then Ginny saidin a flat little voice,

“Well, happy birthday anyway, Harry.”

Ron’s ears were scarlet; Hermione looked nervous.Harry wanted to slam the door in their faces, but itfelt as though a cold draft had entered the room when

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the door opened, and his shining moment had poppedlike a soap bubble. All the reasons for ending hisrelationship with Ginny, for staying well away fromher, seemed to have slunk inside the room with Ron,and all happy forgetfulness was gone.

He looked at Ginny, wanting to say something,though he hardly knew what, but she had turned herback on him. He thought that she might havesuccumbed, for once, to tears. He could not doanything to comfort her in front of Ron.

“I’ll see you later,” he said, and followed the other twoout of the bedroom.

Ron marched downstairs, through the still-crowdedkitchen and into the yard, and Harry kept pace withhim all the way, Hermione trotting along behind themlooking scared.

Once he reached the seclusion of the freshly mownlawn, Ron rounded on Harry.

“You ditched her. What are you doing now, messingher around?”

“I’m not messing her around,” said Harry, asHermione caught up with them.

“Ron —”

But Ron held up a hand to silence her.

“She was really cut up when you ended it —”

“So was I. You know why I stopped it, and it wasn’tbecause I wanted to.”

Page | 130 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, but you go snogging her now and she’s justgoing to get her hopes up again —”

“She’s not an idiot, she knows it can’t happen, she’snot expecting us to — to end up married, or —”

As he said it, a vivid picture formed in Harry’s mind ofGinny in a white dress, marrying a tall, faceless, andunpleasant stranger. In one spiraling moment itseemed to hit him: Her future was free andunencumbered, whereas his ... he could see nothingbut Voldemort ahead.

“If you keep groping her every chance you get —”

“It won’t happen again,” said Harry harshly. The daywas cloudless, but he felt as though the sun had gonein. “Okay?”

Ron looked half resentful, half sheepish; he rockedbackward and forward on his feet for a moment, thensaid, “Right then, well, that’s ... yeah.”

Ginny did not seek another one-to-one meeting withHarry for the rest of the day, nor by any look orgesture did she show that they had shared more thanpolite conversation in her room. Nevertheless,

Charlie’s arrival came as a relief to Harry. It provideda distraction, watching Mrs. Weasley force Charlieinto a chair, raise her wand threateningly, andannounce that he was about to get a proper haircut.

As Harry’s birthday dinner would have stretched theBurrow’s kitchen to breaking point even before thearrival of Charlie, Lupin, Tonks, and Hagrid, severaltables were placed end to end in the garden. Fred andGeorge bewitched a number of purple lanterns, allemblazoned with a large number 17, to hang inmidair over the guests. Thanks to Mrs. Weasley’sPage | 131 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

ministrations, George’s wound was neat and clean,but Harry was not yet used to the dark hole in theside of his head, despite the twins’ many jokes aboutit.

Hermione made purple and gold streamers erupt fromthe end of her wand and drape themselves artisticallyover the trees and bushes.

“Nice,” said Ron, as with one final flourish of herwand, Hermione turned the leaves on the crabappletree to gold. “You’ve really got an eye for that sort ofthing.”

“Thank you, Ron!” said Hermione, looking bothpleased and a little confused. Harry turned away,smiling to himself. He had a funny notion that hewould find a chapter on compliments when he foundtime to peruse his copy of Twelve Fail-Safe Ways toCharm Witches; he caught Ginny’s eye and grinned ather before remembering his promise to Ron andhurriedly striking up a conversation with MonsieurDelacour.

“Out of the way, out of the way!” sang Mrs. Weasley,coming through the gate with what appeared to be agiant, beach-ball-sized Snitch floating in front of her.Seconds later Harry realized that it was his birthdaycake, which Mrs. Weasley was suspending with herwand, rather than risk carrying it over the unevenground. When the cake had finally landed in themiddle of the table, Harry said, “That looks amazing,Mrs. Weasley.”

“Oh, it’s nothing, dear,” she said fondly. Over hershoulder, Ron gave Harry the thumbs-up andmouthed, Good one.

Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

By seven o’clock all the guests had arrived, led intothe house by Fred and George, who had waited forthem at the end of the lane. Hagrid had honored theoccasion by wearing his best, and horrible, hairybrown suit. Although Lupin smiled as he shookHarry’s hand, Harry thought he looked ratherunhappy. It was all very odd; Tonks, beside him,looked simply radiant.

“Happy birthday, Harry,” she said, hugging himtightly.

“Seventeen, eh!” said Hagrid as he accepted a bucket-sized glass of wine from Fred. “Six years ter the daysince we met, Harry, d’yeh remember it?”

“Vaguely,” said Harry, grinning up at him. “Didn’t yousmash down the front door, give Dudley a pig’s tail,and tell me I was a wizard?”

“I forge’ the details,” Hagrid chortled. “All righ’, Ron,Hermione?”

“We’re fine,” said Hermione. “How are you?”

“Ar, not bad. Bin busy, we got some newbornunicorns, I’ll show yeh when yeh get back —” Harryavoided Ron’s and Hermione’s gazes as Hagridrummaged in his pocket. “Here, Harry — couldn’think what ter get yeh, but then I remembered this.”He pulled out a small, slightly furry drawstring pouchwith a long string, evidently intended to be wornaround the neck. “Mokeskin. Hide anythin’ in therean’ no one but the owner can get it out. They’re rare,them.”

“Hagrid, thanks!”

Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“ ’S’nothin’,” said Hagrid with a wave of a dustbin-lid-sized hand. “An’ there’s Charlie! Always liked him —hey! Charlie!”

Charlie approached, running his hand slightlyruefully over his new, brutally short haircut. He wasshorter than Ron, thickset, with a number of burnsand scratches up his muscley arms.

“Hi, Hagrid, how’s it going?”

“Bin meanin’ ter write fer ages. How’s Norbert doin’?”

“Norbert?” Charlie laughed. “The NorwegianRidgeback? We call her Norberta now.”

“Wha — Norbert’s a girl?”

“Oh yeah,” said Charlie.

“How can you tell?” asked Hermione.

“They’re a lot more vicious,” said Charlie. He lookedover his shoulder and dropped his voice. “Wish Dadwould hurry up and get here. Mum’s getting edgy.”

They all looked over at Mrs. Weasley. She was tryingto talk to Madame Delacour while glancing repeatedlyat the gate.

“I think we’d better start without Arthur,” she calledto the garden at large after a moment or two. “Hemust have been held up at — oh!”

They all saw it at the same time: a streak of light thatcame flying across the yard and onto the table, whereit resolved itself into a bright silver weasel, whichstood on its hind legs and spoke with Mr. Weasley’svoice.

Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Minister of Magic coming with me.”

The Patronus dissolved into thin air, leaving Fleur’sfamily peering in astonishment at the place where ithad vanished.

“We shouldn’t be here,” said Lupin at once. “Harry —I’m sorry — I’ll explain another time —”

He seized Tonks’s wrist and pulled her away; theyreached the fence, climbed over it, and vanished fromsight. Mrs. Weasley looked bewildered.

“The Minister — but why — ? I don’t understand —”

But there was no time to discuss the matter; a secondlater, Mr. Weasley had appeared out of thin air at thegate, accompanied by Rufus Scrimgeour, instantlyrecognizable by his mane of grizzled hair.

The two newcomers marched across the yard towardthe garden and the lantern-lit table, where everybodysat in silence, watching them draw closer. AsScrimgeour came within range of the lantern light,Harry saw that he looked much older than the lasttime they had met, scraggy and grim.

“Sorry to intrude,” said Scrimgeour, as he limped to ahalt before the table. “Especially as I can see that Iam gate-crashing a party.”

His eyes lingered for a moment on the giant Snitchcake.

“Many happy returns.”

“Thanks,” said Harry.

Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I require a private word with you,” Scrimgeour wenton. “Also with Mr. Ronald Weasley and MissHermione Granger.”

“Us?” said Ron, sounding surprised. “Why us?”

“I shall tell you that when we are somewhere moreprivate,” said Scrimgeour. “Is there such a place?” hedemanded of Mr. Weasley.

“Yes, of course,” said Mr. Weasley, who lookednervous. “The, er, sitting room, why don’t you usethat?”

“You can lead the way,” Scrimgeour said to Ron.“There will be no need for you to accompany us,Arthur.”

Harry saw Mr. Weasley exchange a worried look withMrs. Weasley as he, Ron, and Hermione stood up. Asthey led the way back to the house in silence, Harryknew that the other two were thinking the same as hewas: Scrimgeour must, somehow, have learned thatthe three of them were planning to drop out ofHogwarts.

Scrimgeour did not speak as they all passed throughthe messy kitchen and into the Burrow’s sitting room.Although the garden had been full of soft goldenevening light, it was already dark in here: Harryflicked his wand at the oil lamps as he entered andthey illuminated the shabby but cozy room.Scrimgeour sat himself in the sagging armchair thatMr. Weasley normally occupied, leaving Harry, Ron,and Hermione to squeeze side by side onto the sofa.Once they had done so, Scrimgeour spoke.

“I have some questions for the three of you, and Ithink it will be best if we do it individually. If you two”

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

— he pointed at Harry and Hermione — “can waitupstairs, I will start with Ronald.”

“We’re not going anywhere,” said Harry, whileHermione nodded vigorously. “You can speak to ustogether, or not at all.”

Scrimgeour gave Harry a cold, appraising look. Harryhad the impression that the Minister was wonderingwhether it was worthwhile opening hostilities thisearly.

“Very well then, together,” he said, shrugging. Hecleared his throat. “I am here, as I’m sure you know,because of Albus Dumbledore’s will.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another.

“A surprise, apparently! You were not aware then thatDumbledore had left you anything?”

“A-all of us?” said Ron. “Me and Hermione too?”

“Yes, all of—”

But Harry interrupted.

“Dumbledore died over a month ago. Why has it takenthis long to give us what he left us?”

“Isn’t it obvious?” said Hermione, before Scrimgeourcould answer. “They wanted to examine whatever he’sleft us. You had no right to do that!” she said, and hervoice trembled slightly.

“I had every right,” said Scrimgeour dismissively. “TheDecree for Justifiable Confiscation gives the Ministrythe power to confiscate the contents of a will —”

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“That law was created to stop wizards passing onDark artifacts,” said Hermione, “and the Ministry issupposed to have powerful evidence that thedeceased’s possessions are illegal before seizing them!Are you telling me that you thought Dumbledore wastrying to pass us something cursed?”

“Are you planning to follow a career in Magical Law,Miss Granger?” asked Scrimgeour.

“No, I’m not,” retorted Hermione. “I’m hoping to dosome good in the world!”

Ron laughed. Scrimgeour’s eyes flickered toward himand away again as Harry spoke.

“So why have you decided to let us have our thingsnow? Can’t think of a pretext to keep them?”

“No, it’ll be because the thirty-one days are up,” saidHermione at once. “They can’t keep the objects longerthan that unless they can prove they’re dangerous.Right?”

“Would you say you were close to Dumbledore,Ronald?” asked Scrimgeour, ignoring Hermione. Ronlooked startled.

“Me? Not — not really ... It was always Harry who ...”

Ron looked around at Harry and Hermione, to seeHermione giving him a stop-talking-now\ sort of look,but the damage was done: Scrimgeour looked asthough he had heard exactly what he had expected,and wanted, to hear. He swooped like a bird of preyupon Ron’s answer.

“If you were not very close to Dumbledore, how do youaccount for the fact that he remembered you in his

Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

will? He made exceptionally few personal bequests.The vast majority of his possessions — his privatelibrary, his magical instruments, and other personaleffects — were left to Hogwarts. Why do you think youwere singled out?”

“I ... dunno,” said Ron. “I ... when I say we weren’tclose ... I mean, I think he liked me. ...”

“You’re being modest, Ron,” said Hermione.“Dumbledore was very fond of you.”

This was stretching the truth to breaking point; as faras Harry knew, Ron and Dumbledore had never beenalone together, and direct contact between them hadbeen negligible. However, Scrimgeour did not seem tobe listening. He put his hand inside his cloak anddrew out a drawstring pouch much larger than theone Hagrid had given Harry. From it, he removed ascroll of parchment which he unrolled and readaloud.

“ ‘The Last Will and Testament of Albus PercivalWulfric Brian Dumbledore’... Yes, here we are. ... ‘ToRonald Bilius Weasley, I leave my Deluminator, in thehope that he will remember me when he uses it.’ ”

Scrimgeour took from the bag an object that Harryhad seen before: It looked something like a silvercigarette lighter, but it had, he knew, the power tosuck all light from a place, and restore it, with asimple click. Scrimgeour leaned forward and passedthe Deluminator to Ron, who took it and turned itover in his fingers, looking stunned.

“That is a valuable object,” said Scrimgeour, watchingRon. “It may even be unique. Certainly it is ofDumbledore’s own design. Why would he have leftyou an item so rare?”

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron shook his head, looking bewildered.

“Dumbledore must have taught thousands ofstudents,” Scrimgeour persevered. “Yet the only oneshe remembered in his will are you three. Why is that?To what use did he think you would put hisDeluminator, Mr. Weasley?”

“Put out lights, I s’pose,” mumbled Ron. “What elsecould I do with it?”

Evidently Scrimgeour had no suggestions. Aftersquinting at Ron for a moment or two, he turned backto Dumbledore’s will.

“ To Miss Hermione Jean Granger, I leave my copy ofThe Tales of Beedle the Bard, in the hope that she willfind it entertaining and instructive.’ ”

Scrimgeour now pulled out of the bag a small bookthat looked as ancient as the copy of Secrets of theDarkest Art upstairs. Its binding was stained andpeeling in places. Hermione took it from Scrimgeourwithout a word. She held the book in her lap andgazed at it. Harry saw that the title was in runes; hehad never learned to read them. As he looked, a tearsplashed onto the embossed symbols.

“Why do you think Dumbledore left you that book,Miss Granger?” asked Scrimgeour.

“He ... he knew I liked books,” said Hermione in athick voice, mopping her eyes with her sleeve.

“But why that particular book?”

“I don’t know. He must have thought I’d enjoy it.”

Page | 140 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Did you ever discuss codes, or any means of passingsecret messages, with Dumbledore?”

“No, I didn’t,” said Hermione, still wiping her eyes onher sleeve. “And if the Ministry hasn’t found anyhidden codes in this book in thirty-one days, I doubtthat I will.”

She suppressed a sob. They were wedged together sotightly that Ron had difficulty extracting his arm toput it around Hermione’s shoulders. Scrimgeourturned back to the will.

“ ‘To Harry James Potter,’ ” he read, and Harry’sinsides contracted with a sudden excitement, “ ‘I leavethe Snitch he caught in his first Quidditch match atHogwarts, as a reminder of the rewards ofperseverance and skill.’ ”

As Scrimgeour pulled out the tiny, walnut-sizedgolden ball, its silver wings fluttered rather feebly,and Harry could not help feeling a definite sense ofanticlimax.

“Why did Dumbledore leave you this Snitch?” askedScrimgeour.

“No idea,” said Harry. “For the reasons you just readout, I suppose ... to remind me what you can get ifyou ... persevere and whatever it was.”

“You think this a mere symbolic keepsake, then?”

“I suppose so,” said Harry. “What else could it be?”

“I’m asking the questions,” said Scrimgeour, shiftinghis chair a little closer to the sofa. Dusk was reallyfalling outside now; the marquee beyond the windowstowered ghostly white over the hedge.

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

“I notice that your birthday cake is in the shape of aSnitch,” Scrimgeour said to Harry. “Why is that?”

Hermione laughed derisively.

“Oh, it can’t be a reference to the fact Harry’s a greatSeeker, that’s way too obvious,” she said. “There mustbe a secret message from Dumbledore hidden in theicing!”

“I don’t think there’s anything hidden in the icing,”said Scrimgeour, “but a Snitch would be a very goodhiding place for a small object. You know why, I’msure?”

Harry shrugged. Hermione, however, answered: Harrythought that answering questions correctly was sucha deeply ingrained habit she could not suppress theurge.

“Because Snitches have flesh memories,” she said.

“What?” said Harry and Ron together; bothconsidered Hermione’s Quidditch knowledgenegligible.

“Correct,” said Scrimgeour. “A Snitch is not touchedby bare skin before it is released, not even by themaker, who wears gloves. It carries an enchantmentby which it can identify the first human to lay handsupon it, in case of a disputed capture. This Snitch” —he held up the tiny golden ball — “will remember yourtouch, Potter. It occurs to me that Dumbledore, whohad prodigious magical skill, whatever his otherfaults, might have enchanted this Snitch so that itwill open only for you.”

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s heart was beating rather fast. He was surethat Scrimgeour was right. How could he avoid takingthe Snitch with his bare hand in front of the Minister?

“You don’t say anything,” said Scrimgeour. “Perhapsyou already know what the Snitch contains?”

“No,” said Harry, still wondering how he could appearto touch the Snitch without really doing so. If only heknew Legilimency, really knew it, and could readHermione’s mind; he could practically hear her brainwhirring beside him.

“Take it,” said Scrimgeour quietly.

Harry met the Minister’s yellow eyes and knew he hadno option but to obey. He held out his hand, andScrimgeour leaned forward again and placed theSnitch, slowly and deliberately, into Harry’s palm.

Nothing happened. As Harry’s fingers closed aroundthe Snitch, its tired wings fluttered and were still.Scrimgeour, Ron, and Hermione continued to gazeavidly at the now partially concealed ball, as if stillhoping it might transform in some way.

“That was dramatic,” said Harry coolly. Both Ron andHermione laughed.

“That’s all, then, is it?” asked Hermione, making toprise herself off the sofa.

“Not quite,” said Scrimgeour, who looked bad-tempered now. “Dumbledore left you a secondbequest, Potter.”

“What is it?” asked Harry, excitement rekindling.

Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Scrimgeour did not bother to read from the will thistime.

“The sword of Godric Gryffindor,” he said.

Hermione and Ron both stiffened. Harry lookedaround for a sign of the ruby-encrusted hilt, butScrimgeour did not pull the sword from the leatherpouch, which in any case looked much too small tocontain it.

“So where is it?” Harry asked suspiciously.

“Unfortunately,” said Scrimgeour, “that sword wasnot Dumbledore’s to give away. The sword of GodricGryffindor is an important historical artifact, and assuch, belongs —”

“It belongs to Harry!” said Hermione hotly. “It chosehim, he was the one who found it, it came to him outof the Sorting Hat —”

“According to reliable historical sources, the swordmay present itself to any worthy Gryffindor,” saidScrimgeour. “That does not make it the exclusiveproperty of Mr. Potter, whatever Dumbledore mayhave decided.” Scrimgeour scratched his badlyshaven cheek, scrutinizing Harry. “Why do you think— ?”

“— Dumbledore wanted to give me the sword?” saidHarry, struggling to keep his temper. “Maybe hethought it would look nice on my wall.”

“This is not a joke, Potter!” growled Scrimgeour. “Wasit because Dumbledore believed that only the sword ofGodric Gryffindor could defeat the Heir of Slytherin?Did he wish to give you that sword, Potter, because he

Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

believed, as do many, that you are the one destined todestroy He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named?”

“Interesting theory,” said Harry. “Has anyone evertried sticking a sword in Voldemort? Maybe theMinistry should put some people onto that, instead ofwasting their time stripping down Deluminators orcovering up breakouts from Azkaban. So is this whatyou’ve been doing, Minister, shut up in your office,trying to break open a Snitch? People are dying — Iwas nearly one of them — Voldemort chased meacross three counties, he killed Mad-Eye Moody, butthere’s been no word about any of that from theMinistry, has there? And you still expect us tocooperate with you!”

“You go too far!” shouted Scrimgeour, standing up;Harry jumped to his feet too. Scrimgeour limpedtoward Harry and jabbed him hard in the chest withthe point of his wand: It singed a hole in Harry’s T-shirt like a lit cigarette.

“Oi!” said Ron, jumping up and raising his own wand,but Harry said,

“No! D’you want to give him an excuse to arrest us?”

“Remembered you’re not at school, have you?” saidScrimgeour, breathing hard into Harry’s face.“Remembered that I am not Dumbledore, who forgaveyour insolence and insubordination? You may wearthat scar like a crown, Potter, but it is not up to aseventeen-year-old boy to tell me how to do my job!

It’s time you learned some respect!”

“It’s time you earned it,” said Harry.

Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The floor trembled; there was a sound of runningfootsteps, then the door to the sitting room burstopen and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley ran in.

“We — we thought we heard —” began Mr. Weasley,looking thoroughly alarmed at the sight of Harry andthe Minister virtually nose to nose.

“— raised voices,” panted Mrs. Weasley.

Scrimgeour took a couple of steps back from Harry,glancing at the hole he had made in Harry’s T-shirt.He seemed to regret his loss of temper.

“It — it was nothing,” he growled. “I ... regret yourattitude,” he said, looking Harry full in the face oncemore. “You seem to think that the Ministry does notdesire what you — what Dumbledore — desired. Weought to be working together.”

“I don’t like your methods, Minister,” said Harry.“Remember?”

For the second time, he raised his right fist anddisplayed to Scrimgeour the scars that still showedwhite on the back of it, spelling I must not tell lies.Scrimgeour’s expression hardened. He turned awaywithout another word and limped from the room. Mrs.Weasley hurried after him; Harry heard her stop atthe back door. After a minute or so she called, “He’sgone!”

“What did he want?” Mr. Weasley asked, lookingaround at Harry, Ron, and Hermione as Mrs. Weasleycame hurrying back to them.

“To give us what Dumbledore left us,” said Harry.“They’ve only just released the contents of his will.”

Page | 146 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Outside in the garden, over the dinner tables, thethree objects Scrimgeour had given them were passedfrom hand to hand. Everyone exclaimed over theDeluminator and The Tales of Beedle the Bard andlamented the fact that Scrimgeour had refused topass on the sword, but none of them could offer anysuggestion as to why Dumbledore would have leftHarry an old Snitch. As Mr. Weasley examined theDeluminator for the third or fourth time, Mrs.

Weasley said tentatively, “Harry, dear, everyone’sawfully hungry, we didn’t like to start without you. ...Shall I serve dinner now?”

They all ate rather hurriedly and then, after a hastychorus of “Happy Birthday” and much gulping ofcake, the party broke up. Hagrid, who was invited tothe wedding the following day, but was far too bulkyto sleep in the overstretched Burrow, left to set up atent for himself in a neighboring field.

“Meet us upstairs,” Harry whispered to Hermione,while they helped Mrs. Weasley restore the garden toits normal state. “After everyone’s gone to bed.”

Up in the attic room, Ron examined his Deluminator,and Harry filled Hagrid’s mokeskin purse, not withgold, but with those items he most prized, apparentlyworthless though some of them were: the Marauder’sMap, the shard of Sirius’s enchanted mirror, andR.A.B.’s locket. He pulled the strings tight and slippedthe purse around his neck, then sat holding the oldSnitch and watching its wings flutter feebly. At last,Hermione tapped on the door and tiptoed inside.

“Muffliato,” she whispered, waving her wand in thedirection of the stairs.

“Thought you didn’t approve of that spell?” said Ron.

Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Times change,” said Hermione. “Now, show us thatDeluminator.”

Ron obliged at once. Holding it up in front of him, heclicked it. The solitary lamp they had lit went out atonce.

“The thing is,” whispered Hermione through the dark,“we could have achieved that with Peruvian InstantDarkness Powder.”

There was a small click, and the ball of light from thelamp flew back to the ceiling and illuminated them allonce more.

“Still, it’s cool,” said Ron, a little defensively. “Andfrom what they said, Dumbledore invented it himself!”

“I know, but surely he wouldn’t have singled you outin his will just to help us turn out the lights!”

“D’you think he knew the Ministry would confiscatehis will and examine everything he’d left us?” askedHarry.

“Definitely,” said Hermione. “He couldn’t tell us in thewill why he was leaving us these things, but that stilldoesn’t explain ...”

"... why he couldn’t have given us a hint when he wasalive?” asked Ron.

“Well, exactly,” said Hermione, now flicking throughThe Tales of Beedle the Bard. “If these things areimportant enough to pass on right under the nose ofthe Ministry, you’d think he’d have let us know why... unless he thought it was obvious?”

Page | 148 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Thought wrong, then, didn’t he?” said Ron. “I alwayssaid he was mental. Brilliant and everything, butcracked. Leaving Harry an old Snitch — what the hellwas that about?”

“I’ve no idea,” said Hermione. “When Scrimgeourmade you take it, Harry, I was so sure that somethingwas going to happen!”

“Yeah, well,” said Harry, his pulse quickening as heraised the Snitch in his fingers. “I wasn’t going to trytoo hard in front of Scrimgeour, was I?”

“What do you mean?” asked Hermione.

“The Snitch I caught in my first ever Quidditchmatch?” said Harry. “Don’t you remember?”

Hermione looked simply bemused. Ron, however,gasped, pointing frantically from Harry to the Snitchand back again until he found his voice.

“That was the one you nearly swallowed!”

“Exactly,” said Harry, and with his heart beating fast,he pressed his mouth to the Snitch.

It did not open. Frustration and bitter disappointmentwelled up inside him: He lowered the golden sphere,but then Hermione cried out.

“Writing! There’s writing on it, quick, look!”

He nearly dropped the Snitch in surprise andexcitement. Hermione was quite right. Engraved uponthe smooth golden surface, where seconds beforethere had been nothing, were five words written in thethin, slanting handwriting that Harry recognized asDumbledore’s:

Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

I open at the close.

He had barely read them when the words vanishedagain.

“ ‘I open at the close ...’ What’s that supposed tomean?”

Hermione and Ron shook their heads, looking blank.

“I open at the close ... at the close ... I open at theclose ...”

But no matter how often they repeated the words,with many different inflections, they were unable towring any more meaning from them.

“And the sword,” said Ron finally, when they had atlast abandoned their attempts to divine meaning inthe Snitch’s inscription. “Why did he want Harry tohave the sword?”

“And why couldn’t he just have told me?” Harry saidquietly. “It was there, it was right there on the wall ofhis office during all our talks last year! If he wantedme to have it, why didn’t he just give it to me then?”

He felt as though he were sitting in an examinationwith a question he ought to have been able to answerin front of him, his brain slow and unresponsive. Wasthere something he had missed in the long talks withDumbledore last year? Ought he to know what it allmeant? Had Dumbledore expected him tounderstand?

“And as for this book,” said Hermione, “The Tales ofBeedle the Bard ... I’ve never even heard of them!”

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’ve never heard of The Tales of Beedle the Bard?”said Ron incredulously. “You’re kidding, right?”

“No, I’m not!” said Hermione in surprise. “Do youknow them, then?”

“Well, of course I do!”

Harry looked up, diverted. The circumstance of Ronhaving read a book that Hermione had not wasunprecedented. Ron, however, looked bemused bytheir surprise.

“Oh come on! All the old kids’ stories are supposed tobe Beedle’s, aren’t they? The Fountain of FairFortune’ ... The Wizard and the Hopping Pot’ ...‘Babbitty Rabbitty and her Cackling Stump’ ...”

“Excuse me?” said Hermione, giggling. “What was thatlast one?

“Come off it!” said Ron, looking in disbelief from Harryto Hermione. “You must’ve heard of Babbitty Rabbitty

“Ron, you know full well Harry and I were brought upby Muggles!” said Hermione. “We didn’t hear storieslike that when we were little, we heard ‘Snow Whiteand the Seven Dwarfs’ and ‘Cinderella’ —”

“What’s that, an illness?” asked Ron.

“So these are children’s stories?” asked Hermione,bending again over the runes.

“Yeah,” said Ron uncertainly, “I mean, that’s justwhat you hear, you know, that all these old storiescame from Beedle. I dunno what they’re like in theoriginal versions.”

Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But I wonder why Dumbledore thought I should readthem?”

Something creaked downstairs.

“Probably just Charlie, now Mum’s asleep, sneakingoff to regrow his hair,” said Ron nervously.

“All the same, we should get to bed,” whisperedHermione. “It wouldn’t do to oversleep tomorrow.”

“No,” agreed Ron. “A brutal triple murder by thebridegroom’s mother might put a bit of a damper onthe wedding. I’ll get the lights.”

And he clicked the Deluminator once more asHermione left the room.

Page | 152 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE WEDDING

Three o’clock on the following afternoon found Harry,Ron, Fred, and George standing outside the greatwhite marquee in the orchard, awaiting the arrival ofthe wedding guests. Harry had taken a large dose ofPolyjuice Potion and was now the double of aredheaded Muggle boy from the local village, OtterySt. Catchpole, from whom Fred had stolen hairs usinga Summoning Charm. The plan was to introduceHarry as “Cousin Barny” and trust to the greatnumber of Weasley relatives to camouflage him.

All four of them were clutching seating plans, so thatthey could help show people to the right seats. A hostof white-robed waiters had arrived an hour earlier,along with a golden-jacketed band, and all of thesewizards were currently sitting a short distance awayunder a tree; Harry could see a blue haze of pipesmoke issuing from the spot.

Behind Harry, the entrance to the marquee revealedrows and rows of fragile golden chairs set on eitherside of a long purple carpet. The supporting poles

Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

were entwined with white and gold flowers. Fred andGeorge had fastened an enormous bunch of goldenballoons over the exact point where Bill and Fleurwould shortly become husband and wife. Outside,butterflies and bees were hovering lazily over thegrass and hedgerow. Harry was rather uncomfortable.The Muggle boy whose appearance he was affectingwas slightly fatter than him, and his dress robes felthot and tight in the full glare of a summer’s day.

“When I get married,” said Fred, tugging at the collarof his own robes, “I won’t be bothering with any ofthis nonsense. You can all wear what you like, and I’llput a full Body-Bind Curse on Mum until it’s allover.”

“She wasn’t too bad this morning, considering,” saidGeorge. “Cried a bit about Percy not being here, butwho wants him? Oh blimey, brace yourselves — herethey come, look.”

Brightly colored figures were appearing, one by one,out of nowhere at the distant boundary of the yard.Within minutes a procession had formed, whichbegan to snake its way up through the garden towardthe marquee. Exotic flowers and bewitched birdsfluttered on the witches’ hats, while precious gemsglittered from many of the wizards’ cravats; a hum ofexcited chatter grew louder and louder, drowning thesound of the bees as the crowd approached the tent.

“Excellent, I think I see a few veela cousins,” saidGeorge, craning his neck for a better look. “They’llneed help understanding our English customs, I’lllook after them. ...”

“Not so fast, Your Holeyness,” said Fred, and dartingpast the gaggle of middle-aged witches heading theprocession, he said, “Here — permettez-moi to assister

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

vous,” to a pair of pretty French girls, who giggled andallowed him to escort them inside. George was left todeal with the middle-aged witches and Ron tookcharge of Mr. Weasley’s old Ministry colleaguePerkins, while a rather deaf old couple fell to Harry’slot.

“Wotcher,” said a familiar voice as he came out of themarquee again and found Tonks and Lupin at thefront of the queue. She had turned blonde for theoccasion. “Arthur told us you were the one with thecurly hair. Sorry about last night,” she added in awhisper as Harry led them up the aisle. “TheMinistry’s being very anti-werewolf at the momentand we thought our presence might not do you anyfavors.”

“It’s fine, I understand,” said Harry, speaking more toLupin than Tonks. Lupin gave him a swift smile, butas they turned away, Harry saw Lupin’s face fall againinto lines of misery. He did not understand it, butthere was no time to dwell on the matter: Hagrid wascausing a certain amount of disruption. Havingmisunderstood Fred’s directions he had sat himself,not upon the magically enlarged and reinforced seatset aside for him in the back row, but on five seatsthat now resembled a large pile of goldenmatchsticks.

While Mr. Weasley repaired the damage and Hagridshouted apologies to anybody who would listen, Harryhurried back to the entrance to find Ron face-to-facewith a most eccentric-looking wizard. Slightly cross-eyed, with shoulder-length white hair the texture ofcandyfloss, he wore a cap whose tassel dangled infront of his nose and robes of an eye-watering shadeof egg-yolk yellow. An odd symbol, rather like atriangular eye, glistened from a golden chain aroundhis neck.

Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Xenophilius Lovegood,” he said, extending a hand toHarry, “my daughter and I live just over the hill, sokind of the good Weasleys to invite us. But I thinkyou know my Luna?” he added to Ron.

“Yes,” said Ron. “Isn’t she with you?”

“She lingered in that charming little garden to sayhello to the gnomes, such a glorious infestation! Howfew wizards realize just how much we can learn fromthe wise little gnomes — or, to give them their correctname, the Gernumbli gardensi.”

“Ours do know a lot of excellent swear words,” saidRon, “but I think Fred and George taught themthose.”

He led a party of warlocks into the marquee as Lunarushed up.

“Hello, Harry!” she said.

“Er — my name’s Barny,” said Harry, flummoxed.

“Oh, have you changed that too?” she asked brightly.

“How did you know — ?”

“Oh, just your expression,” she said.

Like her father, Luna was wearing bright yellowrobes, which she had accessorized with a largesunflower in her hair. Once you got over thebrightness of it all, the general effect was quitepleasant. At least there were no radishes danglingfrom her ears.

Xenophilius, who was deep in conversation with anacquaintance, had missed the exchange between

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Luna and Harry. Bidding the wizard farewell, heturned to his daughter, who held up her finger andsaid, “Daddy, look — one of the gnomes actually bitme!”

“How wonderful! Gnome saliva is enormouslybeneficial!” said Mr. Lovegood, seizing Luna’soutstretched finger and examining the bleedingpuncture marks. “Luna, my love, if you should feelany burgeoning talent today — perhaps anunexpected urge to sing opera or to declaim inMermish — do not repress it! You may have beengifted by the Gernumblies!”

Ron, passing them in the opposite direction, let out aloud snort.

“Ron can laugh,” said Luna serenely as Harry led herand Xenophilius toward their seats, “but my fatherhas done a lot of research on Gernumbli magic.”

“Really?” said Harry, who had long since decided notto challenge Luna or her father’s peculiar views. “Areyou sure you don’t want to put anything on that bite,though?”

“Oh, it’s fine,” said Luna, sucking her finger in adreamy fashion and looking Harry up and down. “Youlook smart. I told Daddy most people would probablywear dress robes, but he believes you ought to wearsun colors to a wedding, for luck, you know.”

As she drifted off after her father, Ron reappearedwith an elderly witch clutching his arm. Her beakynose, red-rimmed eyes, and feathery pink hat gaveher the look of a bad-tempered flamingo.

"... and your hair’s much too long, Ronald, for amoment I thought you were Ginevra. Merlin’s beard,

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

what is Xenophilius Lovegood wearing? He looks likean omelet. And who are you?” she barked at Harry.

“Oh yeah, Auntie Muriel, this is our cousin Barny.”

“Another Weasley? You breed like gnomes. Isn’t HarryPotter here? I was hoping to meet him. I thought hewas a friend of yours, Ronald, or have you merelybeen boasting?”

“No — he couldn’t come —”

“Hmm. Made an excuse, did he? Not as gormless ashe looks in press photographs, then. I’ve just beeninstructing the bride on how best to wear my tiara,”she shouted at Harry. “Goblin-made, you know, andbeen in my family for centuries. She’s a good-lookinggirl, but still — French. Well, well, find me a goodseat, Ronald, I am a hundred and seven and I oughtnot to be on my feet too long.”

Ron gave Harry a meaningful look as he passed anddid not reappear for some time: When next they metat the entrance, Harry had shown a dozen morepeople to their places. The marquee was nearly fullnow, and for the first time there was no queueoutside.

“Nightmare, Muriel is,” said Ron, mopping hisforehead on his sleeve. “She used to come forChristmas every year, then, thank God, she tookoffense because Fred and George set off a Dung-bombunder her chair at dinner. Dad always says she’llhave written them out of her will — like they care,they’re going to end up richer than anyone in thefamily, rate they’re going. ... Wow,” he added, blinkingrather rapidly as Hermione came hurrying towardthem. “You look great!”

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Always the tone of surprise,” said Hermione, thoughshe smiled. She was wearing a floaty, lilac-coloreddress with matching high heels; her hair was sleekand shiny. “Your Great-Aunt Muriel doesn’t agree, Ijust met her upstairs while she was giving Fleur thetiara. She said, ‘Oh dear, is this the Muggle-born?’and then, ‘Bad posture and skinny ankles.’ ”

“Don’t take it personally, she’s rude to everyone,” saidRon.

“Talking about Muriel?” inquired George, reemergingfrom the marquee with Fred. “Yeah, she’s just told memy ears are lopsided. Old bat. I wish old Uncle Biliuswas still with us, though; he was a right laugh atweddings.”

“Wasn’t he the one who saw a Grim and died twenty-four hours later?” asked Hermione.

“Well, yeah, he went a bit odd toward the end,”conceded George.

“But before he went loopy he was the life and soul ofthe party,” said Fred. “He used to down an entirebottle of firewhisky, then run onto the dance floor,hoist up his robes, and start pulling bunches offlowers out of his —”

“Yes, he sounds a real charmer,” said Hermione,while Harry roared with laughter.

“Never married, for some reason,” said Ron.

“You amaze me,” said Hermione.

They were all laughing so much that none of themnoticed the latecomer, a dark-haired young man witha large, curved nose and thick black eyebrows, until

Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

he held out his invitation to Ron and said, with hiseyes on Hermione, “You look vunderful.”

“Viktor!” she shrieked, and dropped her small beadedbag, which made a loud thump quite disproportionateto its size. As she scrambled, blushing, to pick it up,she said, “I didn’t know you were — goodness — it’slovely to see — how are you?”

Ron’s ears had turned bright red again. After glancingat Krum’s invitation as if he did not believe a word ofit, he said, much too loudly, “How come you’re here?”

“Fleur invited me,” said Krum, eyebrows raised.

Harry, who had no grudge against Krum, shookhands; then, feeling that it would be prudent toremove Krum from Ron’s vicinity, offered to show himhis seat.

“Your friend is not pleased to see me,” said Krum asthey entered the now packed marquee. “Or is he arelative?” he added with a glance at Harry’s red curlyhair.

“Cousin,” Harry muttered, but Krum was not reallylistening. His appearance was causing a stir,particularly amongst the veela cousins: He was, afterall, a famous Quidditch player. While people were stillcraning their necks to get a good look at him, Ron,Hermione, Fred, and George came hurrying down theaisle.

“Time to sit down,” Fred told Harry, “or we’re going toget run over by the bride.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione took their seats in thesecond row behind Fred and George. Hermione lookedrather pink and Ron’s ears were still scarlet. After a

Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

few moments he muttered to Harry, “Did you see he’sgrown a stupid little beard?”

Harry gave a noncommittal grunt.

A sense of jittery anticipation had filled the warmtent, the general murmuring broken by occasionalspurts of excited laughter. Mr. and Mrs. Weasleystrolled up the aisle, smiling and waving at relatives;Mrs. Weasley was wearing a brand-new set ofamethyst-colored robes with a matching hat.

A moment later Bill and Charlie stood up at the frontof the marquee, both wearing dress robes, with largewhite roses in their buttonholes; Fred wolf-whistledand there was an outbreak of giggling from the veelacousins. Then the crowd fell silent as music swelledfrom what seemed to be the golden balloons.

“Ooooh!” said Hermione, swiveling around in her seatto look at the entrance.

A great collective sigh issued from the assembledwitches and wizards as Monsieur Delacour and Fleurcame walking up the aisle, Fleur gliding, MonsieurDelacour bouncing and beaming. Fleur was wearing avery simple white dress and seemed to be emitting astrong, silvery glow. While her radiance usuallydimmed everyone else by comparison, today itbeautified everybody it fell upon. Ginny and Gabrielle,both wearing golden dresses, looked even prettierthan usual, and once Fleur had reached him, Bill didnot look as though he had ever met Fenrir Greyback.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” said a slightly singsongvoice, and with a slight shock, Harry saw the samesmall, tufty-haired wizard who had presided atDumbledore’s funeral, now standing in front of Bill

Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and Fleur. “We are gathered here today to celebratethe union of two faithful souls ...”

“Yes, my tiara sets off the whole thing nicely,” saidAuntie Muriel in a rather carrying whisper. “But Imust say, Ginevra’s dress is far too low cut.”

Ginny glanced around, grinning, winked at Harry,then quickly faced the front again. Harry’s mindwandered a long way from the marquee, back toafternoons spent alone with Ginny in lonely parts ofthe school grounds. They seemed so long ago; theyhad always seemed too good to be true, as though hehad been stealing shining hours from a normalperson’s life, a person without a lightning-shapedscar on his forehead. ...

“Do you, William Arthur, take Fleur Isabelle ... ?”

In the front row, Mrs. Weasley and Madame Delacourwere both sobbing quietly into scraps of lace.Trumpetlike sounds from the back of the marqueetold everyone that Hagrid had taken out one of hisown tablecloth-sized handkerchiefs. Hermione turnedand beamed at Harry; her eyes too were full of tears.

"... then I declare you bonded for life.”

The tufty-haired wizard waved his wand high over theheads of Bill and Fleur and a shower of silver starsfell upon them, spiraling around their now entwinedfigures. As Fred and George led a round of applause,the golden balloons overhead burst: Birds of paradiseand tiny golden bells flew and floated out of them,adding their songs and chimes to the din.

“Ladies and gentlemen!” called the tufty-hairedwizard. “If you would please stand up!”

Page | 162 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

They all did so, Auntie Muriel grumbling audibly; hewaved his wand again. The seats on which they hadbeen sitting rose gracefully into the air as the canvaswalls of the marquee vanished, so that they stoodbeneath a canopy supported by golden poles, with aglorious view of the sunlit orchard and surroundingcountryside. Next, a pool of molten gold spread fromthe center of the tent to form a gleaming dance floor;the hovering chairs grouped themselves aroundsmall, white-clothed tables, which all floatedgracefully back to earth around it, and the golden-jacketed band trooped toward a podium.

“Smooth,” said Ron approvingly as the waiters poppedup on all sides, some bearing silver trays of pumpkinjuice, butterbeer, and firewhisky, others totteringpiles of tarts and sandwiches.

“We should go and congratulate them!” saidHermione, standing on tiptoe to see the place whereBill and Fleur had vanished amid a crowd of well-wishers.

“Well have time later,” shrugged Ron, snatching threebutter-beers from a passing tray and handing one toHarry. “Hermione, cop hold, let’s grab a table. ... Notthere! Nowhere near Muriel —”

Ron led the way across the empty dance floor,glancing left and right as he went: Harry felt sure thathe was keeping an eye out for Krum. By the time theyhad reached the other side of the marquee, most ofthe tables were occupied: The emptiest was the onewhere Luna sat alone.

“All right if we join you?” asked Ron.

“Oh yes,” she said happily. “Daddy’s just gone to giveBill and Fleur our present.”

Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“What is it, a lifetime’s supply of Gurdyroots?” askedRon.

Hermione aimed a kick at him under the table, butcaught Harry instead. Eyes watering in pain, Harrylost track of the conversation for a few moments.

The band had begun to play. Bill and Fleur took tothe dance floor first, to great applause; after a while,Mr. Weasley led Madame Delacour onto the floor,followed by Mrs. Weasley and Fleur’s father.

“I like this song,” said Luna, swaying in time to thewaltzlike tune, and a few seconds later she stood upand glided onto the dance floor, where she revolvedon the spot, quite alone, eyes closed and waving herarms.

“She’s great, isn’t she?” said Ron admiringly. “Alwaysgood value.”

But the smile vanished from his face at once: ViktorKrum had dropped into Luna’s vacant seat. Hermionelooked pleasurably flustered, but this time Krum hadnot come to compliment her. With a scowl on his facehe said, “Who is that man in the yellow?”

“That’s Xenophilius Lovegood, he’s the father of afriend of ours,” said Ron. His pugnacious toneindicated that they were not about to laugh atXenophilius, despite the clear provocation. “Come anddance,” he added abruptly to Hermione.

She looked taken aback, but pleased too, and got up.They vanished together into the growing throng onthe dance floor.

“Ah, they are together now?” asked Krum,momentarily distracted.

Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Er — sort of,” said Harry.

“Who are you?” Krum asked.

“Barny Weasley.”

They shook hands.

“You, Barny — you know this man Lovegood veil?”

“No, I only met him today. Why?”

Krum glowered over the top of his drink, watchingXenophilius, who was chatting to several warlocks onthe other side of the dance floor.

“Because,” said Krum, “if he vos not a guest ofFleur’s, I vould duel him, here and now, for vearingthat filthy sign upon his chest.”

“Sign?” said Harry, looking over at Xenophilius too.The strange triangular eye was gleaming on his chest.“Why? What’s wrong with it?”

“Grindelvald. That is Grindelvald’s sign.”

“Grindelwald ... the Dark wizard Dumbledoredefeated?”

“Exactly.”

Krum’s jaw muscles worked as if he were chewing,then he said, “Grindelvald killed many people, mygrandfather, for instance. Of course, he vos neverpoverful in this country, they said he fearedDumbledore — and rightly, seeing how he vosfinished. But this” — he pointed a finger atXenophilius — “this is his symbol, I recognized it atvunce: Grindelvald carved it into a vail at Durmstrang

Page | 165 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

ven he vos a pupil there. Some idiots copied it ontotheir books and clothes, thinking to shock, makethemselves impressive — until those of us who hadlost family members to Grindelvald taught thembetter.”

Krum cracked his knuckles menacingly and gloweredat Xenophilius. Harry felt perplexed. It seemedincredibly unlikely that Luna’s father was a supporterof the Dark Arts, and nobody else in the tent seemedto have recognized the triangular, runelike shape.

“Are you — er — quite sure it’s Grindelwald’s — ?”

“I am not mistaken,” said Krum coldly. “I valked pastthat sign for several years, I know it veil.”

“Well, there’s a chance,” said Harry, “that Xenophiliusdoesn’t actually know what the symbol means. TheLovegoods are quite ... unusual. He could easily havepicked it up somewhere and think it’s a cross sectionof the head of a Crumple-Horned Snorkack orsomething.”

“The cross section of a vot?”

“Well, I don’t know what they are, but apparently heand his daughter go on holiday looking for them. ...”

Harry felt he was doing a bad job explaining Luna andher father.

“That’s her,” he said, pointing at Luna, who was stilldancing alone, waving her arms around her head likesomeone attempting to beat off midges.

“Vy is she doing that?” asked Krum.

Page | 166 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Probably trying to get rid of a Wrackspurt,” saidHarry, who recognized the symptoms.

Krum did not seem to know whether or not Harry wasmaking fun of him. He drew his wand from inside hisrobes and tapped it menacingly on his thigh; sparksflew out of the end.

“Gregorovitch!” said Harry loudly, and Krum started,but Harry was too excited to care; the memory hadcome back to him at the sight of Krum’s wand:Ollivander taking it and examining it carefully beforethe Triwizard Tournament.

“Vot about him?” asked Krum suspiciously.

“He’s a wandmaker!”

“I know that,” said Krum.

“He made your wand! That’s why I thought —Quidditch —”

Krum was looking more and more suspicious.

“How do you know Gregorovitch made my vand?”

“I ... I read it somewhere, I think,” said Harry. “In a —a fan magazine,” he improvised wildly and Krumlooked mollified.

“I had not realized I ever discussed my vand withfans,” he said.

“So ... er ... where is Gregorovitch these days?”

Krum looked puzzled.

Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“He retired several years ago. I vos one of the last topurchase a Gregorovitch vand. They are the best —although I know, of course, that you Britons set muchstore by Ollivander.”

Harry did not answer. He pretended to watch thedancers, like Krum, but he was thinking hard. SoVoldemort was looking for a celebrated wandmaker,and Harry did not have to search far for a reason: Itwas surely because of what Harry’s wand had doneon the night that Voldemort had pursued him acrossthe skies. The holly and phoenix feather wand hadconquered the borrowed wand, something thatOllivander had not anticipated or understood. WouldGregorovitch know better? Was he truly more skilledthan Ollivander, did he know secrets of wands thatOllivander did not?

“This girl is very nice-looking,” Krum said, recallingHarry to his surroundings. Krum was pointing atGinny, who had just joined Luna. “She is also arelative of yours?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, suddenly irritated, “and she’sseeing someone. Jealous type. Big bloke. Youwouldn’t want to cross him.”

Krum grunted.

“Vot,” he said, draining his goblet and getting to hisfeet again, “is the point of being an internationalQuidditch player if all the good-looking girls aretaken?”

And he strode off, leaving Harry to take a sandwichfrom a passing waiter and make his way around theedge of the crowded dance floor. He wanted to findRon, to tell him about Gregorovitch, but Ron wasdancing with Hermione out in the middle of the floor.Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry leaned up against one of the golden pillars andwatched Ginny, who was now dancing with Fred andGeorge’s friend Lee Jordan, trying not to feel resentfulabout the promise he had given Ron.

He had never been to a wedding before, so he couldnot judge how Wizarding celebrations differed fromMuggle ones, though he was pretty sure that thelatter would not involve a wedding cake topped withtwo model phoenixes that took flight when the cakewas cut, or bottles of champagne that floatedunsupported through the crowd. As evening drew in,and moths began to swoop under the canopy, now litwith floating golden lanterns, the revelry becamemore and more uncontained. Fred and George hadlong since disappeared into the darkness with a pairof Fleur’s cousins; Charlie, Hagrid, and a squatwizard in a purple porkpie hat were singing “Odo theHero” in a corner.

Wandering through the crowd so as to escape adrunken uncle of Ron’s who seemed unsure whetheror not Harry was his son, Harry spotted an old wizardsitting alone at a table. His cloud of white hair madehim look rather like an aged dandelion clock and wastopped by a moth-eaten fez. He was vaguely familiar:Racking his brains, Harry suddenly realized that thiswas Elphias Doge, member of the Order of thePhoenix and the writer of Dumbledore’s obituary.

Harry approached him.

“May I sit down?”

“Of course, of course,” said Doge; he had a ratherhigh-pitched, wheezy voice.

Harry leaned in.

Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Mr. Doge, I’m Harry Potter.”

Doge gasped.

“My dear boy! Arthur told me you were here,disguised. ... I am so glad, so honored!”

In a flutter of nervous pleasure Doge poured Harry agoblet of champagne.

“I thought of writing to you,” he whispered, “afterDumbledore ... the shock ... and for you, I am sure

Doge’s tiny eyes filled with sudden tears.

“I saw the obituary you wrote for the Daily Prophet,”said Harry. “I didn’t realize you knew ProfessorDumbledore so well.”

“As well as anyone,” said Doge, dabbing his eyes witha napkin. “Certainly I knew him longest, if you don’tcount Aberforth — and somehow, people never doseem to count Aberforth.”

“Speaking of the Daily Prophet... I don’t knowwhether you saw, Mr. Doge — ?”

“Oh, please call me Elphias, dear boy.”

“Elphias, I don’t know whether you saw the interviewRita Skeeter gave about Dumbledore?”

Doge’s face flooded with angry color.

“Oh yes, Harry, I saw it. That woman, or vulturemight be a more accurate term, positively pestered meto talk to her. I am ashamed to say that I becamerather rude, called her an interfering trout, which

Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

resulted, as you may have seen, in aspersions castupon my sanity.”

“Well, in that interview,” Harry went on, “Rita Skeeterhinted that Professor Dumbledore was involved in theDark Arts when he was young.”

“Don’t believe a word of it!” said Doge at once. “Not aword, Harry! Let nothing tarnish your memories ofAlbus Dumbledore!”

Harry looked into Doge’s earnest, pained face and felt,not reassured, but frustrated. Did Doge really think itwas that easy, that Harry could simply choose not tobelieve? Didn’t Doge understand Harry’s need to besure, to know everything?

Perhaps Doge suspected Harry’s feelings, for helooked concerned and hurried on, “Harry, RitaSkeeter is a dreadful —”

But he was interrupted by a shrill cackle.

“Rita Skeeter? Oh, I love her, always read her!”

Harry and Doge looked up to see Auntie Murielstanding there, the plumes dancing on her hat, agoblet of champagne in her hand. “She’s written abook about Dumbledore, you know!”

“Hello, Muriel,” said Doge. “Yes, we were justdiscussing —”

“You there! Give me your chair, I’m a hundred andseven!”

Another redheaded Weasley cousin jumped off hisseat, looking alarmed, and Auntie Muriel swung it

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

around with surprising strength and plopped herselfdown upon it between Doge and Harry.

“Hello again, Barry, or whatever your name is,” shesaid to Harry. “Now, what were you saying about RitaSkeeter, Elphias? You know she’s written a biographyof Dumbledore? I can’t wait to read it, I mustremember to place an order at Flourish and Blotts!”

Doge looked stiff and solemn at this, but AuntieMuriel drained her goblet and clicked her bony fingersat a passing waiter for a replacement. She tookanother large gulp of champagne, belched, and thensaid, “There’s no need to look like a pair of stuffedfrogs! Before he became so respected and respectableand all that tosh, there were some mighty funnyrumors about Albus!”

“Ill-informed sniping,” said Doge, turning radish-colored again.

“You would say that, Elphias,” cackled Auntie Muriel.“I noticed how you skated over the sticky patches inthat obituary of yours!”

“I’m sorry you think so,” said Doge, more coldly still.

“I assure you I was writing from the heart.”

“Oh, we all know you worshipped Dumbledore; Idaresay you’ll still think he was a saint even if it doesturn out that he did away with his Squib sister!”

“Muriell” exclaimed Doge.

A chill that had nothing to do with the icedchampagne was stealing through Harry’s chest.

“What do you mean?” he asked Muriel. “Who said hissister was a Squib? I thought she was ill?”

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Thought wrong, then, didn’t you, Barry!” said AuntieMuriel, looking delighted at the effect she hadproduced. “Anyway, how could you expect to knowanything about it? It all happened years and yearsbefore you were even thought of, my dear, and thetruth is that those of us who were alive then neverknew what really happened. That’s why I can’t wait tofind out what Skeeter’s unearthed! Dumbledore keptthat sister of his quiet for a long time!”

“Untrue!” wheezed Doge. “Absolutely untrue!”

“He never told me his sister was a Squib,” said Harry,without thinking, still cold inside.

“And why on earth would he tell you?” screechedMuriel, swaying a little in her seat as she attemptedto focus upon Harry.

“The reason Albus never spoke about Ariana,” beganElphias in a voice stiff with emotion, “is, I should havethought, quite clear. He was so devastated by herdeath —”

“Why did nobody ever see her, Elphias?” squawkedMuriel. “Why did half of us never even know sheexisted, until they carried the coffin out of the houseand held a funeral for her? Where was saintly Albuswhile Ariana was locked in the cellar? Off beingbrilliant at Hogwarts, and never mind what was goingon in his own house!”

“What d’you mean, locked in the cellar?” asked Harry.“What is this?”

Doge looked wretched. Auntie Muriel cackled againand answered Harry.

Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Dumbledore’s mother was a terrifying woman, simplyterrifying. Muggle-born, though I heard she pretendedotherwise —”

“She never pretended anything of the sort! Kendrawas a fine woman,” whispered Doge miserably, butAuntie Muriel ignored him.

“— proud and very domineering, the sort of witch whowould have been mortified to produce a Squib —”

“Ariana was not a Squib!” wheezed Doge.

“So you say, Elphias, but explain, then, why shenever attended Hogwarts!” said Auntie Muriel. Sheturned back to Harry. “In our day, Squibs were oftenhushed up, though to take it to the extreme ofactually imprisoning a little girl in the house andpretending she didn’t exist —”

“I tell you, that’s not what happened!” said Doge, butAuntie Muriel steamrollered on, still addressingHarry.

“Squibs were usually shipped off to Muggle schoolsand encouraged to integrate into the Mugglecommunity ... much kinder than trying to find them aplace in the Wizarding world, where they must alwaysbe second class; but naturally Kendra Dumbledorewouldn’t have dreamed of letting her daughter go to aMuggle school —”

“Ariana was delicate!” said Doge desperately. “Herhealth was always too poor to permit her —”

“— to permit her to leave the house?” cackled Muriel.“And yet she was never taken to St. Mungo’s and noHealer was ever summoned to see her!”

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Really, Muriel, how you can possibly know whether

“For your information, Elphias, my cousin Lancelotwas a Healer at St. Mungo’s at the time, and he toldmy family in strictest confidence that Ariana hadnever been seen there. All most suspicious, Lancelotthought!”

Doge looked to be on the verge of tears. Auntie Muriel,who seemed to be enjoying herself hugely, snappedher fingers for more champagne. Numbly Harrythought of how the Dursleys had once shut him up,locked him away, kept him out of sight, all for thecrime of being a wizard. Had Dumbledore’s sistersuffered the same fate in reverse: imprisoned for herlack of magic? And had Dumbledore truly left her toher fate while he went off to Hogwarts, to provehimself brilliant and talented?

“Now, if Kendra hadn’t died first,” Muriel resumed,

“I’d have said that it was she who finished off Ariana

“How can you, Muriel?” groaned Doge. “A mother killher own daughter? Think what you are saying!”

“If the mother in question was capable of imprisoningher daughter for years on end, why not?” shruggedAuntie Muriel. “But as I say, it doesn’t fit, becauseKendra died before Ariana — of what, nobody everseemed sure —”

“Oh, no doubt Ariana murdered her,” said Doge witha brave attempt at scorn. “Why not?”

“Yes, Ariana might have made a desperate bid forfreedom and killed Kendra in the struggle,” saidAuntie Muriel thoughtfully. “Shake your head all you

Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

like, Elphias! You were at Ariana’s funeral, were younot?”

“Yes I was,” said Doge, through trembling lips. “And amore desperately sad occasion I cannot remember.Albus was heartbroken —”

“His heart wasn’t the only thing. Didn’t Aberforthbreak Albus’s nose halfway through the service?”

If Doge had looked horrified before this, it wasnothing to how he looked now. Muriel might havestabbed him. She cackled loudly and took anotherswig of champagne, which dribbled down her chin.

“How do you — ?” croaked Doge.

“My mother was friendly with old Bathilda Bagshot,”said Auntie Muriel happily. “Bathilda described thewhole thing to Mother while I was listening at thedoor. A coffin-side brawl! The way Bathilda told it,Aberforth shouted that it was all Albus’s fault thatAriana was dead and then punched him in the face.According to Bathilda, Albus did not even defendhimself, and that’s odd enough in itself, Albus couldhave destroyed Aberforth in a duel with both handstied behind his back.”

Muriel swigged yet more champagne. The recitation ofthese old scandals seemed to elate her as much asthey horrified Doge. Harry did not know what tothink, what to believe: He wanted the truth, and yetall Doge did was sit there and bleat feebly that Arianahad been ill. Harry could hardly believe thatDumbledore would not have intervened if suchcruelty was happening inside his own house, and yetthere was undoubtedly something odd about thestory.

Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“And I’ll tell you something else,” Muriel said,hiccuping slightly as she lowered her goblet. “I thinkBathilda has spilled the beans to Rita Skeeter. Allthose hints in Skeeter’s interview about an importantsource close to the Dumbledores — goodness knowsshe was there all through the Ariana business, and itwould fit!”

“Bathilda would never talk to Rita Skeeter!” whisperedDoge.

“Bathilda Bagshot?” Harry said. “The author of AHistory of Magic?”

The name was printed on the front of one of Harry’stextbooks, though admittedly not one of the ones hehad read most attentively.

“Yes,” said Doge, clutching at Harry’s question like adrowning man at a life belt. “A most gifted magicalhistorian and an old friend of Albus’s.”

“Quite gaga these days, I’ve heard,” said AuntieMuriel cheerfully.

“If that is so, it is even more dishonorable for Skeeterto have taken advantage of her,” said Doge, “and noreliance can be placed on anything Bathilda may havesaid!”

“Oh, there are ways of bringing back memories, andI’m sure Rita Skeeter knows them all,” said AuntieMuriel. “But even if Bathilda’s completely cuckoo, I’msure she’d still have old photographs, maybe evenletters. She knew the Dumbledores for years. ... Wellworth a trip to Godric’s Hollow, I’d have thought.”

Harry, who had been taking a sip of butterbeer,choked. Doge banged him on the back as Harry

Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

coughed, looking at Auntie Muriel through streamingeyes. Once he had control of his voice again, heasked, “Bathilda Bagshot lives in Godric’s Hollow?”

“Oh yes, she’s been there forever! The Dumbledoresmoved there after Percival was imprisoned, and shewas their neighbor.”

“The Dumbledores lived in Godric’s Hollow?”

“Yes, Barry, that’s what I just said,” said AuntieMuriel testily.

Harry felt drained, empty. Never once, in six years,had Dumbledore told Harry that they had both livedand lost loved ones in Godric’s Hollow. Why? WereLily and James buried close to Dumbledore’s motherand sister? Had Dumbledore visited their graves,perhaps walked past Lily’s and James’s to do so? Andhe had never once told Harry ... never bothered to say

And why it was so important, Harry could not explaineven to himself, yet he felt it had been tantamount toa lie not to tell him that they had this place and theseexperiences in common. He stared ahead of him,barely noticing what was going on around him, anddid not realize that Hermione had appeared out of thecrowd until she drew up a chair beside him.

“I simply can’t dance anymore,” she panted, slippingoff one of her shoes and rubbing the sole of her foot.“Ron’s gone looking to find more butterbeers. It’s a bitodd, I’ve just seen Viktor storming away from Luna’sfather, it looked like they’d been arguing —” Shedropped her voice, staring at him. “Harry, are youokay?”

Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry did not know where to begin, but it did notmatter. At that moment, something large and silvercame falling through the canopy over the dance floor.Graceful and gleaming, the lynx landed lightly in themiddle of the astonished dancers. Heads turned, asthose nearest it froze absurdly in mid-dance. Thenthe Patronus’s mouth opened wide and it spoke in theloud, deep, slow voice of Kingsley Shacklebolt.

“The Ministry has fallen. Scrimgeour is dead. They arecoming.”

Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



A PLACE TO HIDE

Everything seemed fuzzy, slow. Harry and Hermionejumped to their feet and drew their wands. Manypeople were only just realizing that something strangehad happened; heads were still turning toward thesilver cat as it vanished. Silence spread outward incold ripples from the place where the Patronus hadlanded. Then somebody screamed.

Harry and Hermione threw themselves into thepanicking crowd. Guests were sprinting in alldirections; many were Disapparating; the protectiveenchantments around the Burrow had broken.

“Ron!” Hermione cried. “Ron, where are you?”

As they pushed their way across the dance floor,Harry saw cloaked and masked figures appearing inthe crowd; then he saw Lupin and Tonks, their wandsraised, and heard both of them shout, “Protego\”, acry that was echoed on all sides —

Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Ron! Ron!” Hermione called, half sobbing as she andHarry were buffeted by terrified guests: Harry seizedher hand to make sure they weren’t separated as astreak of light whizzed over their heads, whether aprotective charm or something more sinister he didnot know —

And then Ron was there. He caught hold ofHermione’s free arm, and Harry felt her turn on thespot; sight and sound were extinguished as darknesspressed in upon him; all he could feel was Hermione’shand as he was squeezed through space and time,away from the Burrow, away from the descendingDeath Eaters, away, perhaps, from Voldemorthimself. ...

“Where are we?” said Ron’s voice.

Harry opened his eyes. For a moment he thought theyhad not left the wedding after all: They still seemed tobe surrounded by people.

“Tottenham Court Road,” panted Hermione. “Walk,just walk, we need to find somewhere for you tochange.”

Harry did as she asked. They half walked, half ran upthe wide dark street thronged with late-night revelersand lined with closed shops, stars twinkling abovethem. A double-decker bus rumbled by and a groupof merry pub-goers ogled them as they passed; Harryand Ron were still wearing dress robes.

“Hermione, we haven’t got anything to change into,”Ron told her, as a young woman burst into raucousgiggles at the sight of him.

Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Why didn’t I make sure I had the Invisibility Cloakwith me?” said Harry, inwardly cursing his ownstupidity. “All last year I kept it on me and —”

“It’s okay, I’ve got the Cloak, I’ve got clothes for bothof you,” said Hermione. “Just try and act naturallyuntil — this will do.”

She led them down a side street, then into the shelterof a shadowy alleyway.

“When you say you’ve got the Cloak, and clothes ...”said Harry, frowning at Hermione, who was carryingnothing except her small beaded handbag, in whichshe was now rummaging.

“Yes, they’re here,” said Hermione, and to Harry andRon’s utter astonishment, she pulled out a pair ofjeans, a sweatshirt, some maroon socks, and finallythe silvery Invisibility Cloak.

“How the ruddy hell — ?”

“Undetectable Extension Charm,” said Hermione.“Tricky, but I think I’ve done it okay; anyway, Imanaged to fit everything we need in here.” She gavethe fragile-looking bag a little shake and it echoed likea cargo hold as a number of heavy objects rolledaround inside it. “Oh, damn, that’ll be the books,” shesaid, peering into it, “and I had them all stacked bysubject. ... Oh well. ... Harry, you’d better take theInvisibility Cloak. Ron, hurry up and change. ...”

“When did you do all this?” Harry asked as Ronstripped off his robes.

“I told you at the Burrow, I’ve had the essentialspacked for days, you know, in case we needed tomake a quick getaway. I packed your rucksack this

Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

morning, Harry, after you changed, and put it in here.... I just had a feeling. ...”

“You’re amazing, you are,” said Ron, handing her hisbundled-up robes.

“Thank you,” said Hermione, managing a small smileas she pushed the robes into the bag. “Please, Harry,get that Cloak on!”

Harry threw the Invisibility Cloak around hisshoulders and pulled it up over his head, vanishingfrom sight. He was only just beginning to appreciatewhat had happened.

“The others — everyone at the wedding —”

“We can’t worry about that now,” whisperedHermione. “It’s you they’re after, Harry, and we’ll justput everyone in even more danger by going back.”

“She’s right,” said Ron, who seemed to know thatHarry was about to argue, even if he could not see hisface. “Most of the Order was there, they’ll look aftereveryone.”

Harry nodded, then remembered that they could notsee him, and said, “Yeah.” But he thought of Ginny,and fear bubbled like acid in his stomach.

“Come on, I think we ought to keep moving,” saidHermione.

They moved back up the side street and onto themain road again, where a group of men on theopposite side was singing and weaving across thepavement.

Page | 183 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Just as a matter of interest, why Tottenham CourtRoad?” Ron asked Hermione.

“I’ve no idea, it just popped into my head, but I’msure we’re safer out in the Muggle world, it’s notwhere they’ll expect us to be.”

“True,” said Ron, looking around, “but don’t you feel abit — exposed?”

“Where else is there?” asked Hermione, cringing asthe men on the other side of the road started wolf-whistling at her. “We can hardly book rooms at theLeaky Cauldron, can we? And Grimmauld Place is outif Snape can get in there. ... I suppose we could trymy parents’ house, though I think there’s a chancethey might check there. ... Oh, I wish they’d shut up!”

“All right, darling?” the drunkest of the men on theother pavement was yelling. “Fancy a drink? Ditchginger and come and have a pint!”

“Let’s sit down somewhere,” Hermione said hastily asRon opened his mouth to shout back across the road.“Look, this will do, in here!”

It was a small and shabby all-night cafe. A light layerof grease lay on all the Formica-topped tables, but itwas at least empty. Harry slipped into a booth firstand Ron sat next to him opposite Hermione, who hadher back to the entrance and did not like it: Sheglanced over her shoulder so frequently she appearedto have a twitch. Harry did not like being stationary;walking had given the illusion that they had a goal.Beneath the Cloak he could feel the last vestiges ofPolyjuice leaving him, his hands returning to theirusual length and shape. He pulled his glasses out ofhis pocket and put them on again.

Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

After a minute or two, Ron said, “You know, we’re notfar from the Leaky Cauldron here, it’s only in CharingCross —”

“Ron, we can’t!” said Hermione at once.

“Not to stay there, but to find out what’s going on!”

“We know what’s going on! Voldemort’s taken over theMinistry, what else do we need to know?”

“Okay, okay, it was just an idea!”

They relapsed into a prickly silence. The gum-chewingwaitress shuffled over and Hermione ordered twocappuccinos: As Harry was invisible, it would havelooked odd to order him one. A pair of burly workmenentered the cafe and squeezed into the next booth.Hermione dropped her voice to a whisper.

“I say we find a quiet place to Disapparate and headfor the countryside. Once we’re there, we could send amessage to the Order.”

“Can you do that talking Patronus thing, then?”asked Ron.

“I’ve been practicing and I think so,” said Hermione.

“Well, as long as it doesn’t get them into trouble,though they might’ve been arrested already. God,that’s revolting,” Ron added after one sip of thefoamy, grayish coffee. The waitress had heard; sheshot Ron a nasty look as she shuffled off to take thenew customers’ orders. The larger of the twoworkmen, who was blond and quite huge, now thatHarry came to look at him, waved her away. Shestared, affronted.

Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Let’s get going, then, I don’t want to drink thismuck,” said Ron. “Hermione, have you got Mugglemoney to pay for this?”

“Yes, I took out all my Building Society savings beforeI came to the Burrow. I’ll bet all the change is at thebottom,” sighed Hermione, reaching for her beadedbag.

The two workmen made identical movements, andHarry mirrored them without conscious thought: Allthree of them drew their wands. Ron, a few secondslate in realizing what was going on, lunged across thetable, pushing Hermione sideways onto her bench.

The force of the Death Eaters’ spells shattered thetiled wall where Ron’s head had just been, as Harry,still invisible, yelled, “Stupefyl”

The great blond Death Eater was hit in the face by ajet of red light: He slumped sideways, unconscious.His companion, unable to see who had cast the spell,fired another at Ron: Shining black ropes flew fromhis wand-tip and bound Ron head to foot — thewaitress screamed and ran for the door — Harry sentanother Stunning Spell at the Death Eater with thetwisted face who had tied up Ron, but the spellmissed, rebounded on the window, and hit thewaitress, who collapsed in front of the door.

“Expulsol” bellowed the Death Eater, and the tablebehind which Harry was standing blew up: The forceof the explosion slammed him into the wall and he felthis wand leave his hand as the Cloak slipped off him.

“Petrificus TotalusV’ screamed Hermione from out ofsight, and the Death Eater fell forward like a statue toland with a crunching thud on the mess of brokenchina, table, and coffee. Hermione crawled out from

Page | 186 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

underneath the bench, shaking bits of glass ashtrayout of her hair and trembling all over.

“D-diffindo,” she said, pointing her wand at Ron, whoroared in pain as she slashed open the knee of hisjeans, leaving a deep cut. “Oh, I’m so sorry, Ron, myhand’s shaking! Diffindol”

The severed ropes fell away. Ron got to his feet,shaking his arms to regain feeling in them. Harrypicked up his wand and climbed over all the debris towhere the large blond Death Eater was sprawledacross the bench.

“I should’ve recognized him, he was there the nightDumbledore died,” he said. He turned over the darkerDeath Eater with his foot; the man’s eyes movedrapidly between Harry, Ron, and Hermione.

“That’s Dolohov,” said Ron. “I recognize him from theold wanted posters. I think the big one’s ThorfinnRowle.”

“Never mind what they’re called!” said Hermione alittle hysterically. “How did they find us? What are wegoing to do?”

Somehow her panic seemed to clear Harry’s head.

“Lock the door,” he told her, “and Ron, turn out thelights.”

He looked down at the paralyzed Dolohov, thinkingfast as the lock clicked and Ron used theDeluminator to plunge the cafe into darkness. Harrycould hear the men who had jeered at Hermioneearlier, yelling at another girl in the distance.

Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“What are we going to do with them?” Ron whisperedto Harry through the dark; then, even more quietly,“Kill them? They’d kill us. They had a good go justnow.”

Hermione shuddered and took a step backward.Harry shook his head.

“We just need to wipe their memories,” said Harry.“It’s better like that, it’ll throw them off the scent. Ifwe killed them it’d be obvious we were here.”

“You’re the boss,” said Ron, sounding profoundlyrelieved. “But I’ve never done a Memory Charm.”

“Nor have I,” said Hermione, “but I know the theory.”

She took a deep, calming breath, then pointed herwand at Dolohov’s forehead and said, “Obliviate.”

At once, Dolohov’s eyes became unfocused anddreamy.

“Brilliant!” said Harry, clapping her on the back.“Take care of the other one and the waitress whileRon and I clear up.”

“Clear up?” said Ron, looking around at the partlydestroyed cafe. “Why?”

“Don’t you think they might wonder what’s happenedif they wake up and find themselves in a place thatlooks like it’s just been bombed?”

“Oh right, yeah ...”

Ron struggled for a moment before managing toextract his wand from his pocket.

Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It’s no wonder I can’t get it out, Hermione, youpacked my old jeans, they’re tight.”

“Oh, I’m so sorry,” hissed Hermione, and as shedragged the waitress out of sight of the windows,Harry heard her mutter a suggestion as to where Roncould stick his wand instead.

Once the cafe was restored to its previous condition,they heaved the Death Eaters back into their boothand propped them up facing each other.

“But how did they find us?” Hermione asked, lookingfrom one inert man to the other. “How did they knowwhere we were?”

She turned to Harry.

“You — you don’t think you’ve still got your Trace onyou, do you, Harry?”

“He can’t have,” said Ron. “The Trace breaks atseventeen, that’s Wizarding law, you can’t put it onan adult.”

“As far as you know,” said Hermione. “What if theDeath Eaters have found a way to put it on aseventeen-year-old?”

“But Harry hasn’t been near a Death Eater in the lasttwenty-four hours. Who’s supposed to have put aTrace back on him?”

Hermione did not reply. Harry felt contaminated,tainted: Was that really how the Death Eaters hadfound them?

“If I can’t use magic, and you can’t use magic nearme, without us giving away our position —” he began.

Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We’re not splitting up!” said Hermione firmly.

“We need a safe place to hide,” said Ron. “Give ustime to think things through.”

“Grimmauld Place,” said Harry.

The other two gaped.

“Don’t be silly, Harry, Snape can get in there!”

“Ron’s dad said they’ve put up jinxes against him —and even if they haven’t worked,” he pressed on asHermione began to argue, “so what? I swear, I’d likenothing better than to meet Snape!”

“But —”

“Hermione, where else is there? It’s the best chancewe’ve got. Snape’s only one Death Eater. If I’ve stillgot the Trace on me, we’ll have whole crowds of themon us wherever else we go.”

She could not argue, though she looked as if shewould have liked to. While she unlocked the cafedoor, Ron clicked the Deluminator to release thecafe’s light. Then, on Harry’s count of three, theyreversed the spells upon their three victims, andbefore the waitress or either of the Death Eaters coulddo more than stir sleepily, Harry, Ron, and Hermionehad turned on the spot and vanished into thecompressing darkness once more.

Seconds later Harry’s lungs expanded gratefully andhe opened his eyes: They were now standing in themiddle of a familiar small and shabby square. Tall,dilapidated houses looked down on them from everyside. Number twelve was visible to them, for they hadbeen told of its existence by Dumbledore, its Secret-P a g e | 190 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Keeper, and they rushed toward it, checking every fewyards that they were not being followed or observed.They raced up the stone steps, and Harry tapped thefront door once with his wand. They heard a series ofmetallic clicks and the clatter of a chain, then thedoor swung open with a creak and they hurried overthe threshold.

As Harry closed the door behind them, the old-fashioned gas lamps sprang into life, castingflickering light along the length of the hallway. Itlooked just as Harry remembered it: eerie,cobwebbed, the outlines of the house-elf heads on thewall throwing odd shadows up the staircase. Longdark curtains concealed the portrait of Sirius’smother. The only thing that was out of place was thetroll’s leg umbrella stand, which was lying on its sideas if Tonks had just knocked it over again.

“I think somebody’s been in here,” Hermionewhispered, pointing toward it.

“That could’ve happened as the Order left,” Ronmurmured back.

“So where are these jinxes they put up againstSnape?” Harry asked.

“Maybe they’re only activated if he shows up?”suggested Ron.

Yet they remained close together on the doormat,backs against the door, scared to move farther intothe house.

“Well, we can’t stay here forever,” said Harry, and hetook a step forward.

“Severus Snape?”

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Mad-Eye Moody’s voice whispered out of thedarkness, making all three of them jump back infright. “We’re not Snape!” croaked Harry, beforesomething whooshed over him like cold air and histongue curled backward on itself, making itimpossible to speak. Before he had time to feel insidehis mouth, however, his tongue had unraveled again.

The other two seemed to have experienced the sameunpleasant sensation. Ron was making retchingnoises; Hermione stammered, “That m-must have b-been the T-Tongue-Tying Curse Mad-Eye set up forSnape!”

Gingerly Harry took another step forward. Somethingshifted in the shadows at the end of the hall, andbefore any of them could say another word, a figurehad risen up out of the carpet, tall, dust-colored, andterrible: Hermione screamed and so did Mrs. Black,her curtains flying open; the gray figure was glidingtoward them, faster and faster, its waist-length hairand beard streaming behind it, its face sunken,fleshless, with empty eye sockets: Horribly familiar,dreadfully altered, it raised a wasted arm, pointing atHarry.

“No!” Harry shouted, and though he had raised hiswand no spell occurred to him. “No! It wasn’t us! Wedidn’t kill you —”

On the word kill, the figure exploded in a great cloudof dust: Coughing, his eyes watering, Harry lookedaround to see Hermione crouched on the floor by thedoor with her arms over her head, and Ron, who wasshaking from head to foot, patting her clumsily on theshoulder and saying, “It’s all r-right. ... It’s g-gone. ...”

Dust swirled around Harry like mist, catching theblue gaslight, as Mrs. Black continued to scream.

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Mudbloods, filth, stains of dishonor, taint of shame onthe house of my fathers —”

“SHUT UP!” Harry bellowed, directing his wand at her,and with a bang and a burst of red sparks, thecurtains swung shut again, silencing her.

“That ... that was ...” Hermione whimpered, as Ronhelped her to her feet.

“Yeah,” said Harry, “but it wasn’t really him, was it?Just something to scare Snape.”

Had it worked, Harry wondered, or had Snape alreadyblasted the horror-figure aside as casually as he hadkilled the real Dumbledore? Nerves still tingling, heled the other two up the hall, half-expecting some newterror to reveal itself, but nothing moved except for amouse skittering along the skirting board.

“Before we go any farther, I think we’d better check,”whispered Hermione, and she raised her wand andsaid, “Homenum revelio.”

Nothing happened.

“Well, you’ve just had a big shock,” said Ron kindly.“What was that supposed to do?”

“It did what I meant it to do!” said Hermione rathercrossly. “That was a spell to reveal human presence,and there’s nobody here except us!”

“And old Dusty,” said Ron, glancing at the patch ofcarpet from which the corpse-figure had risen.

“Let’s go up,” said Hermione with a frightened look atthe same spot, and she led the way up the creakingstairs to the drawing room on the first floor.

Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hermione waved her wand to ignite the old gas lamps,then, shivering slightly in the drafty room, sheperched on the sofa, her arms wrapped tightly aroundher. Ron crossed to the window and moved the heavyvelvet curtain aside an inch.

“Can’t see anyone out there,” he reported. “And you’dthink, if Harry still had a Trace on him, they’d havefollowed us here. I know they can’t get in the house,but — what’s up, Harry?”

Harry had given a cry of pain: His scar had burnedagain as something flashed across his mind like abright light on water. He saw a large shadow and felta fury that was not his own pound through his body,violent and brief as an electric shock.

“What did you see?” Ron asked, advancing on Harry.“Did you see him at my place?”

“No, I just felt anger — he’s really angry —”

“But that could be at the Burrow,” said Ron loudly.“What else? Didn’t you see anything? Was he cursingsomeone?”

“No, I just felt anger — I couldn’t tell —”

Harry felt badgered, confused, and Hermione did nothelp as she said in a frightened voice, “Your scar,again? But what’s going on? I thought thatconnection had closed!”

“It did, for a while,” muttered Harry; his scar was stillpainful, which made it hard to concentrate. “I — Ithink it’s started opening again whenever he losescontrol, that’s how it used to —”

Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But then you’ve got to close your mind!” saidHermione shrilly. “Harry, Dumbledore didn’t want youto use that connection, he wanted you to shut itdown, that’s why you were supposed to useOcclumency! Otherwise Voldemort can plant falseimages in your mind, remember —”

“Yeah, I do remember, thanks,” said Harry throughgritted teeth; he did not need Hermione to tell himthat Voldemort had once used this selfsameconnection between them to lead him into a trap, northat it had resulted in Sirius’s death. He wished thathe had not told them what he had seen and felt; itmade Voldemort more threatening, as though he werepressing against the window of the room, and still thepain in his scar was building and he fought it: It waslike resisting the urge to be sick.

He turned his back on Ron and Hermione, pretendingto examine the old tapestry of the Black family tree onthe wall. Then Hermione shrieked: Harry drew hiswand again and spun around to see a silver Patronussoar through the drawing room window and landupon the floor in front of them, where it solidified intothe weasel that spoke with the voice of Ron’s father.

“Family safe, do not reply, we are being watched.”

The Patronus dissolved into nothingness. Ron let outa noise between a whimper and a groan and droppedonto the sofa: Hermione joined him, gripping his arm.

“They’re all right, they’re all right!” she whispered,and Ron half laughed and hugged her.

“Harry,” he said over Hermione’s shoulder, “I —”

“It’s not a problem,” said Harry, sickened by the painin his head. “It’s your family, ’course you’re worried.

Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

I’d feel the same way.” He thought of Ginny. “I do feelthe same way.”

The pain in his scar was reaching a peak, burning asit had done in the garden of the Burrow. Faintly heheard Hermione say, “I don’t want to be on my own.Could we use the sleeping bags I’ve brought andcamp in here tonight?”

He heard Ron agree. He could not fight the pain muchlonger: He had to succumb.

“Bathroom,” he muttered, and he left the room as fastas he could without running.

He barely made it: Bolting the door behind him withtrembling hands, he grasped his pounding head andfell to the floor, then in an explosion of agony, he feltthe rage that did not belong to him possess his soul,saw a long room lit only by firelight, and the greatblond Death Eater on the floor, screaming andwrithing, and a slighter figure standing over him,wand outstretched, while Harry spoke in a high, cold,merciless voice.

“More, Rowle, or shall we end it and feed you toNagini? Lord Voldemort is not sure that he will forgivethis time. ... You called me back for this, to tell methat Harry Potter has escaped again? Draco, giveRowle another taste of our displeasure. ... Do it, orfeel my wrath yourself!”

A log fell in the fire: Flames reared, their light dartingacross a terrified, pointed white face — with a senseof emerging from deep water, Harry drew heavingbreaths and opened his eyes.

He was spread-eagled on the cold black marble floor,his nose inches from one of the silver serpent tails

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

that supported the large bathtub. He sat up. Malfoy’sgaunt, petrified face seemed branded on the inside ofhis eyes. Harry felt sickened by what he had seen, bythe use to which Draco was now being put byVoldemort.

There was a sharp rap on the door, and Harry jumpedas Hermione’s voice rang out.

“Harry, do you want your toothbrush? I’ve got ithere.”

“Yeah, great, thanks,” he said, fighting to keep hisvoice casual as he stood up to let her in.

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



KREACHER’S TALE

Harry woke early next morning, wrapped in a sleepingbag on the drawing room floor. A chink of sky wasvisible between the heavy curtains: It was the cool,clear blue of watered ink, somewhere between nightand dawn, and everything was quiet except for Ronand Hermione’s slow, deep breathing. Harry glancedover at the dark shapes they made on the floor besidehim. Ron had had a fit of gallantry and insisted thatHermione sleep on the cushions from the sofa, so thather silhouette was raised above his. Her arm curvedto the floor, her fingers inches from Ron’s. Harrywondered whether they had fallen asleep holdinghands. The idea made him feel strangely lonely.

He looked up at the shadowy ceiling, the cobwebbedchandelier. Less than twenty-four hours ago, he hadbeen standing in the sunlight at the entrance to themarquee, waiting to show in wedding guests. Itseemed a lifetime away. What was going to happennow? He lay on the floor and he thought of theHorcruxes, of the daunting, complex missionDumbledore had left him. ... Dumbledore ...

Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

The grief that had possessed him since Dumbledore’sdeath felt different now. The accusations he hadheard from Muriel at the wedding seemed to havenested in his brain like diseased things, infecting hismemories of the wizard he had idolized. CouldDumbledore have let such things happen? Had hebeen like Dudley, content to watch neglect and abuseas long as it did not affect him? Could he have turnedhis back on a sister who was being imprisoned andhidden?

Harry thought of Godric’s Hollow, of gravesDumbledore had never mentioned there; he thoughtof mysterious objects left without explanation inDumbledore’s will, and resentment swelled in thedarkness. Why hadn’t Dumbledore told him? Whyhadn’t he explained? Had Dumbledore actually caredabout Harry at all? Or had Harry been nothing morethan a tool to be polished and honed, but not trusted,never confided in?

Harry could not stand lying there with nothing butbitter thoughts for company. Desperate for somethingto do, for distraction, he slipped out of his sleepingbag, picked up his wand, and crept out of the room.On the landing he whispered, “Lumos,” and started toclimb the stairs by wandlight.

On the second landing was the bedroom in which heand Ron had slept last time they had been here; heglanced into it. The wardrobe doors stood open andthe bedclothes had been ripped back. Harryremembered the overturned troll leg downstairs.Somebody had searched the house since the Orderhad left. Snape? Or perhaps Mundungus, who hadpilfered plenty from this house both before and afterSirius died? Harry’s gaze wandered to the portraitthat sometimes contained Phineas Nigellus Black,Sirius’s great-great-grandfather, but it was empty,Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

showing nothing but a stretch of muddy backdrop.Phineas Nigellus was evidently spending the night inthe headmaster’s study at Hogwarts.

Harry continued up the stairs until he reached thetopmost landing, where there were only two doors.

The one facing him bore a nameplate reading SIRIUS.Harry had never entered his godfather’s bedroombefore. He pushed open the door, holding his wandhigh to cast light as widely as possible. The room wasspacious and must once have been handsome. Therewas a large bed with a carved wooden headboard, atall window obscured by long velvet curtains, and achandelier thickly coated in dust with candle stubsstill resting in its sockets, solid wax hanging infrostlike drips. A fine film of dust covered the pictureson the walls and the bed’s headboard; a spider’s webstretched between the chandelier and the top of thelarge wooden wardrobe, and as Harry moved deeperinto the room, he heard a scurrying of disturbed mice.

The teenage Sirius had plastered the walls with somany posters and pictures that little of the walls’silvery-gray silk was visible. Harry could only assumethat Sirius’s parents had been unable to remove thePermanent Sticking Charm that kept them on thewall, because he was sure they would not haveappreciated their eldest son’s taste in decoration.Sirius seemed to have gone out of his way to annoyhis parents. There were several large Gryffindorbanners, faded scarlet and gold, just to underline hisdifference from all the rest of the Slytherin family.There were many pictures of Muggle motorcycles, andalso (Harry had to admire Sirius’s nerve) severalposters of bikini-clad Muggle girls; Harry could tellthat they were Muggles because they remained quitestationary within their pictures, faded smiles andglazed eyes frozen on the paper. This was in contrastto the only Wizarding photograph on the walls, whichPage | 200 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

was a picture of four Hogwarts students standing armin arm, laughing at the camera.

With a leap of pleasure, Harry recognized his father;his untidy black hair stuck up at the back likeHarry’s, and he too wore glasses. Beside him wasSirius, carelessly handsome, his slightly arrogant faceso much younger and happier than Harry had everseen it alive. To Sirius’s right stood Pettigrew, morethan a head shorter, plump and watery-eyed, flushedwith pleasure at his inclusion in this coolest of gangs,with the much-admired rebels that James and Siriushad been. On James’s left was Lupin, even then alittle shabby-looking, but he had the same air ofdelighted surprise at finding himself liked andincluded ... or was it simply because Harry knew howit had been, that he saw these things in the picture?He tried to take it from the wall; it was his now, afterall, Sirius had left him everything, but it would notbudge. Sirius had taken no chances in preventing hisparents from redecorating his room.

Harry looked around at the floor. The sky outside wasgrowing brighter: A shaft of light revealed bits ofpaper, books, and small objects scattered over thecarpet. Evidently Sirius’s bedroom had been searchedtoo, although its contents seemed to have beenjudged mostly, if not entirely, worthless. A few of thebooks had been shaken roughly enough to partcompany with their covers, and sundry pages litteredthe floor.

Harry bent down, picked up a few of the pieces ofpaper, and examined them. He recognized one as partof an old edition of A History of Magic, by BathildaBagshot, and another as belonging to a motorcyclemaintenance manual. The third was handwritten andcrumpled. He smoothed it out.

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Dear Padfoot,

Thank you, thank you, for Harry’s birthday present! Itwas his favorite by far. One year old and alreadyzooming along on a toy broomstick, he looked sopleased with himself, I’m enclosing a picture so youcan see. You know it only rises about two feet off theground, but he nearly killed the cat and he smashed ahorrible vase Petunia sent me for Christmas (nocomplaints there). Of course, James thought it was sofunny, says he’s going to be a great Quidditch player,but we’ve had to pack away all the ornaments andmake sure we don’t take our eyes off him when he getsgoing.

We had a very quiet birthday tea, just us and oldBathilda, who has always been sweet to us and whodotes on Harry. We were so sorry you couldn’t come,but the Order’s got to come first, and Harry’s not oldenough to know it’s his birthday anyway! James isgetting a bit frustrated shut up here, he tries not toshow it but I can tell — also, Dumbledore’s still got hisInvisibility Cloak, so no chance of little excursions. Ifyou could visit, it would cheer him up so much. Wormywas here last weekend, I thought he seemed down,but that was probably the news about the McKinnons;

I cried all evening when I heard.

Bathilda drops in most days, she’s a fascinating oldthing with the most amazing stories about Dumbledore,I’m not sure he’d be pleased if he knew! I don’t knowhow much to believe, actually, because it seemsincredible that Dumbledore

Harry’s extremities seemed to have gone numb. Hestood quite still, holding the miraculous paper in hisnerveless fingers while inside him a kind of quieteruption sent joy and grief thundering in equal

Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

measure through his veins. Lurching to the bed, hesat down.

He read the letter again, but could not take in anymore meaning than he had done the first time, andwas reduced to staring at the handwriting itself. Shehad made her “g”s the same way he did: He searchedthrough the letter for every one of them, and each feltlike a friendly little wave glimpsed from behind a veil.The letter was an incredible treasure, proof that LilyPotter had lived, really lived, that her warm hand hadonce moved across this parchment, tracing ink intothese letters, these words, words about him, Harry,her son.

Impatiently brushing away the wetness in his eyes, hereread the letter, this time concentrating on themeaning. It was like listening to a half-rememberedvoice.

They had had a cat ... perhaps it had perished, likehis parents, at Godric’s Hollow ... or else fled whenthere was nobody left to feed it. ... Sirius had boughthim his first broomstick. ... His parents had knownBathilda Bagshot; had Dumbledore introduced them?DumblecLore’s still got his Invisibility Cloak ... Therewas something funny there. ...

Harry paused, pondering his mother’s words. Whyhad Dumbledore taken James’s Invisibility Cloak?Harry distinctly remembered his headmaster tellinghim years before, “I don’t need a cloak to becomeinvisible.” Perhaps some less gifted Order memberhad needed its assistance, and Dumbledore had actedas carrier? Harry passed on. ...

Wormy was here ... Pettigrew, the traitor, had seemed“down,” had he? Was he aware that he was seeingJames and Lily alive for the last time?

Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

And finally Bathilda again, who told incredible storiesabout Dumbledore. It seems incredible thatDumbledore —

That Dumbledore what? But there were any numberof things that would seem incredible aboutDumbledore; that he had once received bottom marksin a Transfiguration test, for instance, or had takenup goat-charming like Aberforth. ...

Harry got to his feet and scanned the floor: Perhapsthe rest of the letter was here somewhere. He seizedpapers, treating them, in his eagerness, with as littleconsideration as the original searcher; he pulled opendrawers, shook out books, stood on a chair to run hishand over the top of the wardrobe, and crawled underthe bed and armchair.

At last, lying facedown on the floor, he spotted whatlooked like a torn piece of paper under the chest ofdrawers. When he pulled it out, it proved to be mostof the photograph Lily had described in her letter. Ablack-haired baby was zooming in and out of thepicture on a tiny broom, roaring with laughter, and apair of legs that must have belonged to James waschasing after him. Harry tucked the photograph intohis pocket with Lily’s letter and continued to look forthe second sheet.

After another quarter of an hour, however, he wasforced to conclude that the rest of his mother’s letterwas gone. Had it simply been lost in the sixteen yearsthat had elapsed since it had been written, or had itbeen taken by whoever had searched the room? Harryread the first sheet again, this time looking for cluesas to what might have made the second sheetvaluable. His toy broomstick could hardly beconsidered interesting to the Death Eaters. ... Theonly potentially useful thing he could see here wasPage | 204 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

possible information on Dumbledore. It seemsincredible that Dumbledore — what?

“Harry? Harry! HarryV’

“I’m here!” he called. “What’s happened?”

There was a clatter of footsteps outside the door, andHermione burst inside.

“We woke up and didn’t know where you were!” shesaid breathlessly. She turned and shouted over hershoulder, “Ron! I’ve found him!”

Ron’s annoyed voice echoed distantly from severalfloors below.

“Good! Tell him from me he’s a git!”

“Harry, don’t just disappear, please, we were terrified!Why did you come up here anyway?” She gazedaround the ransacked room. “What have you beendoing?”

“Look what I’ve just found.”

He held out his mother’s letter. Hermione took it andread it while Harry watched her. When she reachedthe end of the page she looked up at him.

“Oh, Harry ...”

“And there’s this too.”

He handed her the torn photograph, and Hermionesmiled at the baby zooming in and out of sight on thetoy broom.

Page | 205 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I’ve been looking for the rest of the letter,” Harrysaid, “but it’s not here.”

Hermione glanced around.

“Did you make all this mess, or was some of it donewhen you got here?”

“Someone had searched before me,” said Harry.

“I thought so. Every room I looked into on the way uphad been disturbed. What were they after, do youthink?”

“Information on the Order, if it was Snape.”

“But you’d think he’d already have all he needed, Imean, he was in the Order, wasn’t he?”

“Well then,” said Harry, keen to discuss his theory,“what about information on Dumbledore? The secondpage of this letter, for instance. You know thisBathilda my mum mentions, you know who she is?”

“Who?”

“Bathilda Bagshot, the author of —”

“A History of Magic,” said Hermione, lookinginterested. “So your parents knew her? She was anincredible magical historian.”

“And she’s still alive,” said Harry, “and she lives inGodric’s Hollow, Ron’s Auntie Muriel was talkingabout her at the wedding. She knew Dumbledore’sfamily too. Be pretty interesting to talk to, wouldn’tshe?”

Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There was a little too much understanding in thesmile Hermione gave him for Harry’s liking. He tookback the letter and the photograph and tucked theminside the pouch around his neck, so as not to haveto look at her and give himself away.

“I understand why you’d love to talk to her about yourmum and dad, and Dumbledore too,” said Hermione.“But that wouldn’t really help us in our search for theHorcruxes, would it?” Harry did not answer, and sherushed on, “Harry, I know you really want to go toGodric’s Hollow, but I’m scared, I’m scared at howeasily those Death Eaters found us yesterday. It justmakes me feel more than ever that we ought to avoidthe place where your parents are buried, I’m surethey’d be expecting you to visit it.”

“It’s not just that,” Harry said, still avoiding looking ather. “Muriel said stuff about Dumbledore at thewedding. I want to know the truth. ...”

He told Hermione everything that Muriel had toldhim. When he had finished, Hermione said, “Ofcourse, I can see why that’s upset you, Harry —”

“I’m not upset,” he lied, “I’d just like to know whetheror not it’s true or —”

“Harry, do you really think you’ll get the truth from amalicious old woman like Muriel, or from RitaSkeeter? How can you believe them? You knewDumbledore!”

“I thought I did,” he muttered.

“But you know how much truth there was ineverything Rita wrote about you! Doge is right, howcan you let these people tarnish your memories ofDumbledore?”

Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He looked away, trying not to betray the resentmenthe felt. There it was again: Choose what to believe. Hewanted the truth. Why was everybody so determinedthat he should not get it?

“Shall we go down to the kitchen?” Hermionesuggested after a little pause. “Find something forbreakfast?”

He agreed, but grudgingly, and followed her out ontothe landing and past the second door that led off it.There were deep scratch marks in the paintworkbelow a small sign that he had not noticed in thedark. He paused at the top of the stairs to read it. Itwas a pompous little sign, neatly lettered by hand,the sort of thing that Percy Weasley might have stuckon his bedroom door:

Do Not Enter

Without the Express Permission ofRegulus Arcturus Black

Excitement trickled through Harry, but he was notimmediately sure why. He read the sign again.Hermione was already a flight of stairs below him.

“Hermione,” he said, and he was surprised that hisvoice was so calm. “Come back up here.”

“What’s the matter?”

“R.A.B. I think I’ve found him.”

There was a gasp, and then Hermione ran back upthe stairs.

“In your mum’s letter? But I didn’t see —”

Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry shook his head, pointing at Regulus’s sign. Sheread it, then clutched Harry’s arm so tightly that hewinced.

“Sirius’s brother?” she whispered.

“He was a Death Eater,” said Harry, “Sirius told meabout him, he joined up when he was really youngand then got cold feet and tried to leave — so theykilled him.”

“That fits!” gasped Hermione. “If he was a Death Eaterhe had access to Voldemort, and if he becamedisenchanted, then he would have wanted to bringVoldemort down!”

She released Harry, leaned over the banister, andscreamed, “Ron! RON! Get up here, quick!”

Ron appeared, panting, a minute later, his wandready in his hand.

“What’s up? If it’s massive spiders again I wantbreakfast before I —”

He frowned at the sign on Regulus’s door, to whichHermione was silently pointing.

“What? That was Sirius’s brother, wasn’t it? RegulusArcturus ... Regulus ... R.A.B.l The locket — you don’treckon — ?”

“Let’s find out,” said Harry. He pushed the door: Itwas locked. Hermione pointed her wand at the handleand said, “Alohomora.” There was a click, and thedoor swung open.

They moved over the threshold together, gazingaround. Regulus’s bedroom was slightly smaller than

Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Sirius’s, though it had the same sense of formergrandeur. Whereas Sirius had sought to advertise hisdifference from the rest of the family, Regulus hadstriven to emphasize the opposite. The Slytherincolors of emerald and silver were everywhere, drapingthe bed, the walls, and the windows. The Black familycrest was painstakingly painted over the bed, alongwith its motto, TOUJOURS PUR. Beneath this was acollection of yellow newspaper cuttings, all stucktogether to make a ragged collage. Hermione crossedthe room to examine them.

“They’re all about Voldemort,” she said. “Regulusseems to have been a fan for a few years before hejoined the Death Eaters. ...”

A little puff of dust rose from the bedcovers as she satdown to read the clippings. Harry, meanwhile, hadnoticed another photograph; a Hogwarts Quidditchteam was smiling and waving out of the frame. Hemoved closer and saw the snakes emblazoned ontheir chests: Slytherins. Regulus was instantlyrecognizable as the boy sitting in the middle of thefront row: He had the same dark hair and slightlyhaughty look of his brother, though he was smaller,slighter, and rather less handsome than Sirius hadbeen.

“He played Seeker,” said Harry.

“What?” said Hermione vaguely; she was stillimmersed in Voldemort’s press clippings.

“He’s sitting in the middle of the front row, that’swhere the Seeker ... Never mind,” said Harry, realizingthat nobody was listening: Ron was on his hands andknees, searching under the wardrobe. Harry lookedaround the room for likely hiding places andapproached the desk. Yet again, somebody hadPage | 210 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

searched before them. The drawers’ contents hadbeen turned over recently, the dust disturbed, butthere was nothing of value there: old quills, out-of-date textbooks that bore evidence of being roughlyhandled, a recently smashed ink bottle, its stickyresidue covering the contents of the drawer.

“There’s an easier way,” said Hermione, as Harrywiped his inky fingers on his jeans. She raised herwand and said, “Accio Locked.”

Nothing happened. Ron, who had been searching thefolds of the faded curtains, looked disappointed.

“Is that it, then? It’s not here?”

“Oh, it could still be here, but under counter-enchantments,” said Hermione. “Charms to prevent itbeing summoned magically, you know.”

“Like Voldemort put on the stone basin in the cave,”said Harry, remembering how he had been unable toSummon the fake locket.

“How are we supposed to find it then?” asked Ron.

“We search manually,” said Hermione.

“That’s a good idea,” said Ron, rolling his eyes, and heresumed his examination of the curtains.

They combed every inch of the room for more than anhour, but were forced, finally, to conclude that thelocket was not there.

The sun had risen now; its light dazzled them eventhrough the grimy landing windows.

Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It could be somewhere else in the house, though,”said Hermione in a rallying tone as they walked backdownstairs: As Harry and Ron had become morediscouraged, she seemed to have become moredetermined. “Whether he’d managed to destroy it ornot, he’d want to keep it hidden from Voldemort,wouldn’t he? Remember all those awful things we hadto get rid of when we were here last time? That clockthat shot bolts at everyone and those old robes thattried to strangle Ron; Regulus might have put themthere to protect the locket’s hiding place, even thoughwe didn’t realize it at ... at ...”

Harry and Ron looked at her. She was standing withone foot in midair, with the dumbstruck look of onewho had just been Obliviated; her eyes had evendrifted out of focus.

"... at the time,” she finished in a whisper.

“Something wrong?” asked Ron.

“There was a locket.”

“What?” said Harry and Ron together.

“In the cabinet in the drawing room. Nobody couldopen it. And we ... we ...”

Harry felt as though a brick had slid down throughhis chest into his stomach. He remembered: He hadeven handled the thing as they passed it around, eachtrying in turn to prise it open. It had been tossed intoa sack of rubbish, along with the snuffbox of Wartcappowder and the music box that had made everyonesleepy. ...

“Kreacher nicked loads of things back from us,” saidHarry. It was the only chance, the only slender hope

Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

left to them, and he was going to cling to it untilforced to let go. “He had a whole stash of stuff in hiscupboard in the kitchen. C’mon.”

He ran down the stairs taking two steps at a time, theother two thundering along in his wake. They madeso much noise that they woke the portrait of Sirius’smother as they passed through the hall.

“Filth). Mudbloods\ Scum)” she screamed after them asthey dashed down into the basement kitchen andslammed the door behind them.

Harry ran the length of the room, skidded to a halt atthe door of Kreacher’s cupboard, and wrenched itopen. There was the nest of dirty old blankets inwhich the house-elf had once slept, but they were nolonger glittering with the trinkets Kreacher hadsalvaged. The only thing there was an old copy ofNature’s Nobility: A Wizarding Genealogy. Refusing tobelieve his eyes, Harry snatched up the blankets andshook them. A dead mouse fell out and rolleddismally across the floor. Ron groaned as he threwhimself into a kitchen chair; Hermione closed hereyes.

“It’s not over yet,” said Harry, and he raised his voiceand called, “Kreacherl”

There was a loud crack and the house-elf that Harryhad so reluctantly inherited from Sirius appeared outof nowhere in front of the cold and empty fireplace:tiny, half human-sized, his pale skin hanging off himin folds, white hair sprouting copiously from hisbatlike ears. He was still wearing the filthy rag inwhich they had first met him, and the contemptuouslook he bent upon Harry showed that his attitude tohis change of ownership had altered no more than hisoutfit.

Page | 213 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Master,” croaked Kreacher in his bullfrog’s voice, andhe bowed low, muttering to his knees, “back in myMistress’s old house with the blood-traitor Weasleyand the Mudblood —”

“I forbid you to call anyone ‘blood traitor’ or‘Mudblood,’ ” growled Harry. He would have foundKreacher, with his snoutlike nose and bloodshot eyes,a distinctly unlovable object even if the elf had notbetrayed Sirius to Voldemort.

“I’ve got a question for you,” said Harry, his heartbeating rather fast as he looked down at the elf, “andI order you to answer it truthfully. Understand?”

“Yes, Master,” said Kreacher, bowing low again: Harrysaw his lips moving soundlessly, undoubtedly framingthe insults he was now forbidden to utter.

“Two years ago,” said Harry, his heart nowhammering against his ribs, “there was a big goldlocket in the drawing room upstairs. We threw it out.Did you steal it back?”

There was a moment’s silence, during which Kreacherstraightened up to look Harry full in the face. Then hesaid, “Yes.”

“Where is it now?” asked Harry jubilantly as Ron andHermione looked gleeful.

Kreacher closed his eyes as though he could not bearto see their reactions to his next word.

“Gone.”

“Gone?” echoed Harry, elation flooding out of him.“What do you mean, it’s gone?”

Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The elf shivered. He swayed.

“Kreacher,” said Harry fiercely, “I order you —”

“Mundungus Fletcher,” croaked the elf, his eyes stilltight shut. “Mundungus Fletcher stole it all: MissBella’s and Miss Cissy’s pictures, my Mistress’sgloves, the Order of Merlin, First Class, the gobletswith the family crest, and — and —”

Kreacher was gulping for air: His hollow chest wasrising and falling rapidly, then his eyes flew open andhe uttered a bloodcurdling scream.

“— and the locket, Master Regulus’s locket, Kreacherdid wrong, Kreacher failed in his orders!”

Harry reacted instinctively: As Kreacher lunged forthe poker standing in the grate, he launched himselfupon the elf, flattening him. Hermione’s screammingled with Kreacher’s, but Harry bellowed louderthan both of them: “Kreacher, I order you to staystill!”

He felt the elf freeze and released him. Kreacher layflat on the cold stone floor, tears gushing from hissagging eyes.

“Harry, let him up!” Hermione whispered.

“So he can beat himself up with the poker?” snortedHarry, kneeling beside the elf. “I don’t think so. Right,Kreacher, I want the truth: How do you knowMundungus Fletcher stole the locket?”

“Kreacher saw him!” gasped the elf as tears pouredover his snout and into his mouth full of grayingteeth. “Kreacher saw him coming out of Kreacher’scupboard with his hands full of Kreacher’s treasures.

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Kreacher told the sneak thief to stop, but MundungusFletcher laughed and r-ran. ...”

“You called the locket ‘Master Regulus’s,’ ” said Harry.“Why? Where did it come from? What did Regulushave to do with it? Kreacher, sit up and tell meeverything you know about that locket, andeverything Regulus had to do with it!”

The elf sat up, curled into a ball, placed his wet facebetween his knees, and began to rock backward andforward. When he spoke, his voice was muffled butquite distinct in the silent, echoing kitchen.

“Master Sirius ran away, good riddance, for he was abad boy and broke my Mistress’s heart with hislawless ways. But Master Regulus had proper pride;he knew what was due to the name of Black and thedignity of his pure blood. For years he talked of theDark Lord, who was going to bring the wizards out ofhiding to rule the Muggles and the Muggle-borns ...and when he was sixteen years old, Master Regulusjoined the Dark Lord. So proud, so proud, so happy toserve ...

“And one day, a year after he had joined, MasterRegulus came down to the kitchen to see Kreacher.Master Regulus always liked Kreacher. And MasterRegulus said ... he said ...”

The old elf rocked faster than ever.

"... he said that the Dark Lord required an elf.”

“Voldemort needed an elf?” Harry repeated, lookingaround at Ron and Hermione, who looked just aspuzzled as he did.

Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Oh yes,” moaned Kreacher. “And Master Regulus hadvolunteered Kreacher. It was an honor, said MasterRegulus, an honor for him and for Kreacher, whomust be sure to do whatever the Dark Lord orderedhim to do ... and then to c-come home.”

Kreacher rocked still faster, his breath coming insobs.

“So Kreacher went to the Dark Lord. The Dark Lorddid not tell Kreacher what they were to do, but tookKreacher with him to a cave beside the sea. Andbeyond the cave there was a cavern, and in thecavern was a great black lake ...”

The hairs on the back of Harry’s neck stood up.Kreacher’s croaking voice seemed to come to him fromacross that dark water. He saw what had happenedas clearly as though he had been present.

"... There was a boat ...”

Of course there had been a boat; Harry knew theboat, ghostly green and tiny, bewitched so as to carryone wizard and one victim toward the island in thecenter. This, then, was how Voldemort had tested thedefenses surrounding the Horcrux: by borrowing adisposable creature, a house-elf ...

“There was a b-basin full of potion on the island. TheD-Dark Lord made Kreacher drink it. ...”

The elf quaked from head to foot.

“Kreacher drank, and as he drank, he saw terriblethings. ... Kreacher’s insides burned. ... Kreachercried for Master Regulus to save him, he cried for hisMistress Black, but the Dark Lord only laughed. ...

He made Kreacher drink all the potion. ... He droppedPage | 217 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

a locket into the empty basin. ... He filled it with morepotion.

“And then the Dark Lord sailed away, leavingKreacher on the island. ...”

Harry could see it happening. He watchedVoldemort’s white, snakelike face vanishing intodarkness, those red eyes fixed pitilessly on thethrashing elf whose death would occur withinminutes, whenever he succumbed to the desperatethirst that the burning potion caused its victim. ...

But here, Harry’s imagination could go no further, forhe could not see how Kreacher had escaped.

“Kreacher needed water, he crawled to the island’sedge and he drank from the black lake ... and hands,dead hands, came out of the water and draggedKreacher under the surface. ...”

“How did you get away?” Harry asked, and he was notsurprised to hear himself whispering.

Kreacher raised his ugly head and looked at Harrywith his great, bloodshot eyes.

“Master Regulus told Kreacher to come back,” hesaid.

“I know — but how did you escape the Inferi?”

Kreacher did not seem to understand.

“Master Regulus told Kreacher to come back,” herepeated.

“I know, but —”

Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Well, it’s obvious, isn’t it, Harry?” said Ron. “HeDisapparated!”

“But ... you couldn’t Apparate in and out of thatcave,” said Harry, “otherwise Dumbledore —”

“Elf magic isn’t like wizard’s magic, is it?” said Ron. “Imean, they can Apparate and Disapparate in and outof Hogwarts when we can’t.”

There was silence as Harry digested this. How couldVoldemort have made such a mistake? But even as hethought this, Hermione spoke, and her voice was icy.

“Of course, Voldemort would have considered theways of house-elves far beneath his notice, just likeall the purebloods who treat them like animals. ... Itwould never have occurred to him that they mighthave magic that he didn’t.”

“The house-elf’s highest law is his Master’s bidding,”intoned Kreacher. “Kreacher was told to come home,so Kreacher came home. ...”

“Well, then, you did what you were told, didn’t you?”said Hermione kindly. “You didn’t disobey orders atall!”

Kreacher shook his head, rocking as fast as ever.

“So what happened when you got back?” Harry asked.“What did Regulus say when you told him what hadhappened?”

“Master Regulus was very worried, very worried,”croaked Kreacher. “Master Regulus told Kreacher tostay hidden and not to leave the house. And then ... itwas a little while later ... Master Regulus came to findKreacher in his cupboard one night, and MasterPage | 219 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Regulus was strange, not as he usually was,disturbed in his mind, Kreacher could tell ... and heasked Kreacher to take him to the cave, the cavewhere Kreacher had gone with the Dark Lord. ...”

And so they had set off. Harry could visualize themquite clearly, the frightened old elf and the thin, darkSeeker who had so resembled Sirius. ... Kreacherknew how to open the concealed entrance to theunderground cavern, knew how to raise the tiny boat;this time it was his beloved Regulus who sailed withhim to the island with its basin of poison. ...

“And he made you drink the potion?” said Harry,disgusted.

But Kreacher shook his head and wept. Hermione’shands leapt to her mouth: She seemed to haveunderstood something.

“M-Master Regulus took from his pocket a locket likethe one the Dark Lord had,” said Kreacher, tearspouring down either side of his snoutlike nose. “Andhe told Kreacher to take it and, when the basin wasempty, to switch the lockets. ...”

Kreacher’s sobs came in great rasps now; Harry hadto concentrate hard to understand him.

“And he ordered — Kreacher to leave — without him.And he told Kreacher — to go home — and never totell my Mistress — what he had done — but todestroy — the first locket. And he drank — all thepotion — and Kreacher swapped the lockets — andwatched ... as Master Regulus ... was draggedbeneath the water ... and ...”

“Oh, Kreacher!” wailed Hermione, who was crying.

She dropped to her knees beside the elf and tried to

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

hug him. At once he was on his feet, cringing awayfrom her, quite obviously repulsed.

“The Mudblood touched Kreacher, he will not allow it,what would his Mistress say?”

“I told you not to call her ‘Mudblood’!” snarled Harry,but the elf was already punishing himself: He fell tothe ground and banged his forehead on the floor.

“Stop him — stop him!” Hermione cried. “Oh, don’tyou see now how sick it is, the way they’ve got toobey?”

“Kreacher — stop, stop!” shouted Harry.

The elf lay on the floor, panting and shivering, greenmucus glistening around his snout, a bruise alreadyblooming on his pallid forehead where he had struckhimself, his eyes swollen and bloodshot andswimming in tears. Harry had never seen anything sopitiful.

“So you brought the locket home,” he saidrelentlessly, for he was determined to know the fullstory. “And you tried to destroy it?”

“Nothing Kreacher did made any mark upon it,”moaned the elf. “Kreacher tried everything, everythinghe knew, but nothing, nothing would work. ... Somany powerful spells upon the casing, Kreacher wassure the way to destroy it was to get inside it, but itwould not open. ... Kreacher punished himself, hetried again, he punished himself, he tried again.Kreacher failed to obey orders, Kreacher could notdestroy the locket! And his Mistress was mad withgrief, because Master Regulus had disappeared, andKreacher could not tell her what had happened, no,

Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

because Master Regulus had f-f-forbidden him to tellany of the f-f-family what happened in the c-cave. ...”

Kreacher began to sob so hard that there were nomore coherent words. Tears flowed down Hermione’scheeks as she watched Kreacher, but she did not daretouch him again. Even Ron, who was no fan ofKreacher’s, looked troubled. Harry sat back on hisheels and shook his head, trying to clear it.

“I don’t understand you, Kreacher,” he said finally.“Voldemort tried to kill you, Regulus died to bringVoldemort down, but you were still happy to betraySirius to Voldemort? You were happy to go toNarcissa and Bellatrix, and pass information toVoldemort through them. ...”

“Harry, Kreacher doesn’t think like that,” saidHermione, wiping her eyes on the back of her hand.“He’s a slave; house-elves are used to bad, evenbrutal treatment; what Voldemort did to Kreacherwasn’t that far out of the common way. What dowizard wars mean to an elf like Kreacher? He’s loyalto people who are kind to him, and Mrs. Black musthave been, and Regulus certainly was, so he servedthem willingly and parroted their beliefs. I know whatyou’re going to say,” she went on as Harry began toprotest, “that Regulus changed his mind ... but hedoesn’t seem to have explained that to Kreacher, doeshe? And I think I know why. Kreacher and Regulus’sfamily were all safer if they kept to the old pure-bloodline. Regulus was trying to protect them all.”

“Sirius —”

“Sirius was horrible to Kreacher, Harry, and it’s nogood looking like that, you know it’s true. Kreacherhad been alone for a long time when Sirius came tolive here, and he was probably starving for a bit of

Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

affection. I’m sure ‘Miss Cissy’ and ‘Miss Bella’ wereperfectly lovely to Kreacher when he turned up, so hedid them a favor and told them everything theywanted to know. I’ve said all along that wizards wouldpay for how they treat house-elves. Well, Voldemortdid ... and so did Sirius.”

Harry had no retort. As he watched Kreacher sobbingon the floor, he remembered what Dumbledore hadsaid to him, mere hours after Sirius’s death: I do notthink Sirius ever saw Kreacher as a being with feelingsas acute as a human’s. ...

“Kreacher,” said Harry after a while, “when you feelup to it, er ... please sit up.”

It was several minutes before Kreacher hiccupedhimself into silence. Then he pushed himself into asitting position again, rubbing his knuckles into hiseyes like a small child.

“Kreacher, I am going to ask you to do something,”said Harry. He glanced at Hermione for assistance. Hewanted to give the order kindly, but at the same time,he could not pretend that it was not an order.However, the change in his tone seemed to havegained her approval: She smiled encouragingly.

“Kreacher, I want you, please, to go and findMundungus Fletcher. We need to find out where thelocket — where Master Regulus’s locket is. It’s reallyimportant. We want to finish the work MasterRegulus started, we want to — er — ensure that hedidn’t die in vain.”

Kreacher dropped his fists and looked up at Harry.“Find Mundungus Fletcher?” he croaked.

Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“And bring him here, to Grimmauld Place,” saidHarry. “Do you think you could do that for us?”

As Kreacher nodded and got to his feet, Harry had asudden inspiration. He pulled out Hagrid’s purse andtook out the fake Horcrux, the substitute locket inwhich Regulus had placed the note to Voldemort.

“Kreacher, I’d, er, like you to have this,” he said,pressing the locket into the elf’s hand. “This belongedto Regulus and I’m sure he’d want you to have it as atoken of gratitude for what you —”

“Overkill, mate,” said Ron as the elf took one look atthe locket, let out a howl of shock and misery, andthrew himself back onto the ground.

It took them nearly half an hour to calm downKreacher, who was so overcome to be presented witha Black family heirloom for his very own that he wastoo weak at the knees to stand properly. When finallyhe was able to totter a few steps they all accompaniedhim to his cupboard, watched him tuck up the locketsafely in his dirty blankets, and assured him thatthey would make its protection their first prioritywhile he was away. He then made two low bows toHarry and Ron, and even gave a funny little spasm inHermione’s direction that might have been an attemptat a respectful salute, before Disapparating with theusual loud crack.

Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE BRIBE

If Kreacher could escape a lake full of Inferi, Harrywas confident that the capture of Mundungus wouldtake a few hours at most, and he prowled the houseall morning in a state of high anticipation. However,Kreacher did not return that morning or even thatafternoon. By nightfall, Harry felt discouraged andanxious, and a supper composed largely of moldybread, upon which Hermione had tried a variety ofunsuccessful Transfigurations, did nothing to help.

Kreacher did not return the following day, nor the dayafter that. However, two cloaked men had appeared inthe square outside number twelve, and they remainedthere into the night, gazing in the direction of thehouse that they could not see.

“Death Eaters, for sure,” said Ron, as he, Harry, andHermione watched from the drawing room windows.“Reckon they know we’re in here?”

Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t think so,” said Hermione, though she lookedfrightened, “or they’d have sent Snape in after us,wouldn’t they?”

“D’you reckon he’s been in here and had his tonguetied by Moody’s curse?” asked Ron.

“Yes,” said Hermione, “otherwise he’d have been ableto tell that lot how to get in, wouldn’t he? But they’reprobably watching to see whether we turn up. Theyknow that Harry owns the house, after all.”

“How do they — ?” began Harry.

“Wizarding wills are examined by the Ministry,remember? They’ll know Sirius left you the place.”

The presence of the Death Eaters outside increasedthe ominous mood inside number twelve. They hadnot heard a word from anyone beyond GrimmauldPlace since Mr. Weasley’s Patronus, and the strainwas starting to tell. Restless and irritable, Ron haddeveloped an annoying habit of playing with theDeluminator in his pocket: This particularlyinfuriated Hermione, who was whiling away the waitfor Kreacher by studying The Tales of Beedle the Bardand did not appreciate the way the lights keptflashing on and off.

“Will you stop it!” she cried on the third evening ofKreacher’s absence, as all light was sucked from thedrawing room yet again.

“Sorry, sorry!” said Ron, clicking the Deluminator andrestoring the lights. “I don’t know I’m doing it!”

“Well, can’t you find something useful to occupyyourself?”

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“What, like reading kids’ stories?”

“Dumbledore left me this book, Ron —”

“— and he left me the Deluminator, maybe I’msupposed to use it!”

Unable to stand the bickering, Harry slipped out ofthe room unnoticed by either of them. He headeddownstairs toward the kitchen, which he kept visitingbecause he was sure that was where Kreacher wasmost likely to reappear. Halfway down the flight ofstairs into the hall, however, he heard a tap on thefront door, then metallic clicks and the grinding of thechain.

Every nerve in his body seemed to tauten: He pulledout his wand, moved into the shadows beside thedecapitated elf heads, and waited. The door opened:He saw a glimpse of the lamplit square outside, and acloaked figure edged into the hall and closed the doorbehind it. The intruder took a step forward, andMoody’s voice asked, “Severus Snape?” Then the dustfigure rose from the end of the hall and rushed him,raising its dead hand.

“It was not I who killed you, Albus,” said a quiet voice.

The jinx broke: The dust-figure exploded again, and itwas impossible to make out the newcomer throughthe dense gray cloud it left behind.

Harry pointed his wand into the middle of it.

“Don’t move!”

He had forgotten the portrait of Mrs. Black: At thesound of his yell, the curtains hiding her flew open

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and she began to scream, “Mudbloods and filthdishonoring my house —”

Ron and Hermione came crashing down the stairsbehind Harry, wands pointing, like his, at theunknown man now standing with his arms raised inthe hall below.

“Hold your fire, it’s me, Remus!”

“Oh, thank goodness,” said Hermione weakly,pointing her wand at Mrs. Black instead; with a bang,the curtains swished shut again and silence fell. Rontoo lowered his wand, but Harry did not.

“Show yourself!” he called back.

Lupin moved forward into the lamplight, hands stillheld high in a gesture of surrender.

“I am Remus John Lupin, werewolf, sometimes knownas Moony, one of the four creators of the Marauder’sMap, married to Nymphadora, usually known asTonks, and I taught you how to produce a Patronus,Harry, which takes the form of a stag.”

“Oh, all right,” said Harry, lowering his wand, “but Ihad to check, didn’t I?”

“Speaking as your ex-Defense Against the Dark Artsteacher, I quite agree that you had to check. Ron,Hermione, you shouldn’t be quite so quick to loweryour defenses.”

They ran down the stairs toward him. Wrapped in athick black traveling cloak, he looked exhausted, butpleased to see them.

“No sign of Severus, then?” he asked.

Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry. “What’s going on? Is everyoneokay?”

“Yes,” said Lupin, “but we’re all being watched. Thereare a couple of Death Eaters in the square outside —”

“We know —”

“I had to Apparate very precisely onto the top stepoutside the front door to be sure that they would notsee me. They can’t know you’re in here or I’m surethey’d have more people out there; they’re staking outeverywhere that’s got any connection with you, Harry.Let’s go downstairs, there’s a lot to tell you, and Iwant to know what happened after you left theBurrow.”

They descended into the kitchen, where Hermionepointed her wand at the grate. A fire sprang upinstantly: It gave the illusion of coziness to the starkstone walls and glistened off the long wooden table.Lupin pulled a few butterbeers from beneath histraveling cloak and they sat down.

“I’d have been here three days ago but I needed toshake off the Death Eater tailing me,” said Lupin. “So,you came straight here after the wedding?”

“No,” said Harry, “only after we ran into a couple ofDeath Eaters in a cafe on Tottenham Court Road.”

Lupin slopped most of his butterbeer down his front.

“What?”

They explained what had happened; when they hadfinished, Lupin looked aghast.

Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But how did they find you so quickly? It’s impossibleto track anyone who Apparates, unless you grab holdof them as they disappear!”

“And it doesn’t seem likely they were just strollingdown Tottenham Court Road at the time, does it?”said Harry.

“We wondered,” said Hermione tentatively, “whetherHarry could still have the Trace on him?”

“Impossible,” said Lupin. Ron looked smug, andHarry felt hugely relieved. “Apart from anything else,they’d know for sure Harry was here if he still had theTrace on him, wouldn’t they? But I can’t see how theycould have tracked you to Tottenham Court Road,that’s worrying, really worrying.”

He looked disturbed, but as far as Harry wasconcerned, that question could wait.

“Tell us what happened after we left, we haven’t hearda thing since Ron’s dad told us the family were safe.”

“Well, Kingsley saved us,” said Lupin. “Thanks to hiswarning most of the wedding guests were able toDisapparate before they arrived.”

“Were they Death Eaters or Ministry people?”interjected Hermione.

“A mixture; but to all intents and purposes they’re thesame thing now,” said Lupin. “There were about adozen of them, but they didn’t know you were there,Harry. Arthur heard a rumor that they tried to tortureyour whereabouts out of Scrimgeour before they killedhim; if it’s true, he didn’t give you away.”

Page | 230 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked at Ron and Hermione; their expressionsreflected the mingled shock and gratitude he felt. Hehad never liked Scrimgeour much, but if what Lupinsaid was true, the man’s final act had been to try toprotect Harry.

“The Death Eaters searched the Burrow from top tobottom,” Lupin went on. “They found the ghoul, butdidn’t want to get too close — and then theyinterrogated those of us who remained for hours.

They were trying to get information on you, Harry, butof course nobody apart from the Order knew that youhad been there.

“At the same time that they were smashing up thewedding, more Death Eaters were forcing their wayinto every Order-connected house in the country. Nodeaths,” he added quickly, forestalling the question,“but they were rough. They burned down DedalusDiggle’s house, but as you know he wasn’t there, andthey used the Cruciatus Curse on Tonks’s family.Again, trying to find out where you went after youvisited them. They’re all right — shaken, obviously,but otherwise okay.”

“The Death Eaters got through all those protectivecharms?” Harry asked, remembering how effectivethese had been on the night he had crashed inTonks’s parents’ garden.

“What you’ve got to realize, Harry, is that the DeathEaters have got the full might of the Ministry on theirside now,” said Lupin. “They’ve got the power toperform brutal spells without fear of identification orarrest. They managed to penetrate every defensivespell we’d cast against them, and once inside, theywere completely open about why they’d come.”

Page | 231 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“And are they bothering to give an excuse fortorturing Harry’s whereabouts out of people?” askedHermione, an edge to her voice.

“Well,” said Lupin. He hesitated, then pulled out afolded copy of the Daily Prophet

“Here,” he said, pushing it across the table to Harry,“you’ll know sooner or later anyway. That’s theirpretext for going after you.”

Harry smoothed out the paper. A huge photograph ofhis own face filled the front page. He read theheadline over it:

WANTED FOR QUESTIONING ABOUT

THE DEATH OF ALBUS DUMBLEDORE

Ron and Hermione gave roars of outrage, but Harrysaid nothing. He pushed the newspaper away; he didnot want to read any more: He knew what it wouldsay. Nobody but those who had been on top of thetower when Dumbledore died knew who had reallykilled him and, as Rita Skeeter had already told theWizarding world, Harry had been seen running fromthe place moments after Dumbledore had fallen.

“I’m sorry, Harry,” Lupin said.

“So Death Eaters have taken over the Daily Prophettoo?” asked Hermione furiously.

Lupin nodded.

“But surely people realize what’s going on?”

“The coup has been smooth and virtually silent,” saidLupin. “The official version of Scrimgeour’s murder is

Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

that he resigned; he has been replaced by PiusThicknesse, who is under the Imperius Curse.”

“Why didn’t Voldemort declare himself Minister ofMagic?” asked Ron.

Lupin laughed.

“He doesn’t need to, Ron. Effectively he is theMinister, but why should he sit behind a desk at theMinistry? His puppet, Thicknesse, is taking care ofeveryday business, leaving Voldemort free to extendhis power beyond the Ministry.

“Naturally many people have deduced what hashappened: There has been such a dramatic change inMinistry policy in the last few days, and many arewhispering that Voldemort must be behind it.However, that is the point: They whisper. They daren’tconfide in each other, not knowing whom to trust;they are scared to speak out, in case their suspicionsare true and their families are targeted. Yes,

Voldemort is playing a very clever game. Declaringhimself might have provoked open rebellion:Remaining masked has created confusion,uncertainty, and fear.”

“And this dramatic change in Ministry policy,” saidHarry, “involves warning the Wizarding world againstme instead of Voldemort?”

“That’s certainly part of it,” said Lupin, “and it is amasterstroke. Now that Dumbledore is dead, you —the Boy Who Lived — were sure to be the symbol andrallying point for any resistance to Voldemort. But bysuggesting that you had a hand in the old hero’sdeath, Voldemort has not only set a price upon yourhead, but sown doubt and fear amongst many whowould have defended you.

Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Meanwhile, the Ministry has started moving againstMuggle-borns.”

Lupin pointed at the Daily Prophet“Look at page two.”

Hermione turned the pages with much the sameexpression of distaste she had worn when handlingSecrets of the Darkest Art

“ ‘Muggle-born Register,’ ” she read aloud. “ ‘TheMinistry of Magic is undertaking a survey of so-called“Muggle-borns,” the better to understand how theycame to possess magical secrets.

“ ‘Recent research undertaken by the Department ofMysteries reveals that magic can only be passed fromperson to person when Wizards reproduce. Where noproven Wizarding ancestry exists, therefore, the so-called Muggle-born is likely to have obtained magicalpower by theft or force.

“ ‘The Ministry is determined to root out such usurpersof magical power, and to this end has issued aninvitation to every so-called Muggle-born to presentthemselves for interview by the newly appointedMuggle-born Registration Commission.’ ”

“People won’t let this happen,” said Ron.

“It is happening, Ron,” said Lupin. “Muggle-borns arebeing rounded up as we speak.”

“But how are they supposed to have ‘stolen’ magic?”said Ron. “It’s mental, if you could steal magic therewouldn’t be any Squibs, would there?”

Page | 234 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I know,” said Lupin. “Nevertheless, unless you canprove that you have at least one close Wizardingrelative, you are now deemed to have obtained yourmagical power illegally and must suffer thepunishment.”

Ron glanced at Hermione, then said, “What ifpurebloods and half-bloods swear a Muggle-born’spart of their family? I’ll tell everyone Hermione’s mycousin —”

Hermione covered Ron’s hand with hers and squeezedit.

“Thank you, Ron, but I couldn’t let you —”

“You won’t have a choice,” said Ron fiercely, grippingher hand back. “I’ll teach you my family tree so youcan answer questions on it.

Hermione gave a shaky laugh.

“Ron, as we’re on the run with Harry Potter, the mostwanted person in the country, I don’t think it matters.If I was going back to school it would be different.What’s Voldemort planning for Hogwarts?” she askedLupin.

“Attendance is now compulsory for every young witchand wizard,” he replied. “That was announcedyesterday. It’s a change, because it was neverobligatory before. Of course, nearly every witch andwizard in Britain has been educated at Hogwarts, buttheir parents had the right to teach them at home orsend them abroad if they preferred. This way,Voldemort will have the whole Wizarding populationunder his eye from a young age. And it’s also anotherway of weeding out Muggle-borns, because studentsmust be given Blood Status — meaning that theyPage | 235 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

have proven to the Ministry that they are of Wizarddescent — before they are allowed to attend.”

Harry felt sickened and angry: At this moment,excited eleven-year-olds would be poring over stacksof newly purchased spell-books, unaware that theywould never see Hogwarts, perhaps never see theirfamilies again either.

“It’s ... it’s ...” he muttered, struggling to find wordsthat did justice to the horror of his thoughts, butLupin said quietly,

“I know.”

Lupin hesitated.

“I’ll understand if you can’t confirm this, Harry, butthe Order is under the impression that Dumbledoreleft you a mission.”

“He did,” Harry replied, “and Ron and Hermione arein on it and they’re coming with me.”

“Can you confide in me what the mission is?”

Harry looked into the prematurely lined face, framedin thick but graying hair, and wished that he couldreturn a different answer.

“I can’t, Remus, I’m sorry. If Dumbledore didn’t tellyou I don’t think I can.”

“I thought you’d say that,” said Lupin, lookingdisappointed. “But I might still be of some use to you.You know what I am and what I can do. I could comewith you to provide protection. There would be noneed to tell me exactly what you were up to.”

Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry hesitated. It was a very tempting offer, thoughhow they would be able to keep their mission secretfrom Lupin if he were with them all the time he couldnot imagine.

Hermione, however, looked puzzled.

“But what about Tonks?” she asked.

“What about her?” said Lupin.

“Well,” said Hermione, frowning, “you’re married! Howdoes she feel about you going away with us?”

“Tonks will be perfectly safe,” said Lupin. “She’ll be ather parents’ house.”

There was something strange in Lupin’s tone; it wasalmost cold. There was also something odd in the ideaof Tonks remaining hidden at her parents’ house; shewas, after all, a member of the Order and, as far asHarry knew, was likely to want to be in the thick ofthe action.

“Remus,” said Hermione tentatively, “is everything allright ... you know ... between you and —”

“Everything is fine, thank you,” said Lupin pointedly.

Hermione turned pink. There was another pause, anawkward and embarrassed one, and then Lupin said,with an air of forcing himself to admit somethingunpleasant, “Tonks is going to have a baby.”

“Oh, how wonderful!” squealed Hermione.

“Excellent!” said Ron enthusiastically.

“Congratulations,” said Harry.

Page | 237 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Lupin gave an artificial smile that was more like agrimace, then said, “So ... do you accept my offer?

Will three become four? I cannot believe thatDumbledore would have disapproved, he appointedme your Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher, afterall. And I must tell you that I believe that we arefacing magic many of us have never encountered orimagined.”

Ron and Hermione both looked at Harry.

“Just —just to be clear,” he said. “You want to leaveTonks at her parents’ house and come away with us?”

“She’ll be perfectly safe there, they’ll look after her,”said Lupin. He spoke with a finality bordering onindifference. “Harry, I’m sure James would havewanted me to stick with you.”

“Well,” said Harry slowly, “I’m not. I’m pretty sure myfather would have wanted to know why you aren’tsticking with your own kid, actually.”

Lupin’s face drained of color. The temperature in thekitchen might have dropped ten degrees. Ron staredaround the room as though he had been bidden tomemorize it, while Hermione’s eyes swiveledbackward and forward from Harry to Lupin.

“You don’t understand,” said Lupin at last.

“Explain, then,” said Harry.

Lupin swallowed.

“I — I made a grave mistake in marrying Tonks. I didit against my better judgment and I have regretted itvery much ever since.”

Page | 238 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I see,” said Harry, “so you’re just going to dump herand the kid and run off with us?”

Lupin sprang to his feet: His chair toppled overbackward, and he glared at them so fiercely thatHarry saw, for the first time ever, the shadow of thewolf upon his human face.

“Don’t you understand what I’ve done to my wife andmy unborn child? I should never have married her,I’ve made her an outcast!”

Lupin kicked aside the chair he had overturned.

“You have only ever seen me amongst the Order, orunder Dumbledore’s protection at Hogwarts! Youdon’t know how most of the Wizarding world seescreatures like me! When they know of my affliction,they can barely talk to me! Don’t you see what I’vedone? Even her own family is disgusted by ourmarriage, what parents want their only daughter tomarry a werewolf? And the child — the child —”

Lupin actually seized handfuls of his own hair; helooked quite deranged.

“My kind don’t usually breed! It will be like me, I amconvinced of it — how can I forgive myself, when Iknowingly risked passing on my own condition to aninnocent child? And if, by some miracle, it is not likeme, then it will be better off, a hundred times so,without a father of whom it must always beashamed!”

“Remus!” whispered Hermione, tears in her eyes.“Don’t say that — how could any child be ashamed ofyou?”

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, I don’t know, Hermione,” said Harry. “I’d bepretty ashamed of him.”

Harry did not know where his rage was coming from,but it had propelled him to his feet too. Lupin lookedas though Harry had hit him.

“If the new regime thinks Muggle-borns are bad,”Harry said, “what will they do to a half-werewolfwhose father’s in the Order? My father died trying toprotect my mother and me, and you reckon he’d tellyou to abandon your kid to go on an adventure withus?”

“How — how dare you?” said Lupin. “This is not abouta desire for — for danger or personal glory — howdare you suggest such a —”

“I think you’re feeling a bit of a daredevil,” Harry said.“You fancy stepping into Sirius’s shoes —”

“Harry, no!” Hermione begged him, but he continuedto glare into Lupin’s livid face.

“I’d never have believed this,” Harry said. “The manwho taught me to fight dementors — a coward.”

Lupin drew his wand so fast that Harry had barelyreached for his own; there was a loud bang and hefelt himself flying backward as if punched; as heslammed into the kitchen wall and slid to the floor, heglimpsed the tail of Lupin’s cloak disappearingaround the door.

“Remus, Remus, come back!” Hermione cried, butLupin did not respond. A moment later they heard thefront door slam.

“Harry!” wailed Hermione. “How could you?”

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It was easy,” said Harry. He stood up; he could feel alump swelling where his head had hit the wall. Hewas still so full of anger he was shaking.

“Don’t look at me like that!” he snapped at Hermione.

“Don’t you start on her!” snarled Ron.

“No — no — we mustn’t fight!” said Hermione,launching herself between them.

“You shouldn’t have said that stuff to Lupin,” Rontold Harry.

“He had it coming to him,” said Harry. Broken imageswere racing each other through his mind: Siriusfalling through the veil; Dumbledore suspended,broken, in midair; a flash of green light and hismother’s voice, begging for mercy ...

“Parents,” said Harry, “shouldn’t leave their kidsunless — unless they’ve got to.”

“Harry —” said Hermione, stretching out a consolinghand, but he shrugged it off and walked away, hiseyes on the fire Hermione had conjured. He had oncespoken to Lupin out of that fireplace, seekingreassurance about James, and Lupin had consoledhim. Now Lupin’s tortured white face seemed to swimin the air before him. He felt a sickening surge ofremorse. Neither Ron nor Hermione spoke, but Harryfelt sure that they were looking at each other behindhis back, communicating silently.

He turned around and caught them turning hurriedlyaway from each other.

“I know I shouldn’t have called him a coward.”

Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No, you shouldn’t,” said Ron at once.

“But he’s acting like one.”

“All the same ...” said Hermione.

“I know,” said Harry. “But if it makes him go back toTonks, it’ll be worth it, won’t it?”

He could not keep the plea out of his voice. Hermionelooked sympathetic, Ron uncertain. Harry lookeddown at his feet, thinking of his father. Would Jameshave backed Harry in what he had said to Lupin, orwould he have been angry at how his son had treatedhis old friend?

The silent kitchen seemed to hum with the shock ofthe recent scene and with Ron and Hermione’sunspoken reproaches. The Daily Prophet Lupin hadbrought was still lying on the table, Harry’s own facestaring up at the ceiling from the front page. Hewalked over to it and sat down, opened the paper atrandom, and pretended to read. He could not take inthe words; his mind was still too full of the encounterwith Lupin. He was sure that Ron and Hermione hadresumed their silent communications on the otherside of the Prophet He turned a page loudly, andDumbledore’s name leapt out at him. It was amoment or two before he took in the meaning of thephotograph, which showed a family group. Beneaththe photograph were the words: The Dumbledorefamily, left to right: Albus; Percival, holding newbornAriana; Kendra; and Aberforth.

His attention caught, Harry examined the picturemore carefully. Dumbledore’s father, Percival, was agood-looking man with eyes that seemed to twinkleeven in this faded old photograph. The baby, Ariana,was little longer than a loaf of bread and no morePage | 242 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

distinctive-looking. The mother, Kendra, had jet-blackhair pulled into a high bun. Her face had a carvedquality about it. Harry thought of photos of NativeAmericans he’d seen as he studied her dark eyes,high cheekbones, and straight nose, formallycomposed above a high-necked silk gown. Albus andAberforth wore matching lacy collared jackets andhad identical, shoulder-length hairstyles. Albuslooked several years older, but otherwise the two boyslooked very alike, for this was before Albus’s nose hadbeen broken and before he started wearing glasses.

The family looked quite happy and normal, smilingserenely up out of the newspaper. Baby Ariana’s armwaved vaguely out of her shawl. Harry looked abovethe picture and saw the headline:

EXCLUSIVE EXTRACT FROM THE UPCOMINGBIOGRAPHY OF ALBUS DUMBLEDORE

by Rita Skeeter

Thinking that it could hardly make him feel any worsethan he already did, Harry began to read:

Proud and haughty, Kendra Dumbledore could notbear to remain in Mould-on-the-Wold after herhusband Percival’s well-publicized arrest andimprisonment in Azkaban. She therefore decided touproot the family and relocate to Godric’s Hollow, thevillage that was later to gain fame as the scene ofHarry Potter’s strange escape from You-Know-Who.

Like Mould-on-the-Wold, Godric’s Hollow was home toa number of Wizarding families, but as Kendra knewnone of them, she would be spared the curiosityabout her husband’s crime she had faced in herformer village. By repeatedly rebuffing the friendly

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

advances of her new Wizarding neighbors, she soonensured that her family was left well alone.

“Slammed the door in my face when I went around towelcome her with a batch of homemade CauldronCakes,” says Bathilda Bagshot. “The first year theywere there I only ever saw the two boys. Wouldn’thave known there was a daughter if I hadn’t beenpicking Plangentines by moonlight the winter after theymoved in, and saw Kendra leading Ariana out into theback garden. Walked her round the lawn once, keepinga firm grip on her, then took her back inside. Didn’tknow what to make of it. ”

It seems that Kendra thought the move to Godric’sHollow was the perfect opportunity to hide Arianaonce and for all, something she had probably beenplanning for years. The timing was significant. Arianawas barely seven years old when she vanished fromsight, and seven is the age by which most expertsagree that magic will have revealed itself, if present.Nobody now alive remembers Ariana everdemonstrating even the slightest sign of magicalability. It seems clear, therefore, that Kendra made adecision to hide her daughter’s existence rather thansuffer the shame of admitting that she had produceda Squib. Moving away from the friends and neighborswho knew Ariana would, of course, make imprisoningher all the easier. The tiny number of people whohenceforth knew of Ariana’s existence could becounted upon to keep the secret, including her twobrothers, who deflected awkward questions with theanswer their mother had taught them: “My sister istoo frail for school.”

Next week: Albus Dumbledore at Hogwarts — thePrizes and the Pretense.

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry had been wrong: What he had read had indeedmade him feel worse. He looked back at thephotograph of the apparently happy family. Was ittrue? How could he find out? He wanted to go toGodric’s Hollow, even if Bathilda was in no fit state totalk to him; he wanted to visit the place where he andDumbledore had both lost loved ones. He was in theprocess of lowering the newspaper, to ask Ron’s andHermione’s opinions, when a deafening crack echoedaround the kitchen.

For the first time in three days Harry had forgotten allabout Kreacher. His immediate thought was thatLupin had burst back into the room, and for a splitsecond, he did not take in the mass of strugglinglimbs that had appeared out of thin air right besidehis chair. He hurried to his feet as Kreacherdisentangled himself and, bowing low to Harry,croaked, “Kreacher has returned with the thiefMundungus Fletcher, Master.”

Mundungus scrambled up and pulled out his wand;Hermione, however, was too quick for him.

“Expelliarmusl”

Mundungus’s wand soared into the air, and Hermionecaught it. Wild-eyed, Mundungus dived for the stairs:Ron rugby-tackled him and Mundungus hit the stonefloor with a muffled crunch.

“What?” he bellowed, writhing in his attempts to freehimself from Ron’s grip. “Wha’ve I done? Setting ableedin’ ’ouse-elf on me, what are you playing at,wha’ve I done, lemme go, lemme go, or —”

“You’re not in much of a position to make threats,”said Harry. He threw aside the newspaper, crossedthe kitchen in a few strides, and dropped to his knees

Page | 245 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

beside Mundungus, who stopped struggling andlooked terrified. Ron got up, panting, and watched asHarry pointed his wand deliberately at Mundungus’snose. Mundungus stank of stale sweat and tobaccosmoke: His hair was matted and his robes stained.

“Kreacher apologizes for the delay in bringing thethief, Master,” croaked the elf. “Fletcher knows how toavoid capture, has many hidey-holes andaccomplices. Nevertheless, Kreacher cornered thethief in the end.”

“You’ve done really well, Kreacher,” said Harry, andthe elf bowed low.

“Right, we’ve got a few questions for you,” Harry toldMundungus, who shouted at once,

“I panicked, okay? I never wanted to come along, nooffense, mate, but I never volunteered to die for you,an’ that was bleedin’ You-Know-Who come flying atme, anyone woulda got outta there, I said all along Ididn’t wanna do it —”

“For your information, none of the rest of usDisapparated,” said Hermione.

“Well, you’re a bunch of bleedin’ ’eroes then, aren’tyou, but I never pretended I was up for killing meself

“We’re not interested in why you ran out on Mad-Eye,” said Harry, moving his wand a little closer toMundungus’s baggy, bloodshot eyes. “We alreadyknew you were an unreliable bit of scum.”

“Well then, why the ’ell am I being ’unted down by’ouse-elves? Or is this about them goblets again? Iain’t got none of ’em left, or you could ’ave ’em —”

Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It’s not about the goblets either, although you’regetting warmer,” said Harry. “Shut up and listen.”

It felt wonderful to have something to do, someone ofwhom he could demand some small portion of truth.Harry’s wand was now so close to the bridge ofMundungus’s nose that Mundungus had gone cross-eyed trying to keep it in view.

“When you cleaned out this house of anythingvaluable,” Harry began, but Mundungus interruptedhim again.

“Sirius never cared about any of the junk —”

There was the sound of pattering feet, a blaze ofshining copper, an echoing clang, and a shriek ofagony: Kreacher had taken a run at Mundungus andhit him over the head with a saucepan.

“Call ’im off, call ’im off, ’e should be locked up!”screamed Mundungus, cowering as Kreacher raisedthe heavy-bottomed pan again.

“Kreacher, no!” shouted Harry.

Kreacher’s thin arms trembled with the weight of thepan, still held aloft.

“Perhaps just one more, Master Harry, for luck?”

Ron laughed.

“We need him conscious, Kreacher, but if he needspersuading you can do the honors,” said Harry.

“Thank you very much, Master,” said Kreacher with abow, and he retreated a short distance, his great paleeyes still fixed upon Mundungus with loathing.

Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“When you stripped this house of all the valuablesyou could find,” Harry began again, “you took abunch of stuff from the kitchen cupboard. There wasa locket there.” Harry’s mouth was suddenly dry: Hecould sense Ron and Hermione’s tension andexcitement too. “What did you do with it?”

“Why?” asked Mundungus. “Is it valuable?”

“You’ve still got it!” cried Hermione.

“No, he hasn’t,” said Ron shrewdly. “He’s wonderingwhether he should have asked more money for it.”

“More?” said Mundungus. “That wouldn’t have beeneffing difficult ... bleedin’ gave it away, di’n’ I? Nochoice.”

“What do you mean?”

“I was selling in Diagon Alley and she come up to meand asks if I’ve got a license for trading in magicalartifacts. Bleedin’ snoop. She was gonna fine me, butshe took a fancy to the locket an’ told me she’d take itand let me off that time, and to fink meself lucky.”

“Who was this woman?” asked Harry.

“I dunno, some Ministry hag.”

Mundungus considered for a moment, brow wrinkled.

“Little woman. Bow on top of ’er head.”

He frowned and then added, “Looked like a toad.”

Harry dropped his wand: It hit Mundungus on thenose and shot red sparks into his eyebrows, whichignited.

Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Aguamenti\” screamed Hermione, and a jet of waterstreamed from her wand, engulfing a spluttering andchoking Mundungus.

Harry looked up and saw his own shock reflected inRon’s and Hermione’s faces. The scars on the back ofhis right hand seemed to be tingling again.

Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





MAGIC IS MIGHT

As August wore on, the square of unkempt grass inthe middle of Grimmauld Place shriveled in the sununtil it was brittle and brown. The inhabitants ofnumber twelve were never seen by anybody in thesurrounding houses, and nor was number twelveitself. The Muggles who lived in Grimmauld Place hadlong since accepted the amusing mistake in thenumbering that had caused number eleven to sitbeside number thirteen.

And yet the square was now attracting a trickle ofvisitors who seemed to find the anomaly mostintriguing. Barely a day passed without one or twopeople arriving in Grimmauld Place with no otherpurpose, or so it seemed, than to lean against therailings facing numbers eleven and thirteen, watchingthe join between the two houses. The lurkers werenever the same two days running, although they allseemed to share a dislike for normal clothing. Most ofthe Londoners who passed them were used toeccentric dressers and took little notice, thoughoccasionally one of them might glance back,

Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

wondering why anyone would wear such long cloaksin this heat.

The watchers seemed to be gleaning little satisfactionfrom their vigil. Occasionally one of them startedforward excitedly, as if they had seen somethinginteresting at last, only to fall back lookingdisappointed.

On the first day of September there were more peoplelurking in the square than ever before. Half a dozenmen in long cloaks stood silent and watchful, gazingas ever at houses eleven and thirteen, but the thingfor which they were waiting still appeared elusive. Asevening drew in, bringing with it an unexpected gustof chilly rain for the first time in weeks, thereoccurred one of those inexplicable moments whenthey appeared to have seen something interesting.

The man with the twisted face pointed and his closestcompanion, a podgy, pallid man, started forward, buta moment later they had relaxed into their previousstate of inactivity, looking frustrated anddisappointed.

Meanwhile, inside number twelve, Harry had justentered the hall. He had nearly lost his balance as heApparated onto the top step just outside the frontdoor, and thought that the Death Eaters might havecaught a glimpse of his momentarily exposed elbow.Shutting the front door carefully behind him, hepulled off the Invisibility Cloak, draped it over hisarm, and hurried along the gloomy hallway towardthe door that led to the basement, a stolen copy of theDaily Prophet clutched in his hand.

The usual low whisper of “Severus Snape?” greetedhim, the chill wind swept him, and his tongue rolledup for a moment.

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I didn’t kill you,” he said, once it had unrolled, thenheld his breath as the dusty jinx-figure exploded. Hewaited until he was halfway down the stairs to thekitchen, out of earshot of Mrs. Black and clear of thedust cloud, before calling, “I’ve got news, and youwon’t like it.”

The kitchen was almost unrecognizable. Every surfacenow shone: Copper pots and pans had beenburnished to a rosy glow; the wooden tabletopgleamed; the goblets and plates already laid fordinner glinted in the light from a merrily blazing fire,on which a cauldron was simmering. Nothing in theroom, however, was more dramatically different thanthe house-elf who now came hurrying toward Harry,dressed in a snowy-white towel, his ear hair as cleanand fluffy as cotton wool, Regulus’s locket bouncingon his thin chest.

“Shoes off, if you please, Master Harry, and handswashed before dinner,” croaked Kreacher, seizing theInvisibility Cloak and slouching off to hang it on ahook on the wall, beside a number of old-fashionedrobes that had been freshly laundered.

“What’s happened?” Ron asked apprehensively. Heand Hermione had been poring over a sheaf ofscribbled notes and hand-drawn maps that litteredthe end of the long kitchen table, but now theywatched Harry as he strode toward them and threwdown the newspaper on top of their scatteredparchment.

A large picture of a familiar, hook-nosed, black-hairedman stared up at them all, beneath a headline thatread:

SEVERUS SNAPE CONFIRMED AS HOGWARTSHEADMASTER

Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No!” said Ron and Hermione loudly.

Hermione was quickest; she snatched up thenewspaper and began to read the accompanying storyout loud.

“ ‘Severus Snape, long-standing Potions master atHogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, wastoday appointed headmaster in the most important ofseveral staffing changes at the ancient school.Following the resignation of the previous MuggleStudies teacher, Alecto Carrow will take over the postwhile her brother, Amycus, fills the position of DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts professor.

“ 7 welcome the opportunity to uphold our finestWizarding traditions and values —’ Like committingmurder and cutting off people’s ears, I suppose!

Snape, headmaster! Snape in Dumbledore’s study —Merlin’s pants!” she shrieked, making both Harry andRon jump. She leapt up from the table and hurtledfrom the room, shouting as she went, “I’ll be back in aminute!”

“ ‘Merlin’s pants?” repeated Ron, looking amused.“She must be upset.” He pulled the newspaper towardhim and perused the article about Snape.

“The other teachers won’t stand for this. McGonagalland Flitwick and Sprout all know the truth, theyknow how Dumbledore died. They won’t accept Snapeas headmaster. And who are these Carrows?”

“Death Eaters,” said Harry. “There are pictures ofthem inside. They were at the top of the tower whenSnape killed Dumbledore, so it’s all friends together.And,” Harry went on bitterly, drawing up a chair, “Ican’t see that the other teachers have got any choicebut to stay. If the Ministry and Voldemort are behindPage | 253 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Snape it’ll be a choice between staying and teaching,or a nice few years in Azkaban — and that’s if they’relucky. I reckon they’ll stay to try and protect thestudents.”

Kreacher came bustling to the table with a largetureen in his hands, and ladled out soup into pristinebowls, whistling between his teeth as he did so.

“Thanks, Kreacher,” said Harry, flipping over theProphet so as not to have to look at Snape’s face.

“Well, at least we know exactly where Snape is now.”

He began to spoon soup into his mouth. The qualityof Kreacher’s cooking had improved dramatically eversince he had been given Regulus’s locket: Today’sFrench onion was as good as Harry had ever tasted.

“There are still a load of Death Eaters watching thehouse,” he told Ron as he ate, “more than usual. It’slike they’re hoping we’ll march out carrying ourschool trunks and head off for the Hogwarts Express.”

Ron glanced at his watch.

“I’ve been thinking about that all day. It left nearly sixhours ago. Weird, not being on it, isn’t it?”

In his mind’s eye Harry seemed to see the scarletsteam engine as he and Ron had once followed it byair, shimmering between fields and hills, a ripplingscarlet caterpillar. He was sure Ginny, Neville, andLuna were sitting together at this moment, perhapswondering where he, Ron, and Hermione were, ordebating how best to undermine Snape’s new regime.

“They nearly saw me coming back in just now,” Harrysaid. “I landed badly on the top step, and the Cloakslipped.”

Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I do that every time. Oh, here she is,” Ron added,craning around in his seat to watch Hermionereentering the kitchen. “And what in the name ofMerlin’s most baggy Y Fronts was that about?”

“I remembered this,” Hermione panted.

She was carrying a large, framed picture, which shenow lowered to the floor before seizing her small,beaded bag from the kitchen sideboard. Opening it,she proceeded to force the painting inside, anddespite the fact that it was patently too large to fitinside the tiny bag, within a few seconds it hadvanished, like so much else, into the bag’s capaciousdepths.

“Phineas Nigellus,” Hermione explained as she threwthe bag onto the kitchen table with the usualsonorous, clanking crash.

“Sorry?” said Ron, but Harry understood. The paintedimage of Phineas Nigellus Black was able to flitbetween his portrait in Grimmauld Place and the onethat hung in the headmaster’s office at Hogwarts: thecircular tower-top room where Snape was no doubtsitting right now, in triumphant possession ofDumbledore’s collection of delicate, silver magicalinstruments, the stone Pensieve, the Sorting Hat and,unless it had been moved elsewhere, the sword ofGryffindor.

“Snape could send Phineas Nigellus to look inside thishouse for him,” Hermione explained to Ron as sheresumed her seat. “But let him try it now, all PhineasNigellus will be able to see is the inside of myhandbag.”

“Good thinking!” said Ron, looking impressed.

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Thank you,” smiled Hermione, pulling her souptoward her. “So, Harry, what else happened today?”

“Nothing,” said Harry. “Watched the Ministry entrancefor seven hours. No sign of her. Saw your dad,though, Ron. He looks fine.”

Ron nodded his appreciation of this news. They hadagreed that it was far too dangerous to try andcommunicate with Mr. Weasley while he walked inand out of the Ministry, because he was alwayssurrounded by other Ministry workers. It was,however, reassuring to catch these glimpses of him,even if he did look very strained and anxious.

“Dad always told us most Ministry people use theFloo Network to get to work,” Ron said. “That’s whywe haven’t seen Umbridge, she’d never walk, she’dthink she’s too important.”

“And what about that funny old witch and that littlewizard in the navy robes?” Hermione asked.

“Oh yeah, the bloke from Magical Maintenance,” saidRon.

“How do you know he works for MagicalMaintenance?” Hermione asked, her soupspoonsuspended in midair.

“Dad said everyone from Magical Maintenance wearsnavy blue robes.”

“But you never told us that!”

Hermione dropped her spoon and pulled toward herthe sheaf of notes and maps that she and Ron hadbeen examining when Harry had entered the kitchen.

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“There’s nothing in here about navy blue robes,nothing!” she said, flipping feverishly through thepages.

“Well, does it really matter?”

“Ron, it all matters! If we’re going to get into theMinistry and not give ourselves away when they’rebound to be on the lookout for intruders, every littledetail matters! We’ve been over and over this, I mean,what’s the point of all these reconnaissance trips ifyou aren’t even bothering to tell us —”

“Blimey, Hermione, I forget one little thing —”

“You do realize, don’t you, that there’s probably nomore dangerous place in the whole world for us to beright now than the Ministry of —”

“I think we should do it tomorrow,” said Harry.

Hermione stopped dead, her jaw hanging; Ron chokeda little over his soup.

“Tomorrow?” repeated Hermione. “You aren’t serious,Harry?”

“I am,” said Harry. “I don’t think we’re going to bemuch better prepared than we are now even if weskulk around the Ministry entrance for anothermonth. The longer we put it off, the farther away thatlocket could be. There’s already a good chanceUmbridge has chucked it away; the thing doesn’topen.”

“Unless,” said Ron, “she’s found a way of opening itand she’s now possessed.”

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Wouldn’t make any difference to her, she was so evilin the first place,” Harry shrugged.

Hermione was biting her lip, deep in thought.

“We know everything important,” Harry went on,addressing Hermione. “We know they’ve stoppedApparition in and out of the Ministry. We know onlythe most senior Ministry members are allowed toconnect their homes to the Floo Network now,because Ron heard those two Unspeakablescomplaining about it. And we know roughly whereUmbridge’s office is, because of what you heard thatbearded bloke saying to his mate —”

“ ‘I’ll be up on level one, Dolores wants to see me,’ ”Hermione recited immediately.

“Exactly,” said Harry. “And we know you get in usingthose funny coins, or tokens, or whatever they are,because I saw that witch borrowing one from herfriend —”

“But we haven’t got any!”

“If the plan works, we will have,” Harry continuedcalmly.

“I don’t know, Harry, I don’t know. ... There are anawful lot of things that could go wrong, so muchrelies on chance. ...”

“That’ll be true even if we spend another threemonths preparing,” said Harry. “It’s time to act.”

He could tell from Ron’s and Hermione’s faces thatthey were scared; he was not particularly confidenthimself, and yet he was sure the time had come toput their plan into operation.

Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

They had spent the previous four weeks taking it inturns to don the Invisibility Cloak and spy on theofficial entrance to the Ministry, which Ron, thanks toMr. Weasley, had known since childhood. They hadtailed Ministry workers on their way in, eavesdroppedon their conversations, and learned by carefulobservation which of them could be relied upon toappear, alone, at the same time every day.Occasionally there had been a chance to sneak aDaily Prophet out of somebody’s briefcase. Slowly theyhad built up the sketchy maps and notes now stackedin front of Hermione.

“All right,” said Ron slowly, “let’s say we go for ittomorrow. ... I think it should just be me and Harry.”

“Oh, don’t start that again!” sighed Hermione. “Ithought we’d settled this.”

“It’s one thing hanging around the entrances underthe Cloak, but this is different, Hermione.” Ronjabbed a finger at a copy of the Daily Prophet datedten days previously. “You’re on the list of Muggle-borns who didn’t present themselves forinterrogation!”

“And you’re supposed to be dying of spattergroit atthe Burrow! If anyone shouldn’t go, it’s Harry, he’s gota ten-thousand-Galleon price on his head —”

“Fine, I’ll stay here,” said Harry. “Let me know if youever defeat Voldemort, won’t you?”

As Ron and Hermione laughed, pain shot through thescar on Harry’s forehead. His hand jumped to it: Hesaw Hermione’s eyes narrow, and he tried to pass offthe movement by brushing his hair out of his eyes.

Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Well, if all three of us go well have to Disapparateseparately,” Ron was saying. “We can’t all fit underthe Cloak anymore.”

Harry’s scar was becoming more and more painful.

He stood up. At once, Kreacher hurried forward.

“Master has not finished his soup, would Masterprefer the savory stew, or else the treacle tart towhich Master is so partial?”

“Thanks, Kreacher, but I’ll be back in a minute — er— bathroom.”

Aware that Hermione was watching him suspiciously,Harry hurried up the stairs to the hall and then to thefirst landing, where he dashed into the bathroom andbolted the door again. Grunting with pain, heslumped over the black basin with its taps in the formof open-mouthed serpents and closed his eyes. ...

He was gliding along a twilit street. The buildings oneither side of him had high, timbered gables; theylooked like gingerbread houses.

He approached one of them, then saw the whitenessof his own long-fingered hand against the door. Heknocked. He felt a mounting excitement. ...

The door opened: A laughing woman stood there. Herface fell as she looked into Harry’s face: humor gone,terror replacing it. ...

“Gregorovitch?” said a high, cold voice.

She shook her head: She was trying to close the door.A white hand held it steady, prevented her shuttinghim out. ...

Page | 260 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I want Gregorovitch.”

“Er wohnt hier nicht mehr\” she cried, shaking herhead. “He no live here! He no live here! I know himnot!”

Abandoning the attempt to close the door, she beganto back away down the dark hall, and Harry followed,gliding toward her, and his long-fingered hand haddrawn his wand.

“Where is he?”

“Das weifi ich nichti He move! I know not, I know not!”

He raised the wand. She screamed. Two youngchildren came running into the hall. She tried toshield them with her arms. There was a flash of greenlight —

“Harry! HARRY!”

He opened his eyes; he had sunk to the floor.Hermione was pounding on the door again.

“Harry, open up!”

He had shouted out, he knew it. He got up andunbolted the door; Hermione toppled inside at once,regained her balance, and looked aroundsuspiciously. Ron was right behind her, lookingunnerved as he pointed his wand into the corners ofthe chilly bathroom.

“What were you doing?” asked Hermione sternly.

“What d’you think I was doing?” asked Harry withfeeble bravado.

Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You were yelling your head off!” said Ron.

“Oh yeah ... I must’ve dozed off or —”

“Harry, please don’t insult our intelligence,” saidHermione, taking deep breaths. “We know your scarhurt downstairs, and you’re white as a sheet.”

Harry sat down on the edge of the bath.

“Fine. I’ve just seen Voldemort murdering a woman.By now he’s probably killed her whole family. And hedidn’t need to. It was Cedric all over again, they werejust there. ...”

“Harry, you aren’t supposed to let this happenanymore!” Hermione cried, her voice echoing throughthe bathroom. “Dumbledore wanted you to useOcclumency! He thought the connection wasdangerous — Voldemort can use it, Harry! What goodis it to watch him kill and torture, how can it help?”

“Because it means I know what he’s doing,” saidHarry.

“So you’re not even going to try to shut him out?”

“Hermione, I can’t. You know I’m lousy atOcclumency, I never got the hang of it.”

“You never really tried!” she said hotly. “I don’t get it,Harry — do you like having this special connection orrelationship or what — whatever —”

She faltered under the look he gave her as he stood

up.

“Like it?” he said quietly. “Would you like it?”

Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I — no — I’m sorry, Harry, I didn’t mean —”

“I hate it, I hate the fact that he can get inside me,that I have to watch him when he’s most dangerous.But I’m going to use it.”

“Dumbledore —”

“Forget Dumbledore. This is my choice, nobody else’s.I want to know why he’s after Gregorovitch.”

“Who?”

“He’s a foreign wandmaker,” said Harry. “He madeKrum’s wand and Krum reckons he’s brilliant.”

“But according to you,” said Ron, “Voldemort’s gotOllivander locked up somewhere. If he’s already got awandmaker, what does he need another one for?”

“Maybe he agrees with Krum, maybe he thinksGregorovitch is better ... or else he thinksGregorovitch will be able to explain what my wand didwhen he was chasing me, because Ollivander didn’tknow.”

Harry glanced into the cracked, dusty mirror and sawRon and Hermione exchanging skeptical looks behindhis back.

“Harry, you keep talking about what your wand did,”said Hermione, “but you made it happen! Why areyou so determined not to take responsibility for yourown power?”

“Because I know it wasn’t me! And so does Voldemort,Hermione! We both know what really happened!”

Page | 263 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

They glared at each other: Harry knew that he hadnot convinced Hermione and that she was marshalingcounterarguments, against both his theory on hiswand and the fact that he was permitting himself tosee into Voldemort’s mind. To his relief, Ronintervened.

“Drop it,” he advised her. “It’s up to him. And if we’regoing to the Ministry tomorrow, don’t you reckon weshould go over the plan?”

Reluctantly, as the other two could tell, Hermione letthe matter rest, though Harry was quite sure shewould attack again at the first opportunity. In themeantime, they returned to the basement kitchen,where Kreacher served them all stew and treacle tart.

They did not get to bed until late that night, afterspending hours going over and over their plan untilthey could recite it, word perfect, to each other.

Harry, who was now sleeping in Sirius’s room, lay inbed with his wandlight trained on the old photographof his father, Sirius, Lupin, and Pettigrew, andmuttered the plan to himself for another ten minutes.As he extinguished his wand, however, he wasthinking not of Polyjuice Potion, Puking Pastilles, orthe navy blue robes of Magical Maintenance; hethought of Gregorovitch the wandmaker, and howlong he could hope to remain hidden while Voldemortsought him so determinedly.

Dawn seemed to follow midnight with indecent haste.

“You look terrible,” was Ron’s greeting as he enteredthe room to wake Harry.

“Not for long,” said Harry, yawning.

Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

They found Hermione downstairs in the kitchen. Shewas being served coffee and hot rolls by Kreacher andwearing the slightly manic expression that Harryassociated with exam review.

“Robes,” she said under her breath, acknowledgingtheir presence with a nervous nod and continuing topoke around in her beaded bag, “Polyjuice Potion ...Invisibility Cloak ... Decoy Detonators ... You shouldeach take a couple just in case. ... Puking Pastilles,Nosebleed Nougat, Extendable Ears ...”

They gulped down their breakfast, then set offupstairs, Kreacher bowing them out and promising tohave a steak-and-kidney pie ready for them whenthey returned.

“Bless him,” said Ron fondly, “and when you think Iused to fantasize about cutting off his head andsticking it on the wall.”

They made their way onto the front step withimmense caution: They could see a couple of puffy-eyed Death Eaters watching the house from acrossthe misty square.

Hermione Disapparated with Ron first, then cameback for Harry.

After the usual brief spell of darkness and nearsuffocation, Harry found himself in the tiny alleywaywhere the first phase of their plan was scheduled totake place. It was as yet deserted, except for a coupleof large bins; the first Ministry workers did notusually appear here until at least eight o’clock.

“Right then,” said Hermione, checking her watch.

“She ought to be here in about five minutes. WhenI’ve Stunned her —”

Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Hermione, we know,” said Ron sternly. “And Ithought we were supposed to open the door beforeshe got here?”

Hermione squealed.

“I nearly forgot! Stand back —”

She pointed her wand at the padlocked and heavilygraffitied fire door beside them, which burst openwith a crash. The dark corridor behind it led, as theyknew from their careful scouting trips, into an emptytheater. Hermione pulled the door back toward her, tomake it look as though it was still closed.

“And now,” she said, turning back to face the othertwo in the alleyway, “we put on the Cloak again —”

“— and we wait,” Ron finished, throwing it overHermione’s head like a blanket over a birdcage androlling his eyes at Harry.

Little more than a minute later, there was a tiny popand a little Ministry witch with flyaway gray hairApparated feet from them, blinking a little in thesudden brightness; the sun had just come out frombehind a cloud. She barely had time to enjoy theunexpected warmth, however, before Hermione’ssilent Stunning Spell hit her in the chest and shetoppled over.

“Nicely done, Hermione,” said Ron, emerging frombehind a bin beside the theater door as Harry took offthe Invisibility Cloak. Together they carried the littlewitch into the dark passageway that led backstage.Hermione plucked a few hairs from the witch’s headand added them to a flask of muddy Polyjuice Potionshe had taken from the beaded bag. Ron wasrummaging through the little witch’s handbag.

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“She’s Mafalda Hopkirk,” he said, reading a smallcard that identified their victim as an assistant in theImproper Use of Magic Office. “You’d better take this,Hermione, and here are the tokens.”

He passed her several small golden coins, allembossed with the letters M.O.M., which he hadtaken from the witch’s purse.

Hermione drank the Polyjuice Potion, which was nowa pleasant heliotrope color, and within seconds stoodbefore them, the double of Mafalda Hopkirk. As sheremoved Mafalda’s spectacles and put them on, Harrychecked his watch.

“We’re running late, Mr. Magical Maintenance will behere any second.”

They hurried to close the door on the real Mafalda;Harry and Ron threw the Invisibility Cloak overthemselves but Hermione remained in view, waiting.Seconds later there was another pop, and a small,ferrety-looking wizard appeared before them.

“Oh, hello, Mafalda.”

“Hello!” said Hermione in a quavery voice. “How areyou today?”

“Not so good, actually,” replied the little wizard, wholooked thoroughly downcast.

As Hermione and the wizard headed for the mainroad, Harry and Ron crept along behind them.

“I’m sorry to hear you’re under the weather,” saidHermione, talking firmly over the little wizard as hetried to expound upon his problems; it was essential

Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

to stop him from reaching the street. “Here, have asweet.”

“Eh? Oh, no thanks —”

“I insist!” said Hermione aggressively, shaking the bagof pastilles in his face. Looking rather alarmed, thelittle wizard took one.

The effect was instantaneous. The moment thepastille touched his tongue, the little wizard startedvomiting so hard that he did not even notice asHermione yanked a handful of hairs from the top ofhis head.

“Oh dear!” she said, as he splattered the alley withsick. “Perhaps you’d better take the day off!”

“No — no!” He choked and retched, trying to continueon his way despite being unable to walk straight. “Imust — today — must go —”

“But that’s just silly!” said Hermione, alarmed. “Youcan’t go to work in this state — I think you ought togo to St. Mungo’s and get them to sort you out!”

The wizard had collapsed, heaving, onto all fours, stilltrying to crawl toward the main street.

“You simply can’t go to work like this!” criedHermione.

At last he seemed to accept the truth of her words.Using a repulsed Hermione to claw his way back intoa standing position, he turned on the spot andvanished, leaving nothing behind but the bag Ronhad snatched from his hand as he went and someflying chunks of vomit.

Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Urgh,” said Hermione, holding up the skirts of herrobe to avoid the puddles of sick. “It would have mademuch less mess to Stun him too.”

“Yeah,” said Ron, emerging from under the cloakholding the wizard’s bag, “but I still think a whole pileof unconscious bodies would have drawn moreattention. Keen on his job, though, isn’t he? Chuck usthe hair and the potion, then.”

Within two minutes, Ron stood before them, as smalland ferrety as the sick wizard, and wearing the navyblue robes that had been folded in his bag.

“Weird he wasn’t wearing them today, wasn’t it,seeing how much he wanted to go? Anyway, I’m RegCattermole, according to the label in the back.”

“Now wait here,” Hermione told Harry, who was stillunder the Invisibility Cloak, “and we’ll be back withsome hairs for you.”

He had to wait ten minutes, but it seemed muchlonger to Harry, skulking alone in the sick-splatteredalleyway beside the door concealing the StunnedMafalda. Finally Ron and Hermione reappeared.

“We don’t know who he is,” Hermione said, passingHarry several curly black hairs, “but he’s gone homewith a dreadful nosebleed! Here, he’s pretty tall, you’llneed bigger robes. ...”

She pulled out a set of the old robes Kreacher hadlaundered for them, and Harry retired to take thepotion and change.

Once the painful transformation was complete he wasmore than six feet tall and, from what he could tellfrom his well-muscled arms, powerfully built. He also

Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

had a beard. Stowing the Invisibility Cloak and hisglasses inside his new robes, he rejoined the othertwo.

“Blimey, that’s scary,” said Ron, looking up at Harry,who now towered over him.

“Take one of Mafalda’s tokens,” Hermione told Harry,“and let’s go, it’s nearly nine.”

They stepped out of the alleyway together. Fifty yardsalong the crowded pavement there were spiked blackrailings flanking two flights of steps, one labeledGENTLEMEN, the other LADIES.

“See you in a moment, then,” said Hermionenervously, and she tottered off down the steps toLADIES. Harry and Ron joined a number of oddlydressed men descending into what appeared to be anordinary underground public toilet, tiled in grimyblack and white.

“Morning, Reg!” called another wizard in navy bluerobes as he let himself into a cubicle by inserting hisgolden token into a slot in the door. “Blooming pain inthe bum, this, eh? Forcing us all to get to work thisway! Who are they expecting to turn up, HarryPotter?”

The wizard roared with laughter at his own wit. Rongave a forced chuckle.

“Yeah,” he said, “stupid, isn’t it?”

And he and Harry let themselves into adjoiningcubicles.

To Harry’s left and right came the sound of flushing.He crouched down and peered through the gap at the

Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

bottom of the cubicle, just in time to see a pair ofbooted feet climbing into the toilet next door. Helooked left and saw Ron blinking at him.

“We have to flush ourselves in?” he whispered.

“Looks like it,” Harry whispered back; his voice cameout deep and gravelly.

They both stood up. Feeling exceptionally foolish,Harry clambered into the toilet.

He knew at once that he had done the right thing;though he appeared to be standing in water, hisshoes, feet, and robes remained quite dry. He reachedup, pulled the chain, and next moment had zoomeddown a short chute, emerging out of a fireplace intothe Ministry of Magic.

He got up clumsily; there was a lot more of his bodythan he was accustomed to. The great Atrium seemeddarker than Harry remembered it. Previously a goldenfountain had filled the center of the hall, castingshimmering spots of light over the polished woodenfloor and walls. Now a gigantic statue of black stonedominated the scene. It was rather frightening, thisvast sculpture of a witch and a wizard sitting onornately carved thrones, looking down at the Ministryworkers toppling out of fireplaces below them.Engraved in foot-high letters at the base of the statuewere the words MAGIC IS MIGHT.

Harry received a heavy blow on the back of the legs:Another wizard had just flown out of the fireplacebehind him.

“Out of the way, can’t y — oh, sorry, Runcorn!”

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Clearly frightened, the balding wizard hurried away.Apparently the man whom Harry was impersonating,Runcorn, was intimidating.

“Psst!” said a voice, and he looked around to see awispy little witch and the ferrety wizard from MagicalMaintenance gesturing to him from over beside thestatue. Harry hastened to join them.

“You got in all right, then?” Hermione whispered toHarry.

“No, he’s still stuck in the bog,” said Ron.

“Oh, very funny ... It’s horrible, isn’t it?” she said toHarry, who was staring up at the statue. “Have youseen what they’re sitting on?

Harry looked more closely and realized that what hehad thought were decoratively carved thrones wereactually mounds of carved humans: hundreds andhundreds of naked bodies, men, women, andchildren, all with rather stupid, ugly faces, twistedand pressed together to support the weight of thehandsomely robed wizards.

“Muggles,” whispered Hermione. “In their rightfulplace. Come on, let’s get going.”

They joined the stream of witches and wizards movingtoward the golden gates at the end of the hall, lookingaround as surreptitiously as possible, but there wasno sign of the distinctive figure of Dolores Umbridge.They passed through the gates and into a smallerhall, where queues were forming in front of twentygolden grilles housing as many lifts. They had barelyjoined the nearest one when a voice said,

“Cattermole!”

Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

They looked around: Harry’s stomach turned over.One of the Death Eaters who had witnessedDumbledore’s death was striding toward them. TheMinistry workers beside them fell silent, their eyesdowncast; Harry could feel fear rippling throughthem. The man’s scowling, slightly brutish face wassomehow at odds with his magnificent, sweepingrobes, which were embroidered with much goldthread. Someone in the crowd around the lifts calledsycophantically, “Morning, Yaxley!” Yaxley ignoredthem.

“I requested somebody from Magical Maintenance tosort out my office, Cattermole. It’s still raining inthere.”

Ron looked around as though hoping somebody elsewould intervene, but nobody spoke.

“Raining ... in your office? That’s — that’s not good, isit?”

Ron gave a nervous laugh. Yaxley’s eyes widened.

“You think it’s funny, Cattermole, do you?”

A pair of witches broke away from the queue for thelift and bustled off.

“No,” said Ron, “no, of course —”

“You realize that I am on my way downstairs tointerrogate your wife, Cattermole? In fact, I’m quitesurprised you’re not down there holding her handwhile she waits. Already given her up as a bad job,have you? Probably wise. Be sure and marry apureblood next time.”

Page | 273 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hermione had let out a little squeak of horror. Yaxleylooked at her. She coughed feebly and turned away.

“I — I —” stammered Ron.

“But if my wife were accused of being a Mudblood,”said Yaxley, “— not that any woman I married wouldever be mistaken for such filth — and the Head of theDepartment of Magical Law Enforcement needed a jobdoing, I would make it my priority to do that job,Cattermole. Do you understand me?”

“Yes,” whispered Ron.

“Then attend to it, Cattermole, and if my office is notcompletely dry within an hour, your wife’s BloodStatus will be in even graver doubt than it is now.”

The golden grille before them clattered open. With anod and unpleasant smile to Harry, who wasevidently expected to appreciate this treatment ofCattermole, Yaxley swept away toward another lift.Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered theirs, but nobodyfollowed them: It was as if they were infectious. Thegrilles shut with a clang and the lift began to moveupward.

“What am I going to do?” Ron asked the other two atonce; he looked stricken. “If I don’t turn up, my wife— I mean, Cattermole’s wife —”

“Well come with you, we should stick together —”began Harry, but Ron shook his head feverishly.

“That’s mental, we haven’t got much time. You twofind Umbridge, I’ll go and sort out Yaxley’s office —but how do I stop it raining?”

Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Try Finite Incantatem,” said Hermione at once, “thatshould stop the rain if it’s a hex or curse; if it doesn’t,something’s gone wrong with an Atmospheric Charm,which will be more difficult to fix, so as an interimmeasure try Impervius to protect his belongings —”

“Say it again, slowly —” said Ron, searching hispockets desperately for a quill, but at that momentthe lift juddered to a halt. A disembodied female voicesaid, “Level four, Department for the Regulation andControl of Magical Creatures, incorporating Beast,Being, and Spirit Divisions, Goblin Liaison Office, andPest Advisory Bureau,” and the grilles slid open again,admitting a couple of wizards and several pale violetpaper airplanes that fluttered around the lamp in theceiling of the lift.

“Morning, Albert,” said a bushily whiskered man,smiling at Harry. He glanced over at Ron andHermione as the lift creaked upward once more;Hermione was now whispering frantic instructions toRon. The wizard leaned toward Harry, leering, andmuttered, “Dirk Cresswell, eh? From Goblin Liaison?Nice one, Albert. I’m pretty confident I’ll get his jobnow!”

He winked. Harry smiled back, hoping that this wouldsuffice. The lift stopped; the grilles opened once more.

“Level two, Department of Magical Law Enforcement,including the Improper Use of Magic Office, AurorHeadquarters, and Wizengamot AdministrationServices,” said the disembodied witch’s voice.

Harry saw Hermione give Ron a little push and hehurried out of the lift, followed by the other wizards,leaving Harry and Hermione alone. The moment thegolden door had closed Hermione said, very fast,“Actually, Harry, I think I’d better go after him, I don’tPage | 275 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

think he knows what he’s doing and if he gets caughtthe whole thing —”

“Level one, Minister of Magic and Support Staff.”

The golden grilles slid apart again and Hermionegasped. Four people stood before them, two of themdeep in conversation: a longhaired wizard wearingmagnificent robes of black and gold, and a squat,toadlike witch wearing a velvet bow in her short hairand clutching a clipboard to her chest.

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE MUGGLE-BORN REGISTRATIONCOMMISSION

“Ah, Mafalda!” said Umbridge, looking at Hermione.“Travers sent you, did he?”

“Y-yes,” squeaked Hermione.

“Good, youll do perfectly well.” Umbridge spoke to thewizard in black and gold. “That’s that problem solved,Minister, if Mafalda can be spared for record-keepingwe shall be able to start straightaway.” She consultedher clipboard. “Ten people today and one of them thewife of a Ministry employee! Tut, tut ... even here, inthe heart of the Ministry!” She stepped into the liftbeside Hermione, as did the two wizards who hadbeen listening to Umbridge’s conversation with theMinister. “We’ll go straight down, Mafalda, you’ll findeverything you need in the courtroom. Good morning,Albert, aren’t you getting out?”

“Yes, of course,” said Harry in Runcorn’s deep voice.

Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry stepped out of the lift. The golden grillesclanged shut behind him. Glancing over his shoulder,Harry saw Hermione’s anxious face sinking back outof sight, a tall wizard on either side of her, Umbridge’svelvet hair-bow level with her shoulder.

“What brings you up here, Runcorn?” asked the newMinister of Magic. His long black hair and beard werestreaked with silver, and a great overhangingforehead shadowed his glinting eyes, putting Harry inmind of a crab looking out from beneath a rock.

“Needed a quick word with,” Harry hesitated for afraction of a second, “Arthur Weasley. Someone saidhe was up on level one.”

“Ah,” said Pius Thicknesse. “Has he been caughthaving contact with an Undesirable?”

“No,” said Harry, his throat dry. “No, nothing likethat.”

“Ah, well. It’s only a matter of time,” said Thicknesse.“If you ask me, the blood traitors are as bad as theMudbloods. Good day, Runcorn.”

“Good day, Minister.”

Harry watched Thicknesse march away along thethickly carpeted corridor. The moment the Ministerhad passed out of sight, Harry tugged the InvisibilityCloak out from under his heavy black cloak, threw itover himself, and set off along the corridor in theopposite direction. Runcorn was so tall that Harrywas forced to stoop to make sure his big feet werehidden.

Panic pulsed in the pit of his stomach. As he passedgleaming wooden door after gleaming wooden door,

Page | 278 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

each bearing a small plaque with the owner’s nameand occupation upon it, the might of the Ministry, itscomplexity, its impenetrability, seemed to force itselfupon him so that the plan he had been carefullyconcocting with Ron and Hermione over the past fourweeks seemed laughably childish. They hadconcentrated all their efforts on getting inside withoutbeing detected: They had not given a moment’sthought to what they would do if they were forced toseparate. Now Hermione was stuck in courtproceedings, which would undoubtedly last hours;

Ron was struggling to do magic that Harry was surewas beyond him, a woman’s liberty possiblydepending on the outcome; and he, Harry, waswandering around on the top floor when he knewperfectly well that his quarry had just gone down inthe lift.

He stopped walking, leaned against a wall, and triedto decide what to do. The silence pressed upon him:There was no bustling or talk or swift footsteps here;the purple-carpeted corridors were as hushed asthough the Muffliato charm had been cast over theplace.

Her office must be up here, Harry thought.

It seemed most unlikely that Umbridge would keepher jewelry in her office, but on the other hand itseemed foolish not to search it to make sure. Hetherefore set off along the corridor again, passingnobody but a frowning wizard who was murmuringinstructions to a quill that floated in front of him,scribbling on a trail of parchment.

Now paying attention to the names on the doors,

Harry turned a corner. Halfway along the nextcorridor he emerged into a wide, open space where adozen witches and wizards sat in rows at small desks

Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

not unlike school desks, though much more highlypolished and free from graffiti. Harry paused to watchthem, for the effect was quite mesmerizing. They wereall waving and twiddling their wands in unison, andsquares of colored paper were flying in every directionlike little pink kites. After a few seconds, Harryrealized that there was a rhythm to the proceedings,that the papers all formed the same pattern; and aftera few more seconds he realized that what he waswatching was the creation of pamphlets — that thepaper squares were pages, which, when assembled,folded, and magicked into place, fell into neat stacksbeside each witch or wizard.

Harry crept closer, although the workers were sointent on what they were doing that he doubted theywould notice a carpet-muffled footstep, and he slid acompleted pamphlet from the pile beside a youngwitch. He examined it beneath the Invisibility Cloak.Its pink cover was emblazoned with a golden title:

MUDBLOODS

and the Dangers They Pose toa Peaceful Pure-Blood Society

Beneath the title was a picture of a red rose with asimpering face in the middle of its petals, beingstrangled by a green weed with fangs and a scowl.There was no author’s name upon the pamphlet, butagain, the scars on the back of his right hand seemedto tingle as he examined it. Then the young witchbeside him confirmed his suspicion as she said, stillwaving and twirling her wand, “Will the old hag beinterrogating Mudbloods all day, does anyone know?”

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Careful,” said the wizard beside her, glancing aroundnervously; one of his pages slipped and fell to thefloor.

“What, has she got magic ears as well as an eye,now?”

The witch glanced toward the shining mahogany doorfacing the space full of pamphlet-makers; Harrylooked too, and rage reared in him like a snake.

Where there might have been a peephole on a Mugglefront door, a large, round eye with a bright blue irishad been set into the wood — an eye that wasshockingly familiar to anybody who had knownAlastor Moody.

For a split second Harry forgot where he was andwhat he was doing there: He even forgot that he wasinvisible. He strode straight over to the door toexamine the eye. It was not moving: It gazed blindlyupward, frozen. The plaque beneath it read:

DOLORES UMBRIDGE

SENIOR UNDERSECRETARY TO THE MINISTER

Below that, a slightly shinier new plaque read:

HEAD OF THE MUGGLE-BORN

REGISTRATION COMMISSION

Harry looked back at the dozen pamphlet-makers:Though they were intent upon their work, he couldhardly suppose that they would not notice if the doorof an empty office opened in front of them. Hetherefore withdrew from an inner pocket an oddobject with little waving legs and a rubber-bulbed

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

horn for a body. Crouching down beneath the Cloak,he placed the Decoy Detonator on the ground.

It scuttled away at once through the legs of thewitches and wizards in front of him. A few momentslater, during which Harry waited with his hand uponthe doorknob, there came a loud bang and a greatdeal of acrid black smoke billowed from a corner. Theyoung witch in the front row shrieked: Pink pagesflew everywhere as she and her fellows jumped up,looking around for the source of the commotion.

Harry turned the doorknob, stepped into Umbridge’soffice, and closed the door behind him.

He felt he had stepped back in time. The room wasexactly like Umbridge’s office at Hogwarts: Lacedraperies, doilies, and dried flowers covered everyavailable surface. The walls bore the sameornamental plates, each featuring a highly colored,beribboned kitten, gamboling and frisking withsickening cuteness. The desk was covered with aflouncy, flowered cloth. Behind Mad-Eye’s eye, atelescopic attachment enabled Umbridge to spy onthe workers on the other side of the door. Harry tooka look through it and saw that they were all stillgathered around the Decoy Detonator. He wrenchedthe telescope out of the door, leaving a hole behind,pulled the magical eyeball out of it, and placed it inhis pocket. Then he turned to face the room again,raised his wand, and murmured, “Accio Locket.”

Nothing happened, but he had not expected it to; nodoubt Umbridge knew all about protective charmsand spells. He therefore hurried behind her desk andbegan pulling open the drawers. He saw quills andnotebooks and Spellotape; enchanted paper clips thatcoiled snakelike from their drawer and had to bebeaten back; a fussy little lace box full of spare hairbows and clips; but no sign of a locket.

Page | 282 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There was a filing cabinet behind the desk: Harry setto searching it. Like Filch’s filing cabinets atHogwarts, it was full of folders, each labeled with aname. It was not until Harry reached the bottommostdrawer that he saw something to distract him fromhis search: Mr. Weasley’s file.

He pulled it out and opened it.

ARTHUR WEASLEY

BLOOD STATUS: Pureblood, but with unacceptablepro-Muggle leanings. Known member of the Order ofthe Phoenix.

FAMILY: Wife (pureblood), seven children, twoyoungest at Hogwarts. NB: Youngest son currently athome, seriously ill, Ministry inspectors haveconfirmed.

SECURITY STATUS: TRACKED. All movements arebeing monitored. Strong likelihood Undesirable No. 1will contact (has stayed with Weasley familypreviously)

“Undesirable Number One,” Harry muttered under hisbreath as he replaced Mr. Weasley’s folder and shutthe drawer. He had an idea he knew who that was,and sure enough, as he straightened up and glancedaround the office for fresh hiding places, he saw aposter of himself on the wall, with the wordsundesirable no. 1 emblazoned across his chest. Alittle pink note was stuck to it with a picture of akitten in the corner. Harry moved across to read itand saw that Umbridge had written, “To be punished.”

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Angrier than ever, he proceeded to grope in thebottoms of the vases and baskets of dried flowers, butwas not at all surprised that the locket was not there.He gave the office one last sweeping look, and hisheart skipped a beat. Dumbledore was staring at himfrom a small rectangular mirror, propped up on abookcase beside the desk.

Harry crossed the room at a run and snatched it up,but realized the moment he touched it that it was nota mirror at all. Dumbledore was smiling wistfully outof the front cover of a glossy book. Harry had notimmediately noticed the curly green writing across hishat — The Life and Lies ofAlbus Dumbledore — northe slightly smaller writing across his chest: “by RitaSkeeter, bestselling author of Armando Dippet: Masteror Moron?”

Harry opened the book at random and saw a full-pagephotograph of two teenage boys, both laughingimmoderately with their arms around each other’sshoulders. Dumbledore, now with elbow-length hair,had grown a tiny wispy beard that recalled the one onKrum’s chin that had so annoyed Ron. The boy whoroared in silent amusement beside Dumbledore had agleeful, wild look about him. His golden hair fell incurls to his shoulders. Harry wondered whether itwas a young Doge, but before he could check thecaption, the door of the office opened.

If Thicknesse had not been looking over his shoulderas he entered, Harry would not have had time to pullthe Invisibility Cloak over himself. As it was, hethought Thicknesse might have caught a glimpse ofmovement, because for a moment or two he remainedquite still, staring curiously at the place where Harryhad just vanished. Perhaps deciding that all he hadseen was Dumbledore scratching his nose on thefront of the book, for Harry had hastily replaced itPage | 284 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

upon the shelf, Thicknesse finally walked to the deskand pointed his wand at the quill standing ready inthe ink pot. It sprang out and began scribbling a noteto Umbridge. Very slowly, hardly daring to breathe,Harry backed out of the office into the open areabeyond.

The pamphlet-makers were still clustered around theremains of the Decoy Detonator, which continued tohoot feebly as it smoked. Harry hurried off up thecorridor as the young witch said, “I bet it sneaked uphere from Experimental Charms, they’re so careless,remember that poisonous duck?”

Speeding back toward the lifts, Harry reviewed hisoptions. It had never been likely that the locket washere at the Ministry, and there was no hope ofbewitching its whereabouts out of Umbridge while shewas sitting in a crowded court. Their priority now hadto be to leave the Ministry before they were exposed,and try again another day. The first thing to do was tofind Ron, and then they could work out a way ofextracting Hermione from the courtroom.

The lift was empty when it arrived. Harry jumped inand pulled off the Invisibility Cloak as it started itsdescent. To his enormous relief, when it rattled to ahalt at level two, a soaking-wet and wild-eyed Ron gotin.

“M-morning,” he stammered to Harry as the lift set offagain.

“Ron, it’s me, Harry!”

“Harry! Blimey, I forgot what you looked like — whyisn’t Hermione with you?”

Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“She had to go down to the courtrooms withUmbridge, she couldn’t refuse, and —”

But before Harry could finish the lift had stoppedagain: The doors opened and Mr. Weasley walkedinside, talking to an elderly witch whose blonde hairwas teased so high it resembled an anthill.

"... I quite understand what you’re saying, Wakanda,but I’m afraid I cannot be party to —”

Mr. Weasley broke off; he had noticed Harry. It wasvery strange to have Mr. Weasley glare at him withthat much dislike. The lift doors closed and the fourof them trundled downward once more.

“Oh, hello, Reg,” said Mr. Weasley, looking around atthe sound of steady dripping from Ron’s robes. “Isn’tyour wife in for questioning today? Er — what’shappened to you? Why are you so wet?”

“Yaxley’s office is raining,” said Ron. He addressedMr. Weasley’s shoulder, and Harry felt sure he wasscared that his father might recognize him if theylooked directly into each other’s eyes. “I couldn’t stopit, so they’ve sent me to get Bernie — Pillsworth, Ithink they said —”

“Yes, a lot of offices have been raining lately,” said Mr.Weasley. “Did you try Meteolojinx Recanto? It workedfor Bletchley.”

“Meteolojinx Recanto?” whispered Ron. “No, I didn’t.Thanks, D — I mean, thanks, Arthur.”

The lift doors opened; the old witch with the anthillhair left, and Ron darted past her out of sight. Harrymade to follow him, but found his path blocked as

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Percy Weasley strode into the lift, his nose buried insome papers he was reading.

Not until the doors had clanged shut again did Percyrealize he was in a lift with his father. He glanced up,saw Mr. Weasley, turned radish red, and left the liftthe moment the doors opened again. For the secondtime, Harry tried to get out, but this time found hisway blocked by Mr. Weasley’s arm.

“One moment, Runcorn.”

The lift doors closed and as they clanked downanother floor, Mr. Weasley said, “I hear you laidinformation about Dirk Cresswell.”

Harry had the impression that Mr. Weasley’s angerwas no less because of the brush with Percy. Hedecided his best chance was to act stupid.

“Sorry?” he said.

“Don’t pretend, Runcorn,” said Mr. Weasley fiercely.“You tracked down the wizard who faked his familytree, didn’t you?”

“I — so what if I did?” said Harry.

“So Dirk Cresswell is ten times the wizard you are,”said Mr. Weasley quietly, as the lift sank ever lower.“And if he survives Azkaban, you 11 have to answer tohim, not to mention his wife, his sons, and his friends

“Arthur,” Harry interrupted, “you know you’re beingtracked, don’t you?”

“Is that a threat, Runcorn?” said Mr. Weasley loudly.

Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry, “it’s a fact! They’re watching yourevery move —”

The lift doors opened. They had reached the Atrium.Mr. Weasley gave Harry a scathing look and sweptfrom the lift. Harry stood there, shaken. He wished hewas impersonating somebody other than Runcorn. ...The lift doors clanged shut.

Harry pulled out the Invisibility Cloak and put it backon. He would try to extricate Hermione on his ownwhile Ron was dealing with the raining office. Whenthe doors opened, he stepped out into a torch-litstone passageway quite different from the wood-paneled and carpeted corridors above. As the liftrattled away again, Harry shivered slightly, lookingtoward the distant black door that marked theentrance to the Department of Mysteries.

He set off, his destination not the black door, but thedoorway he remembered on the left-hand side, whichopened onto the flight of stairs down to the courtchambers. His mind grappled with possibilities as hecrept down them: He still had a couple of DecoyDetonators, but perhaps it would be better to simplyknock on the courtroom door, enter as Runcorn, andask for a quick word with Mafalda? Of course, he didnot know whether Runcorn was sufficiently importantto get away with this, and even if he managed it,Hermione’s non-reappearance might trigger a searchbefore they were clear of the Ministry. ...

Lost in thought, he did not immediately register theunnatural chill that was creeping over him, as if hewere descending into fog. It was becoming colder andcolder with every step he took: a cold that reachedright down into his throat and tore at his lungs. Andthen he felt that stealing sense of despair, ofhopelessness, filling him, expanding inside him. ...Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Dementors, he thought.

And as he reached the foot of the stairs and turned tohis right he saw a dreadful scene. The dark passageoutside the courtrooms was packed with tall, black-hooded figures, their faces completely hidden, theirragged breathing the only sound in the place. Thepetrified Muggle-borns brought in for questioning sathuddled and shivering on hard wooden benches. Mostof them were hiding their faces in their hands,perhaps in an instinctive attempt to shield themselvesfrom the dementors’ greedy mouths. Some wereaccompanied by families, others sat alone. Thedementors were gliding up and down in front of them,and the cold, and the hopelessness, and the despairof the place laid themselves upon Harry like a curse.

Fight it, he told himself, but he knew that he couldnot conjure a Patronus here without revealing himselfinstantly. So he moved forward as silently as hecould, and with every step he took numbness seemedto steal over his brain, but he forced himself to thinkof Hermione and of Ron, who needed him.

Moving through the towering black figures wasterrifying: The eyeless faces hidden beneath theirhoods turned as he passed, and he felt sure that theysensed him, sensed, perhaps, a human presence thatstill had some hope, some resilience. ...

And then, abruptly and shockingly amid the frozensilence, one of the dungeon doors on the left of thecorridor was flung open and screams echoed out of it.

“No, no, I’m half-blood, I’m half-blood, I tell you! Myfather was a wizard, he was, look him up, ArkieAlderton, he’s a well-known broomstick designer, look

Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

him up, I tell you — get your hands off me, get yourhands off—”

“This is your final warning,” said Umbridge’s softvoice, magically magnified so that it sounded clearlyover the man’s desperate screams. “If you struggle,you will be subjected to the Dementor’s Kiss.”

The man’s screams subsided, but dry sobs echoedthrough the corridor.

“Take him away,” said Umbridge.

Two dementors appeared in the doorway of thecourtroom, their rotting, scabbed hands clutching theupper arms of a wizard who appeared to be fainting.They glided away down the corridor with him, and thedarkness they trailed behind them swallowed himfrom sight.

“Next — Mary Cattermole,” called Umbridge.

A small woman stood up; she was trembling fromhead to foot. Her dark hair was smoothed back into abun and she wore long, plain robes. Her face wascompletely bloodless. As she passed the dementors,Harry saw her shudder.

He did it instinctively, without any sort of plan,because he hated the sight of her walking alone intothe dungeon: As the door began to swing closed, heslipped into the courtroom behind her.

It was not the same room in which he had once beeninterrogated for improper use of magic. This one wasmuch smaller, though the ceiling was quite as high; itgave the claustrophobic sense of being stuck at thebottom of a deep well.

Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There were more dementors in here, casting theirfreezing aura over the place; they stood like facelesssentinels in the corners farthest from the high, raisedplatform. Here, behind a balustrade, sat Umbridge,with Yaxley on one side of her, and Hermione, quiteas white-faced as Mrs. Cattermole, on the other. Atthe foot of the platform, a bright-silver, long-hairedcat prowled up and down, up and down, and Harryrealized that it was there to protect the prosecutorsfrom the despair that emanated from the dementors:That was for the accused to feel, not the accusers.

“Sit down,” said Umbridge in her soft, silky voice.

Mrs. Cattermole stumbled to the single seat in themiddle of the floor beneath the raised platform. Themoment she had sat down, chains clinked out of thearms of the chair and bound her there.

“You are Mary Elizabeth Cattermole?” askedUmbridge.

Mrs. Cattermole gave a single, shaky nod.

“Married to Reginald Cattermole of the MagicalMaintenance Department?”

Mrs. Cattermole burst into tears.

“I don’t know where he is, he was supposed to meetme here!”

Umbridge ignored her.

“Mother to Maisie, Ellie, and Alfred Cattermole?”

Mrs. Cattermole sobbed harder than ever.

Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“They’re frightened, they think I might not come home

“Spare us,” spat Yaxley. “The brats of Mudbloods donot stir our sympathies.”

Mrs. Cattermole’s sobs masked Harry’s footsteps ashe made his way carefully toward the steps that ledup to the raised platform. The moment he had passedthe place where the Patronus cat patrolled, he felt thechange in temperature: It was warm and comfortablehere. The Patronus, he was sure, was Umbridge’s,and it glowed brightly because she was so happyhere, in her element, upholding the twisted laws shehad helped to write. Slowly and very carefully heedged his way along the platform behind Umbridge,Yaxley, and Hermione, taking a seat behind the latter.He was worried about making Hermione jump. Hethought of casting the Muffliato charm uponUmbridge and Yaxley, but even murmuring the wordmight cause Hermione alarm. Then Umbridge raisedher voice to address Mrs. Cattermole, and Harryseized his chance.

“I’m behind you,” he whispered into Hermione’s ear.

As he had expected, she jumped so violently shenearly overturned the bottle of ink with which shewas supposed to be recording the interview, but bothUmbridge and Yaxley were concentrating upon Mrs.Cattermole, and this went unnoticed.

“A wand was taken from you upon your arrival at theMinistry today, Mrs. Cattermole,” Umbridge wassaying. “Eight-and-three-quarter inches, cherry,unicorn-hair core. Do you recognize that description?”

Mrs. Cattermole nodded, mopping her eyes on hersleeve.

Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Could you please tell us from which witch or wizardyou took that wand?”

“T-took?” sobbed Mrs. Cattermole. “I didn’t t-take itfrom anybody. I b-bought it when I was eleven yearsold. It — it — it — chose me.”

She cried harder than ever.

Umbridge laughed a soft girlish laugh that madeHarry want to attack her. She leaned forward over thebarrier, the better to observe her victim, andsomething gold swung forward too, and dangled overthe void: the locket.

Hermione had seen it; she let out a little squeak, butUmbridge and Yaxley, still intent upon their prey,were deaf to everything else.

“No,” said Umbridge, “no, I don’t think so, Mrs.Cattermole. Wands only choose witches or wizards.You are not a witch. I have your responses to thequestionnaire that was sent to you here — Mafalda,pass them to me.”

Umbridge held out a small hand: She looked sotoadlike at that moment that Harry was quitesurprised not to see webs between the stubby fingers.Hermione’s hands were shaking with shock. Shefumbled in a pile of documents balanced on the chairbeside her, finally withdrawing a sheaf of parchmentwith Mrs. Cattermole’s name on it.

“That’s — that’s pretty, Dolores,” she said, pointing atthe pendant gleaming in the ruffled folds ofUmbridge’s blouse.

“What?” snapped Umbridge, glancing down. “Oh yes— an old family heirloom,” she said, patting the locket

Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

lying on her large bosom. “The S stands for Selwyn. ...I am related to the Selwyns. ... Indeed, there are fewpure-blood families to whom I am not related. ... Apity,” she continued in a louder voice, flickingthrough Mrs. Cattermole’s questionnaire, “that thesame cannot be said for you. ‘Parents’ professions:greengrocers.’ ”

Yaxley laughed jeeringly. Below, the fluffy silver catpatrolled up and down, and the dementors stoodwaiting in the corners.

It was Umbridge’s lie that brought the blood surginginto Harry’s brain and obliterated his sense of caution— that the locket she had taken as a bribe from apetty criminal was being used to bolster her ownpure-blood credentials. He raised his wand, not eventroubling to keep it concealed beneath the InvisibilityCloak, and said, “Stupefyl”

There was a flash of red light; Umbridge crumpledand her forehead hit the edge of the balustrade: Mrs.Cattermole’s papers slid off her lap onto the floor and,down below, the prowling silver cat vanished. Ice-coldair hit them like an oncoming wind: Yaxley, confused,looked around for the source of the trouble and sawHarry’s disembodied hand and wand pointing at him.He tried to draw his own wand, but too late:

“Stupefyl”

Yaxley slid to the ground to lie curled on the floor.“Harry!”

“Hermione, if you think I was going to sit here and lether pretend —”

“Harry, Mrs. Cattermole!”

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry whirled around, throwing off the InvisibilityCloak; down below, the dementors had moved out oftheir corners; they were gliding toward the womanchained to the chair: Whether because the Patronushad vanished or because they sensed that theirmasters were no longer in control, they seemed tohave abandoned restraint. Mrs. Cattermole let out aterrible scream of fear as a slimy, scabbed handgrasped her chin and forced her face back.

“EXPECTO PATRONUM”

The silver stag soared from the tip of Harry’s wandand leaped toward the dementors, which fell back andmelted into the dark shadows again. The stag’s light,more powerful and more warming than the cat’sprotection, filled the whole dungeon as it canteredaround and around the room.

“Get the Horcrux,” Harry told Hermione.

He ran back down the steps, stuffing the InvisibilityCloak back into his bag, and approached Mrs.Cattermole.

“You?” she whispered, gazing into his face. “But —but Reg said you were the one who submitted myname for questioning!”

“Did I?” muttered Harry, tugging at the chainsbinding her arms. “Well, I’ve had a change of heart.Diffindol” Nothing happened. “Hermione, how do I getrid of these chains?”

“Wait, I’m trying something up here —”

“Hermione, we’re surrounded by dementors!”

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I know that, Harry, but if she wakes up and thelocket’s gone — I need to duplicate it — Geminio\There ... That should fool her. ...”

Hermione came running downstairs.

“Let’s see. ... Relashiol”

The chains clinked and withdrew into the arms of thechair. Mrs. Cattermole looked just as frightened asever before.

“I don’t understand,” she whispered.

“You’re going to leave here with us,” said Harry,pulling her to her feet. “Go home, grab your children,and get out, get out of the country if you’ve got to.Disguise yourselves and run. You’ve seen how it is,you won’t get anything like a fair hearing here.”

“Harry,” said Hermione, “how are we going to get outof here with all those dementors outside the door?”

“Patronuses,” said Harry, pointing his wand at hisown: The stag slowed and walked, still gleamingbrightly, toward the door. “As many as we canmuster; do yours, Hermione.”

“Expec — Expecto patronum,” said Hermione. Nothinghappened.

“It’s the only spell she ever has trouble with,” Harrytold a completely bemused Mrs. Cattermole. “Bitunfortunate, really ... Come on, Hermione. ...”

“Expecto patronum).”

A silver otter burst from the end of Hermione’s wandand swam gracefully through the air to join the stag.

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“C’mon,” said Harry, and he led Hermione and Mrs.Cattermole to the door.

When the Patronuses glided out of the dungeon therewere cries of shock from the people waiting outside.Harry looked around; the dementors were falling backon both sides of them, melding into the darkness,scattering before the silver creatures.

“It’s been decided that you should all go home and gointo hiding with your families,” Harry told the waitingMuggle-borns, who were dazzled by the light of thePatronuses and still cowering slightly. “Go abroad ifyou can. Just get well away from the Ministry. That’sthe — er — new official position. Now, if you’ll justfollow the Patronuses, you’ll be able to leave from theAtrium.”

They managed to get up the stone steps without beingintercepted, but as they approached the lifts Harrystarted to have misgivings. If they emerged into theAtrium with a silver stag, an otter soaring alongsideit, and twenty or so people, half of them accusedMuggle-borns, he could not help feeling that theywould attract unwanted attention. He had justreached this unwelcome conclusion when the liftclanged to a halt in front of them.

“Reg!” screamed Mrs. Cattermole, and she threwherself into Ron’s arms. “Runcorn let me out, heattacked Umbridge and Yaxley, and he’s told all of usto leave the country, I think we’d better do it, Reg, Ireally do, let’s hurry home and fetch the children and— why are you so wet?”

“Water,” muttered Ron, disengaging himself. “Harry,they know there are intruders inside the Ministry,something about a hole in Umbridge’s office door, Ireckon we’ve got five minutes if that —”

Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hermione’s Patronus vanished with a pop as sheturned a horror-struck face to Harry.

“Harry, if we’re trapped here — !”

“We won’t be if we move fast,” said Harry. Headdressed the silent group behind them, who were allgawping at him.

“Who’s got wands?”

About half of them raised their hands.

“Okay, all of you who haven’t got wands need toattach yourself to somebody who has. We’ll need to befast before they stop us. Come on.”

They managed to cram themselves into two lifts.Harry’s Patronus stood sentinel before the goldengrilles as they shut and the lifts began to rise.

“Level eight,” said the witch’s cool voice, “Atrium.”

Harry knew at once that they were in trouble. TheAtrium was full of people moving from fireplace tofireplace, sealing them off.

“Harry!” squeaked Hermione. “What are we going to —?”

“STOP!” Harry thundered, and the powerful voice ofRuncorn echoed through the Atrium: The wizardssealing the fireplaces froze. “Follow me,” he whisperedto the group of terrified Muggle-borns, who movedforward in a huddle, shepherded by Ron andHermione.

Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“What’s up, Albert?” said the same balding wizardwho had followed Harry out of the fireplace earlier. Helooked nervous.

“This lot need to leave before you seal the exits,” saidHarry with all the authority he could muster.

The group of wizards in front of him looked at oneanother.

“We’ve been told to seal all exits and not let anyone —

“Are you contradicting me?” Harry blustered. “Wouldyou like me to have your family tree examined, like Ihad Dirk Cresswell’s?”

“Sorry!” gasped the balding wizard, backing away. “Ididn’t mean nothing, Albert, but I thought ... Ithought they were in for questioning and ...”

“Their blood is pure,” said Harry, and his deep voiceechoed impressively through the hall. “Purer thanmany of yours, I daresay. Off you go,” he boomed tothe Muggle-borns, who scurried forward into thefireplaces and began to vanish in pairs. The Ministrywizards hung back, some looking confused, othersscared and resentful. Then:

“Mary!”

Mrs. Cattermole looked over her shoulder. The realReg Cattermole, no longer vomiting but pale and wan,had just come running out of a lift.

“R-Reg?”

She looked from her husband to Ron, who sworeloudly.

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The balding wizard gaped, his head turningludicrously from one Reg Cattermole to the other.

“Hey — what’s going on? What is this?”

“Seal the exit! SEAL IT!”

Yaxley had burst out of another lift and was runningtoward the group beside the fireplaces, into which allof the Muggle-borns but Mrs. Cattermole had nowvanished. As the balding wizard lifted his wand, Harryraised an enormous fist and punched him, sendinghim flying through the air.

“He’s been helping Muggle-borns escape, Yaxley!”Harry shouted.

The balding wizard’s colleagues set up an uproar,under cover of which Ron grabbed Mrs. Cattermole,pulled her into the still-open fireplace, anddisappeared. Confused, Yaxley looked from Harry tothe punched wizard, while the real Reg Cattermolescreamed, “My wife! Who was that with my wife?What’s going on?”

Harry saw Yaxley’s head turn, saw an inkling of thetruth dawn in that brutish face.

“Come on!” Harry shouted at Hermione; he seized herhand and they jumped into the fireplace together asYaxley’s curse sailed over Harry’s head. They spun fora few seconds before shooting up out of a toilet into acubicle. Harry flung open the door; Ron was standingthere beside the sinks, still wrestling with Mrs.Cattermole.

“Reg, I don’t understand —”

“Let go, I’m not your husband, you’ve got to go home!”

Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There was a noise in the cubicle behind them; Harrylooked around; Yaxley had just appeared.

“LET’S GO!” Harry yelled. He seized Hermione by thehand and Ron by the arm and turned on the spot.

Darkness engulfed them, along with the sensation ofcompressing bands, but something was wrong. ...Hermione’s hand seemed to be sliding out of his grip.

He wondered whether he was going to suffocate; hecould not breathe or see and the only solid things inthe world were Ron’s arm and Hermione’s fingers,which were slowly slipping away. ...

And then he saw the door of number twelve,Grimmauld Place, with its serpent door knocker, butbefore he could draw breath, there was a scream anda flash of purple light; Hermione’s hand was suddenlyvicelike upon his and everything went dark again.

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE THIEF

Harry opened his eyes and was dazzled by gold andgreen; he had no idea what had happened, he onlyknew that he was lying on what seemed to be leavesand twigs. Struggling to draw breath into lungs thatfelt flattened, he blinked and realized that the gaudyglare was sunlight streaming through a canopy ofleaves far above him. Then an object twitched close tohis face. He pushed himself onto his hands andknees, ready to face some small, fierce creature, butsaw that the object was Ron’s foot. Looking around,Harry saw that they and Hermione were lying on aforest floor, apparently alone.

Harry’s first thought was of the Forbidden Forest, andfor a moment, even though he knew how foolish anddangerous it would be for them to appear in thegrounds of Hogwarts, his heart leapt at the thought ofsneaking through the trees to Hagrid’s hut. However,in the few moments it took for Ron to give a low groanand Harry to start crawling toward him, he realizedthat this was not the Forbidden Forest: The trees

Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

looked younger, they were more widely spaced, theground clearer.

He met Hermione, also on her hands and knees, atRon’s head. The moment his eyes fell upon Ron, allother concerns fled Harry’s mind, for blood drenchedthe whole of Ron’s left side and his face stood out,grayish-white, against the leaf-strewn earth. ThePolyjuice Potion was wearing off now: Ron washalfway between Cattermole and himself inappearance, his hair turning redder and redder as hisface drained of the little color it had left.

“What’s happened to him?”

“Splinched,” said Hermione, her fingers already busyat Ron’s sleeve, where the blood was wettest anddarkest.

Harry watched, horrified, as she tore open Ron’sshirt. He had always thought of Splinching assomething comical, but this ... His insides crawledunpleasantly as Hermione laid bare Ron’s upper arm,where a great chunk of flesh was missing, scoopedcleanly away as though by a knife.

“Harry, quickly, in my bag, there’s a small bottlelabeled ‘Essence of Dittany’ —”

“Bag — right —”

Harry sped to the place where Hermione had landed,seized the tiny beaded bag, and thrust his handinside it. At once, object after object began presentingitself to his touch: He felt the leather spines of books,woolly sleeves of jumpers, heels of shoes —

“Quickly\”

Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He grabbed his wand from the ground and pointed itinto the depths of the magical bag.

“Accio Dittany\”

A small brown bottle zoomed out of the bag; hecaught it and hastened back to Hermione and Ron,whose eyes were now half-closed, strips of whiteeyeball all that were visible between his lids.

“He’s fainted,” said Hermione, who was also ratherpale; she no longer looked like Mafalda, though herhair was still gray in places. “Unstopper it for me,Harry, my hands are shaking.”

Harry wrenched the stopper off the little bottle,Hermione took it and poured three drops of the potiononto the bleeding wound. Greenish smoke billowedupward and when it had cleared, Harry saw that thebleeding had stopped. The wound now looked severaldays old; new skin stretched over what had just beenopen flesh.

“Wow,” said Harry.

“It’s all I feel safe doing,” said Hermione shakily.“There are spells that would put him completely right,but I daren’t try in case I do them wrong and causemore damage. ... He’s lost so much blood already. ...”

“How did he get hurt? I mean” — Harry shook hishead, trying to clear it, to make sense of whatever hadjust taken place — “why are we here? I thought wewere going back to Grimmauld Place?”

Hermione took a deep breath. She looked close totears.

Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, I don’t think we’re going to be able to go backthere.”

“What d’you — ?”

“As we Disapparated, Yaxley caught hold of me and Icouldn’t get rid of him, he was too strong, and he wasstill holding on when we arrived at Grimmauld Place,and then — well, I think he must have seen the door,and thought we were stopping there, so he slackenedhis grip and I managed to shake him off and I broughtus here instead!”

“But then, where’s he? Hang on. ... You don’t meanhe’s at Grimmauld Place? He can’t get in there?”

Her eyes sparkled with unshed tears as she nodded.

“Harry, I think he can. I — I forced him to let go witha Revulsion Jinx, but I’d already taken him inside theFidelius Charm’s protection. Since Dumbledore died,we’re Secret-Keepers, so I’ve given him the secret,haven’t I?”

There was no pretending; Harry was sure she wasright. It was a serious blow. If Yaxley could now getinside the house, there was no way that they couldreturn. Even now, he could be bringing other DeathEaters in there by Apparition. Gloomy and oppressivethough the house was, it had been their one saferefuge: even, now that Kreacher was so much happierand friendlier, a kind of home. With a twinge of regretthat had nothing to do with food, Harry imagined thehouse-elf busying himself over the steak-and-kidneypie that Harry, Ron, and Hermione would never eat.

“Harry, I’m sorry, I’m so sorry!”

Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t be stupid, it wasn’t your fault! If anything, itwas mine. ...”

Harry put his hand in his pocket and drew out Mad-Eye’s eye. Hermione recoiled, looking horrified.

“Umbridge had stuck it to her office door, to spy onpeople. I couldn’t leave it there ... but that’s how theyknew there were intruders.”

Before Hermione could answer, Ron groaned andopened his eyes. He was still gray and his faceglistened with sweat.

“How d’you feel?” Hermione whispered.

“Lousy,” croaked Ron, wincing as he felt his injuredarm. “Where are we?”

“In the woods where they held the Quidditch WorldCup,” said Hermione. “I wanted somewhere enclosed,undercover, and this was —”

“— the first place you thought of,” Harry finished forher, glancing around at the apparently desertedglade. He could not help remembering what hadhappened the last time they had Apparated to thefirst place Hermione had thought of — how DeathEaters had found them within minutes. Had it beenLegilimency? Did Voldemort or his henchmen know,even now, where Hermione had taken them?

“D’you reckon we should move on?” Ron asked Harry,and Harry could tell by the look on Ron’s face that hewas thinking the same.

“I dunno.”

Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron still looked pale and clammy. He had made noattempt to sit up and it looked as though he was tooweak to do so. The prospect of moving him wasdaunting.

“Let’s stay here for now,” Harry said.

Looking relieved, Hermione sprang to her feet.

“Where are you going?” asked Ron.

“If we’re staying, we should put some protectiveenchantments around the place,” she replied, andraising her wand, she began to walk in a wide circlearound Harry and Ron, murmuring incantations asshe went. Harry saw little disturbances in thesurrounding air: It was as if Hermione had cast aheat haze upon their clearing.

“Salvio Hexia ... Protego Totalum ... Repello Muggletum... Muffliato ... You could get out the tent, Harry. ...”

“Tent?”

“In the bag!”

“In the ... of course,” said Harry.

He did not bother to grope inside it this time, butused another Summoning Charm. The tent emergedin a lumpy mass of canvas, rope, and poles. Harryrecognized it, partly because of the smell of cats, asthe same tent in which they had slept on the night ofthe Quidditch World Cup.

“I thought this belonged to that bloke Perkins at theMinistry?” he asked, starting to disentangle the tentpegs.

Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Apparently he didn’t want it back, his lumbago’s sobad,” said Hermione, now performing complicatedfigure-of-eight movements with her wand, “so Ron’sdad said I could borrow it. ErectoV’ she added,pointing her wand at the misshapen canvas, which inone fluid motion rose into the air and settled, fullyconstructed, onto the ground before Harry, out ofwhose startled hands a tent peg soared, to land witha final thud at the end of a guy rope.

“Cave Inimicum,” Hermione finished with a skywardflourish. “That’s as much as I can do. At the veryleast, we should know they’re coming, I can’tguarantee it will keep out Vol —”

“Don’t say the name!” Ron cut across her, his voiceharsh.

Harry and Hermione looked at each other.

“I’m sorry,” Ron said, moaning a little as he raisedhimself to look at them, “but it feels like a — a jinx orsomething. Can’t we call him You-Know-Who —please?”

“Dumbledore said fear of a name —” began Harry.

“In case you hadn’t noticed, mate, calling You-Know-Who by his name didn’t do Dumbledore much good inthe end,” Ron snapped back. “Just —just show You-Know-Who some respect, will you?”

“Respect?” Harry repeated, but Hermione shot him awarning look; apparently he was not to argue withRon while the latter was in such a weakenedcondition.

Harry and Hermione half carried, half dragged Ronthrough the entrance of the tent. The interior was

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

exactly as Harry remembered it: a small flat, completewith bathroom and tiny kitchen. He shoved aside anold armchair and lowered Ron carefully onto the lowerberth of a bunk bed. Even this very short journey hadturned Ron whiter still, and once they had settled himon the mattress he closed his eyes again and did notspeak for a while.

“I’ll make some tea,” said Hermione breathlessly,pulling kettle and mugs from the depths of her bagand heading toward the kitchen.

Harry found the hot drink as welcome as thefirewhisky had been on the night that Mad-Eye haddied; it seemed to burn away a little of the fearfluttering in his chest. After a minute or two, Ronbroke the silence.

“What d’you reckon happened to the Cattermoles?”

“With any luck, they’ll have got away,” said Hermione,clutching her hot mug for comfort. “As long as Mr.Cattermole had his wits about him, he’ll havetransported Mrs. Cattermole by Side-Along-Apparitionand they’ll be fleeing the country right now with theirchildren. That’s what Harry told her to do.”

“Blimey, I hope they escaped,” said Ron, leaning backon his pillows. The tea seemed to be doing him good;a little of his color had returned. “I didn’t get thefeeling Reg Cattermole was all that quick-witted,though, the way everyone was talking to me when Iwas him. God, I hope they made it. ... If they both endup in Azkaban because of us ...”

Harry looked over at Hermione and the question hehad been about to ask — about whether Mrs.Cattermole’s lack of a wand would prevent herApparating alongside her husband — died in his

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

throat. Hermione was watching Ron fret over the fateof the Cattermoles, and there was such tenderness inher expression that Harry felt almost as if he hadsurprised her in the act of kissing him.

“So, have you got it?” Harry asked her, partly toremind her that he was there.

“Got — got what?” she said with a little start.

“What did we just go through all that for? The locket!Where’s the locket?”

“ You got it?” shouted Ron, raising himself a littlehigher on his pillows. “No one tells me anything!Blimey, you could have mentioned it!”

“Well, we were running for our lives from the DeathEaters, weren’t we?” said Hermione. “Here.”

And she pulled the locket out of the pocket of herrobes and handed it to Ron.

It was as large as a chicken’s egg. An ornate letter S,inlaid with many small green stones, glinted dully inthe diffused light shining through the tent’s canvasroof.

“There isn’t any chance someone’s destroyed it sinceKreacher had it?” asked Ron hopefully. “I mean, arewe sure it’s still a Horcrux?”

“I think so,” said Hermione, taking it back from himand looking at it closely. “There’d be some sign ofdamage if it had been magically destroyed.”

She passed it to Harry, who turned it over in hisfingers. The thing looked perfect, pristine. Heremembered the mangled remains of the diary, and

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

how the stone in the Horcrux ring had been crackedopen when Dumbledore destroyed it.

“I reckon Kreacher’s right,” said Harry. “We’re going tohave to work out how to open this thing before we candestroy it.”

Sudden awareness of what he was holding, of whatlived behind the little golden doors, hit Harry as hespoke. Even after all their efforts to find it, he felt aviolent urge to fling the locket from him. Masteringhimself again, he tried to prise the locket apart withhis fingers, then attempted the charm Hermione hadused to open Regulus’s bedroom door. Neitherworked. He handed the locket back to Ron andHermione, each of whom did their best, but were nomore successful at opening it than he had been.

“Can you feel it, though?” Ron asked in a hushedvoice, as he held it tight in his clenched fist.

“What d’you mean?”

Ron passed the Horcrux to Harry. After a moment ortwo, Harry thought he knew what Ron meant. Was ithis own blood pulsing through his veins that he couldfeel, or was it something beating inside the locket, likea tiny metal heart?

“What are we going to do with it?” Hermione asked.

“Keep it safe till we work out how to destroy it,” Harryreplied, and, little though he wanted to, he hung thechain around his own neck, dropping the locket outof sight beneath his robes, where it rested against hischest beside the pouch Hagrid had given him.

“I think we should take it in turns to keep watchoutside the tent,” he added to Hermione, standing up

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and stretching. “And we’ll need to think about somefood as well. You stay there,” he added sharply, asRon attempted to sit up and turned a nasty shade ofgreen.

With the Sneakoscope Hermione had given Harry forhis birthday set carefully upon the table in the tent,Harry and Hermione spent the rest of the day sharingthe role of lookout. However, the Sneakoscoperemained silent and still upon its point all day, andwhether because of the protective enchantments andMuggle-repelling charms Hermione had spreadaround them, or because people rarely ventured thisway, their patch of wood remained deserted, apartfrom occasional birds and squirrels. Evening broughtno change; Harry lit his wand as he swapped placeswith Hermione at ten o’clock, and looked out upon adeserted scene, noting the bats fluttering high abovehim across the single patch of starry sky visible fromtheir protected clearing.

He felt hungry now, and a little light-headed.

Hermione had not packed any food in her magicalbag, as she had assumed that they would bereturning to Grimmauld Place that night, so they hadhad nothing to eat except some wild mushrooms thatHermione had collected from amongst the nearesttrees and stewed in a billycan. After a couple ofmouthfuls Ron had pushed his portion away, lookingqueasy; Harry had only persevered so as not to hurtHermione’s feelings.

The surrounding silence was broken by odd rustlingsand what sounded like crackings of twigs: Harrythought that they were caused by animals rather thanpeople, yet he kept his wand held tight at the ready.His insides, already uncomfortable due to theirinadequate helping of rubbery mushrooms, tingledwith unease.

Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He had thought that he would feel elated if theymanaged to steal back the Horcrux, but somehow hedid not; all he felt as he sat looking out at thedarkness, of which his wand lit only a tiny part, wasworry about what would happen next. It was asthough he had been hurtling toward this point forweeks, months, maybe even years, but now he hadcome to an abrupt halt, run out of road.

There were other Horcruxes out there somewhere, buthe did not have the faintest idea where they could be.He did not even know what all of them were.Meanwhile he was at a loss to know how to destroythe only one that they had found, the Horcrux thatcurrently lay against the bare flesh of his chest.Curiously, it had not taken heat from his body, butlay so cold against his skin it might just haveemerged from icy water. From time to time Harrythought, or perhaps imagined, that he could feel thetiny heartbeat ticking irregularly alongside his own.

Nameless forebodings crept upon him as he sat therein the dark: He tried to resist them, push them away,yet they came at him relentlessly. Neither can livewhile the other survives. Ron and Hermione, nowtalking softly behind him in the tent, could walk awayif they wanted to: He could not. And it seemed toHarry as he sat there trying to master his own fearand exhaustion, that the Horcrux against his chestwas ticking away the time he had left. ... Stupid idea,he told himself, don’t think that. ...

His scar was starting to prickle again. He was afraidthat he was making it happen by having thesethoughts, and tried to direct them into anotherchannel. He thought of poor Kreacher, who hadexpected them home and had received Yaxley instead.Would the elf keep silent or would he tell the DeathEater everything he knew? Harry wanted to believePage | 313 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

that Kreacher had changed toward him in the pastmonth, that he would be loyal now, but who knewwhat would happen? What if the Death Eaterstortured the elf? Sick images swarmed into Harry’shead and he tried to push these away too, for therewas nothing he could do for Kreacher: He andHermione had already decided against trying tosummon him; what if someone from the Ministrycame too? They could not count on elfish Apparitionbeing free from the same flaw that had taken Yaxleyto Grimmauld Place on the hem of Hermione’s sleeve.

Harry’s scar was burning now. He thought that therewas so much they did not know: Lupin had been rightabout magic they had never encountered or imagined.Why hadn’t Dumbledore explained more? Had hethought that there would be time; that he would livefor years, for centuries perhaps, like his friend NicolasFlamel? If so, he had been wrong. ... Snape had seento that. ... Snape, the sleeping snake, who had struckat the top of the tower ...

And Dumbledore had fallen ... fallen ...

“Give it to me, Gregorovitch.”

Harry’s voice was high, clear, and cold, his wand heldin front of him by a long-fingered white hand. Theman at whom he was pointing was suspended upsidedown in midair, though there were no ropes holdinghim; he swung there, invisibly and eerily bound, hislimbs wrapped about him, his terrified face, on a levelwith Harry’s, ruddy due to the blood that had rushedto his head. He had pure-white hair and a thick,bushy beard: a trussed-up Father Christmas.

“I have it not, I have it no more! It was, many yearsago, stolen from me!”

Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Do not lie to Lord Voldemort, Gregorovitch. Heknows. ... He always knows.”

The hanging man’s pupils were wide, dilated withfear, and they seemed to swell, bigger and bigger untiltheir blackness swallowed Harry whole —

And now Harry was hurrying along a dark corridor instout little Gregorovitch’s wake as he held a lanternaloft: Gregorovitch burst into the room at the end ofthe passage and his lantern illuminated what lookedlike a workshop; wood shavings and gold gleamed inthe swinging pool of light, and there on the windowledge sat perched, like a giant bird, a young man withgolden hair. In the split second that the lantern’s lightilluminated him, Harry saw the delight upon hishandsome face, then the intruder shot a StunningSpell from his wand and jumped neatly backward outof the window with a crow of laughter.

And Harry was hurtling back out of those wide,tunnellike pupils and Gregorovitch’s face was strickenwith terror.

“Who was the thief, Gregorovitch?” said the high coldvoice.

“I do not know, I never knew, a young man — no —please — PLEASE!”

A scream that went on and on and then a burst ofgreen light —

“Harryl”

He opened his eyes, panting, his forehead throbbing.He had passed out against the side of the tent, hadslid sideways down the canvas, and was sprawled onthe ground. He looked up at Hermione, whose bushy

Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

hair obscured the tiny patch of sky visible throughthe dark branches high above them.

“Dream,” he said, sitting up quickly and attempting tomeet Hermione’s glower with a look of innocence.“Must’ve dozed off, sorry.”

“I know it was your scar! I can tell by the look on yourface! You were looking into Vol —”

“Don’t say his name!” came Ron’s angry voice fromthe depths of the tent.

“Fine,” retorted Hermione. “You-Know-Who’s mind,then!”

“I didn’t mean it to happen!” Harry said. “It was adream! Can you control what you dream about,Hermione?”

“If you just learned to apply Occlumency —”

But Harry was not interested in being told off; hewanted to discuss what he had just seen.

“He’s found Gregorovitch, Hermione, and I think he’skilled him, but before he killed him he readGregorovitch’s mind and I saw —”

“I think I’d better take over the watch if you’re so tiredyou’re falling asleep,” said Hermione coldly.

“I can finish the watch!”

“No, you’re obviously exhausted. Go and lie down.”

She dropped down in the mouth of the tent, lookingstubborn. Angry, but wishing to avoid a row, Harryducked back inside.

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron’s still-pale face was poking out from the lowerbunk; Harry climbed into the one above him, laydown, and looked up at the dark canvas ceiling. Afterseveral moments, Ron spoke in a voice so low that itwould not carry to Hermione, huddled in theentrance.

“What’s You-Know-Who doing?”

Harry screwed up his eyes in the effort to rememberevery detail, then whispered into the darkness.

“He found Gregorovitch. He had him tied up, he wastorturing him.”

“How’s Gregorovitch supposed to make him a newwand if he’s tied up?”

“I dunno. ... It’s weird, isn’t it?”

Harry closed his eyes, thinking of all he had seen andheard. The more he recalled, the less sense it made.

... Voldemort had said nothing about Harry’s wand,nothing about the twin cores, nothing aboutGregorovitch making a new and more powerful wandto beat Harry’s. ...

“He wanted something from Gregorovitch,” Harrysaid, eyes still closed tight. “He asked him to hand itover, but Gregorovitch said it had been stolen fromhim ... and then ... then ...”

He remembered how he, as Voldemort, had seemed tohurtle through Gregorovitch’s eyes, into hismemories. ...

“He read Gregorovitch’s mind, and I saw this youngbloke perched on a windowsill, and he fired a curse atGregorovitch and jumped out of sight. He stole it, he

Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

stole whatever You-Know-Who’s after. And I ... I thinkI’ve seen him somewhere. ...”

Harry wished he could have another glimpse of thelaughing boy’s face. The theft had happened manyyears ago, according to Gregorovitch. Why did theyoung thief look familiar?

The noises of the surrounding woods were muffledinside the tent; all Harry could hear was Ron’sbreathing. After a while, Ron whispered, “Couldn’tyou see what the thief was holding?”

“No ... it must’ve been something small.”

“Harry?”

The wooden slats of Ron’s bunk creaked as herepositioned himself in bed.

“Harry, you don’t reckon You-Know-Who’s aftersomething else to turn into a Horcrux?”

“I don’t know,” said Harry slowly. “Maybe. Butwouldn’t it be dangerous for him to make anotherone? Didn’t Hermione say he had pushed his soul tothe limit already?”

“Yeah, but maybe he doesn’t know that.”

“Yeah ... maybe,” said Harry.

He had been sure that Voldemort had been lookingfor a way around the problem of the twin cores, surethat Voldemort sought a solution from the oldwandmaker ... and yet he had killed him, apparentlywithout asking him a single question about wandlore.

Page | 318 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

What was Voldemort trying to find? Why, with theMinistry of Magic and the Wizarding world at his feet,was he far away, intent on the pursuit of an objectthat Gregorovitch had once owned, and which hadbeen stolen by the unknown thief?

Harry could still see the blond-haired youth’s face; itwas merry, wild; there was a Fred and George-ish airof triumphant trickery about him. He had soared fromthe windowsill like a bird, and Harry had seen himbefore, but he could not think where. ...

With Gregorovitch dead, it was the merry-faced thiefwho was in danger now, and it was on him thatHarry’s thoughts dwelled, as Ron’s snores began torumble from the lower bunk and as he himself driftedslowly into sleep once more.

Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE GOBLIN’S REVENGE

Early next morning, before the other two were awake,Harry left the tent to search the woods around themfor the oldest, most gnarled, and resilient-looking treehe could find. There in its shadow he buried Mad-EyeMoody’s eye and marked the spot by gouging a smallcross in the bark with his wand. It was not much, butHarry felt that Mad-Eye would have much preferredthis to being stuck on Dolores Umbridge’s door. Thenhe returned to the tent to wait for the others to wake,and discuss what they were going to do next.

Harry and Hermione felt that it was best not to stayanywhere too long, and Ron agreed, with the soleproviso that their next move took them within reachof a bacon sandwich. Hermione therefore removed theenchantments she had placed around the clearing,while Harry and Ron obliterated all the marks andimpressions on the ground that might show they hadcamped there. Then they Disapparated to theoutskirts of a small market town.

Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Once they had pitched the tent in the shelter of asmall copse of trees and surrounded it with freshlycast defensive enchantments, Harry ventured outunder the Invisibility Cloak to find sustenance. This,however, did not go as planned. He had barelyentered the town when an unnatural chill, adescending mist, and a sudden darkening of the skiesmade him freeze where he stood.

“But you can make a brilliant Patronus!” protestedRon, when Harry arrived back at the tent empty-handed, out of breath, and mouthing the single word,dementors.

“I couldn’t ... make one,” he panted, clutching thestitch in his side. “Wouldn’t ... come.”

Their expressions of consternation anddisappointment made Harry feel ashamed. It hadbeen a nightmarish experience, seeing the dementorsgliding out of the mist in the distance and realizing,as the paralyzing cold choked his lungs and a distantscreaming filled his ears, that he was not going to beable to protect himself. It had taken all Harry’swillpower to uproot himself from the spot and run,leaving the eyeless dementors to glide amongst theMuggles who might not be able to see them, butwould assuredly feel the despair they cast whereverthey went.

“So we still haven’t got any food.”

“Shut up, Ron,” snapped Hermione. “Harry, whathappened? Why do you think you couldn’t make yourPatronus? You managed perfectly yesterday!”

“I don’t know.”

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He sat low in one of Perkins’s old armchairs, feelingmore humiliated by the moment. He was afraid thatsomething had gone wrong inside him. Yesterdayseemed a long time ago: Today he might have beenthirteen years old again, the only one who collapsedon the Hogwarts Express.

Ron kicked a chair leg.

“What?” he snarled at Hermione. “I’m starving! All I’vehad since I bled half to death is a couple oftoadstools!”

“You go and fight your way through the dementors,then,” said Harry, stung.

“I would, but my arm’s in a sling, in case you hadn’tnoticed!”

“That’s convenient.”

“And what’s that supposed to — ?”

“Of course!” cried Hermione, clapping a hand to herforehead and startling both of them into silence.“Harry, give me the locket! Come on,” she saidimpatiently, clicking her fingers at him when he didnot react, “the Horcrux, Harry, you’re still wearing it!”

She held out her hands, and Harry lifted the goldenchain over his head. The moment it parted contactwith Harry’s skin he felt free and oddly light. He hadnot even realized that he was clammy or that therewas a heavy weight pressing on his stomach untilboth sensations lifted.

“Better?” asked Hermione.

“Yeah, loads better!”

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry,” she said, crouching down in front of him andusing the kind of voice he associated with visiting thevery sick, “you don’t think you’ve been possessed, doyou?”

“What? No!” he said defensively. “I remembereverything we’ve done while I’ve been wearing it. Iwouldn’t know what I’d done if I’d been possessed,would I? Ginny told me there were times when shecouldn’t remember anything.”

“Hmm,” said Hermione, looking down at the heavygold locket. “Well, maybe we ought not to wear it. Wecan just keep it in the tent.”

“We are not leaving that Horcrux lying around,” Harrystated firmly. “If we lose it, if it gets stolen —”

“Oh, all right, all right,” said Hermione, and sheplaced it around her own neck and tucked it out ofsight down the front of her shirt. “But we’ll take turnswearing it, so nobody keeps it on too long.”

“Great,” said Ron irritably, “and now we’ve sorted thatout, can we please get some food?”

“Fine, but we’ll go somewhere else to find it,” saidHermione with half a glance at Harry. “There’s nopoint staying where we know dementors are swoopingaround.”

In the end they settled down for the night in a far-flung field belonging to a lonely farm, from which theyhad managed to obtain eggs and bread.

“It’s not stealing, is it?” asked Hermione in a troubledvoice, as they devoured scrambled eggs on toast. “Notif I left some money under the chicken coop?”

Page | 323 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron rolled his eyes and said, with his cheeks bulging,

“ ’Er-my-nee, ’oo worry ’oo much. ’Elax!”

And, indeed, it was much easier to relax when theywere comfortably well fed: The argument about thedementors was forgotten in laughter that night, andHarry felt cheerful, even hopeful, as he took the firstof the three night watches.

This was their first encounter with the fact that a fullstomach meant good spirits; an empty one, bickeringand gloom. Harry was least surprised by this,because he had suffered periods of near starvation atthe Dursleys’. Hermione bore up reasonably well onthose nights when they managed to scavenge nothingbut berries or stale biscuits, her temper perhaps alittle shorter than usual and her silences rather dour.Ron, however, had always been used to threedelicious meals a day, courtesy of his mother or of theHogwarts house-elves, and hunger made him bothunreasonable and irascible. Whenever lack of foodcoincided with Ron’s turn to wear the Horcrux, hebecame downright unpleasant.

“So where next?” was his constant refrain. He did notseem to have any ideas himself, but expected Harryand Hermione to come up with plans while he sat andbrooded over the low food supplies. Accordingly Harryand Hermione spent fruitless hours trying to decidewhere they might find the other Horcruxes, and howto destroy the one they had already got, theirconversations becoming increasingly repetitive asthey had no new information.

As Dumbledore had told Harry that he believedVoldemort had hidden the Horcruxes in placesimportant to him, they kept reciting, in a sort ofdreary litany, those locations they knew thatVoldemort had lived or visited. The orphanage wherePage | 324 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

he had been born and raised; Hogwarts, where he hadbeen educated; Borgin and Burkes, where he hadworked after completing school; then Albania, wherehe had spent his years of exile: These formed thebasis of their speculations.

“Yeah, let’s go to Albania. Shouldn’t take more thanan afternoon to search an entire country,” said Ronsarcastically.

“There can’t be anything there. He’d already made fiveof his Horcruxes before he went into exile, andDumbledore was certain the snake is the sixth,” saidHermione. “We know the snake’s not in Albania, it’susually with Vol —”

“Didn’t I ask you to stop saying that?”

“Fine! The snake is usually with You-Knotu-Who —happy?”

“Not particularly.”

“I can’t see him hiding anything at Borgin andBurkes,” said Harry, who had made this point manytimes before, but said it again simply to break thenasty silence. “Borgin and Burke were experts atDark objects, they would’ve recognized a Horcruxstraightaway.”

Ron yawned pointedly. Repressing a strong urge tothrow something at him, Harry plowed on, “I stillreckon he might have hidden something atHogwarts.”

Hermione sighed.

“But Dumbledore would have found it, Harry!”

Page | 325 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry repeated the argument he kept bringing out infavor of this theory.

“Dumbledore said in front of me that he neverassumed he knew all of Hogwarts’s secrets. I’m tellingyou, if there was one place Vol —”

“Oi!”

“YOU-KNOW-WHO, then!” Harry shouted, goadedpast endurance. “If there was one place that wasreally important to You-Know-Who, it was Hogwarts!”

“Oh, come on,” scoffed Ron. “His school?”

“Yeah, his school! It was his first real home, the placethat meant he was special; it meant everything tohim, and even after he left —”

“This is You-Know-Who we’re talking about, right?

Not you?” inquired Ron. He was tugging at the chainof the Horcrux around his neck: Harry was visited bya desire to seize it and throttle him.

“You told us that You-Know-Who asked Dumbledoreto give him a job after he left,” said Hermione.

“That’s right,” said Harry.

“And Dumbledore thought he only wanted to comeback to try and find something, probably anotherfounder’s object, to make into another Horcrux?”

“Yeah,” said Harry.

“But he didn’t get the job, did he?” said Hermione. “Sohe never got the chance to find a founder’s objectthere and hide it in the school!”

Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Okay, then,” said Harry, defeated. “Forget Hogwarts.”

Without any other leads, they traveled into Londonand, hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak, searchedfor the orphanage in which Voldemort had beenraised. Hermione stole into a library and discoveredfrom their records that the place had beendemolished many years before. They visited its siteand found a tower block of offices.

“We could try digging in the foundations?” Hermionesuggested halfheartedly.

“He wouldn’t have hidden a Horcrux here,” Harrysaid. He had known it all along: The orphanage hadbeen the place Voldemort had been determined toescape; he would never have hidden a part of his soulthere. Dumbledore had shown Harry that Voldemortsought grandeur or mystique in his hiding places;this dismal gray corner of London was as far removedas you could imagine from Hogwarts or the Ministryor a building like Gringotts, the Wizarding bank, withits golden doors and marble floors.

Even without any new ideas, they continued to movethrough the countryside, pitching the tent in adifferent place each night for security. Every morningthey made sure that they had removed all clues totheir presence, then set off to find another lonely andsecluded spot, traveling by Apparition to more woods,to the shadowy crevices of cliffs, to purple moors,gorse-covered mountainsides, and once a shelteredand pebbly cove. Every twelve hours or so theypassed the Horcrux between them as though theywere playing some perverse, slow-motion game ofpass-the-parcel, where they dreaded the musicstopping because the reward was twelve hours ofincreased fear and anxiety.

Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s scar kept prickling. It happened most often,he noticed, when he was wearing the Horcrux.Sometimes he could not stop himself reacting to thepain.

“What? What did you see?” demanded Ron, wheneverhe noticed Harry wince.

“A face,” muttered Harry, every time. “The same face.The thief who stole from Gregorovitch.”

And Ron would turn away, making no effort to hidehis disappointment. Harry knew that Ron was hopingto hear news of his family or of the rest of the Order ofthe Phoenix, but after all, he, Harry, was not atelevision aerial; he could only see what Voldemortwas thinking at the time, not tune in to whatever tookhis fancy. Apparently Voldemort was dwellingendlessly on the unknown youth with the gleeful face,whose name and whereabouts, Harry felt sure,Voldemort knew no better than he did. As Harry’sscar continued to burn and the merry, blond-hairedboy swam tantalizingly in his memory, he learned tosuppress any sign of pain or discomfort, for the othertwo showed nothing but impatience at the mention ofthe thief. He could not entirely blame them, whenthey were so desperate for a lead on the Horcruxes.

As the days stretched into weeks, Harry began tosuspect that Ron and Hermione were havingconversations without, and about, him. Several timesthey stopped talking abruptly when Harry entered thetent, and twice he came accidentally upon them,huddled a little distance away, heads together andtalking fast; both times they fell silent when theyrealized he was approaching them and hastened toappear busy collecting wood or water.

Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry could not help wondering whether they hadonly agreed to come on what now felt like a pointlessand rambling journey because they thought he hadsome secret plan that they would learn in due course.Ron was making no effort to hide his bad mood, andHarry was starting to fear that Hermione too wasdisappointed by his poor leadership. In desperationhe tried to think of further Horcrux locations, but theonly one that continued to occur to him wasHogwarts, and as neither of the others thought this atall likely, he stopped suggesting it.

Autumn rolled over the countryside as they movedthrough it: They were now pitching the tent onmulches of fallen leaves. Natural mists joined thosecast by the dementors; wind and rain added to theirtroubles. The fact that Hermione was getting better atidentifying edible fungi could not altogethercompensate for their continuing isolation, the lack ofother people’s company, or their total ignorance ofwhat was going on in the war against Voldemort.

“My mother,” said Ron one night, as they sat in thetent on a riverbank in Wales, “can make good foodappear out of thin air.”

He prodded moodily at the lumps of charred gray fishon his plate. Harry glanced automatically at Ron’sneck and saw, as he had expected, the golden chainof the Horcrux glinting there. He managed to fightdown the impulse to swear at Ron, whose attitudewould, he knew, improve slightly when the time cameto take off the locket.

“Your mother can’t produce food out of thin air,” saidHermione. “No one can. Food is the first of the fivePrincipal Exceptions to Gamp’s Law of ElementalTransfigur —”

Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, speak English, can’t you?” Ron said, prising afish bone out from between his teeth.

“It’s impossible to make good food out of nothing! Youcan Summon it if you know where it is, you cantransform it, you can increase the quantity if you’vealready got some —”

“Well, don’t bother increasing this, it’s disgusting,”said Ron.

“Harry caught the fish and I did my best with it! Inotice I’m always the one who ends up sorting out thefood, because I’m a girl, I suppose!”

“No, it’s because you’re supposed to be the best atmagic!” shot back Ron.

Hermione jumped up and bits of roast pike slid offher tin plate onto the floor.

“ You can do the cooking tomorrow, Ron, you can findthe ingredients and try and charm them intosomething worth eating, and I’ll sit here and pullfaces and moan and you can see how you —”

“Shut up!” said Harry, leaping to his feet and holdingup both hands. “Shut up now\”

Hermione looked outraged.

“How can you side with him, he hardly ever does thecook —”

“Hermione, be quiet, I can hear someone!”

He was listening hard, his hands still raised, warningthem not to talk. Then, over the rush and gush of the

Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

dark river beside them, he heard voices again. Helooked around at the Sneakoscope. It was not moving.

“You cast the Muffliato charm over us, right?” hewhispered to Hermione.

“I did everything,” she whispered back, “Muffliato,Muggle-Repelling and Disillusionment Charms, all ofit. They shouldn’t be able to hear or see us, whoeverthey are.”

Heavy scuffing and scraping noises, plus the sound ofdislodged stones and twigs, told them that severalpeople were clambering down the steep, wooded slopethat descended to the narrow bank where they hadpitched the tent. They drew their wands, waiting. Theenchantments they had cast around themselvesought to be sufficient, in the near total darkness, toshield them from the notice of Muggles and normalwitches and wizards. If these were Death Eaters, thenperhaps their defenses were about to be tested byDark Magic for the first time.

The voices became louder but no more intelligible asthe group of men reached the bank. Harry estimatedthat their owners were fewer than twenty feet away,but the cascading river made it impossible to tell forsure. Hermione snatched up the beaded bag andstarted to rummage; after a moment she drew outthree Extendable Ears and threw one each to Harryand Ron, who hastily inserted the ends of the flesh-colored strings into their ears and fed the other endsout of the tent entrance.

Within seconds Harry heard a weary male voice.

“There ought to be a few salmon in here, or d’youreckon it’s too early in the season? Accio Salmon).”

Page | 331 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There were several distinct splashes and then theslapping sounds of fish against flesh. Somebodygrunted appreciatively. Harry pressed the ExtendableEar deeper into his own: Over the murmur of the riverhe could make out more voices, but they were notspeaking English or any human language he had everheard. It was a rough and unmelodious tongue, astring of rattling, guttural noises, and there seemed tobe two speakers, one with a slightly lower, slowervoice than the other.

A fire danced into life on the other side of the canvas;large shadows passed between tent and flames. Thedelicious smell of baking salmon wafted tantalizinglyin their direction. Then came the clinking of cutleryon plates, and the first man spoke again.

“Here, Griphook, Gornuk.”

Goblins\ Hermione mouthed at Harry, who nodded.

“Thank you,” said the goblins together in English.

“So, you three have been on the run how long?” askeda new, mellow, and pleasant voice; it was vaguelyfamiliar to Harry, who pictured a round-bellied,cheerful-faced man.

“Six weeks ... seven ... I forget,” said the tired man.“Met up with Griphook in the first couple of days andjoined forces with Gornuk not long after. Nice to havea bit of company.” There was a pause, while knivesscraped plates and tin mugs were picked up andreplaced on the ground. “What made you leave, Ted?”continued the man.

“Knew they were coming for me,” replied mellow-voiced Ted, and Harry suddenly knew who he was:Tonks’s father. “Heard Death Eaters were in the area

Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

last week and decided I’d better run for it. Refused toregister as a Muggle-born on principle, see, so I knewit was a matter of time, knew I’d have to leave in theend. My wife should be okay, she’s pure-blood. Andthen I met Dean here, what, a few days ago, son?”

“Yeah,” said another voice, and Harry, Ron, andHermione stared at each other, silent but besidethemselves with excitement, sure they recognized thevoice of Dean Thomas, their fellow Gryffindor.

“Muggle-born, eh?” asked the first man.

“Not sure,” said Dean. “My dad left my mum when Iwas a kid. I’ve got no proof he was a wizard, though.”

There was silence for a while, except for the sounds ofmunching; then Ted spoke again.

“I’ve got to say, Dirk, I’m surprised to run into you.Pleased, but surprised. Word was you’d been caught.”

“I was,” said Dirk. “I was halfway to Azkaban when Imade a break for it, Stunned Dawlish, and nicked hisbroom. It was easier than you’d think; I don’t reckonhe’s quite right at the moment. Might be Confunded.

If so, I’d like to shake the hand of the witch or wizardwho did it, probably saved my life.”

There was another pause in which the fire crackledand the river rushed on. Then Ted said, “And wheredo you two fit in? I, er, had the impression the goblinswere for You-Know-Who, on the whole.”

“You had a false impression,” said the higher-voicedof the goblins. “We take no sides. This is a wizards’war.”

“How come you’re in hiding, then?”

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I deemed it prudent,” said the deeper-voiced goblin.“Having refused what I considered an impertinentrequest, I could see that my personal safety was injeopardy.”

“What did they ask you to do?” asked Ted.

“Duties ill-befitting the dignity of my race,” replied thegoblin, his voice rougher and less human as he saidit. “I am not a house-elf.”

“What about you, Griphook?”

“Similar reasons,” said the higher-voiced goblin.“Gringotts is no longer under the sole control of myrace. I recognize no Wizarding master.”

He added something under his breath inGobbledegook, and Gornuk laughed.

“What’s the joke?” asked Dean.

“He said,” replied Dirk, “that there are things wizardsdon’t recognize, either.”

There was a short pause.

“I don’t get it,” said Dean.

“I had my small revenge before I left,” said Griphookin English.

“Good man — goblin, I should say,” amended Tedhastily. “Didn’t manage to lock a Death Eater up inone of the old high-security vaults, I suppose?”

“If I had, the sword would not have helped him breakout,” replied Griphook. Gornuk laughed again andeven Dirk gave a dry chuckle.

Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Dean and I are still missing something here,” saidTed.

“So is Severus Snape, though he does not know it,”said Griphook, and the two goblins roared withmalicious laughter. Inside the tent Harry’s breathingwas shallow with excitement: He and Hermione staredat each other, listening as hard as they could.

“Didn’t you hear about that, Ted?” asked Dirk. “Aboutthe kids who tried to steal Gryffindor’s sword out ofSnape’s office at Hogwarts?”

An electric current seemed to course through Harry,jangling his every nerve as he stood rooted to thespot.

“Never heard a word,” said Ted. “Not in the Prophet,was it?”

“Hardly,” chortled Dirk. “Griphook here told me, heheard about it from Bill Weasley who works for thebank. One of the kids who tried to take the sword wasBill’s younger sister.”

Harry glanced toward Hermione and Ron, both ofwhom were clutching the Extendable Ears as tightlyas lifelines.

“She and a couple of friends got into Snape’s officeand smashed open the glass case where he wasapparently keeping the sword. Snape caught them asthey were trying to smuggle it down the staircase.”

“Ah, God bless ’em,” said Ted. “What did they think,that they’d be able to use the sword on You-Know-Who? Or on Snape himself?”

Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Well, whatever they thought they were going to dowith it, Snape decided the sword wasn’t safe where itwas,” said Dirk. “Couple of days later, once he’d gotthe say-so from You-Know-Who, I imagine, he sent itdown to London to be kept in Gringotts instead.”

The goblins started to laugh again.

“I’m still not seeing the joke,” said Ted.

“It’s a fake,” rasped Griphook.

“The sword of Gryffindor!”

“Oh yes. It is a copy — an excellent copy, it is true —but it was Wizard-made. The original was forgedcenturies ago by goblins and had certain propertiesonly goblin-made armor possesses. Wherever thegenuine sword of Gryffindor is, it is not in a vault atGringotts bank.”

“I see,” said Ted. “And I take it you didn’t bothertelling the Death Eaters this?”

“I saw no reason to trouble them with theinformation,” said Griphook smugly, and now Ted andDean joined in Gornuk and Dirk’s laughter.

Inside the tent, Harry closed his eyes, willing someoneto ask the question he needed answered, and after aminute that seemed ten, Dean obliged; he was (Harryremembered with a jolt) an ex-boyfriend of Ginny’stoo.

“What happened to Ginny and the others? The oneswho tried to steal it?”

“Oh, they were punished, and cruelly,” said Griphookindifferently.

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“They’re okay, though?” asked Ted quickly. “I mean,the Weasleys don’t need any more of their kidsinjured, do they?”

“They suffered no serious injury, as far as I amaware,” said Griphook.

“Lucky for them,” said Ted. “With Snape’s trackrecord I suppose we should just be glad they’re stillalive.”

“You believe that story, then, do you, Ted?” askedDirk. “You believe Snape killed Dumbledore?”

“ ’Course I do,” said Ted. “You’re not going to sit thereand tell me you think Potter had anything to do withit?”

“Hard to know what to believe these days,” mutteredDirk.

“I know Harry Potter,” said Dean. “And I reckon he’sthe real thing — the Chosen One, or whatever youwant to call it.”

“Yeah, there’s a lot would like to believe he’s that,son,” said Dirk, “me included. But where is he? Runfor it, by the looks of things. You’d think, if he knewanything we don’t, or had anything special going forhim, he’d be out there now fighting, rallyingresistance, instead of hiding. And you know, theProphet made a pretty good case against him —”

“The Prophet?” scoffed Ted. “You deserve to be lied toif you’re still reading that muck, Dirk. You want thefacts, try the Quibbler.”

There was a sudden explosion of choking andretching, plus a good deal of thumping; by the sound

Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

of it, Dirk had swallowed a fish bone. At last hespluttered, “The Quibbler? That lunatic rag of XenoLovegood’s?”

“It’s not so lunatic these days,” said Ted. “You want togive it a look. Xeno is printing all the stuff theProphet’s ignoring, not a single mention of Crumple-Horned Snorkacks in the last issue. How long they’lllet him get away with it, mind, I don’t know. But Xenosays, front page of every issue, that any wizard who’sagainst You-Know-Who ought to make helping HarryPotter their number-one priority.”

“Hard to help a boy who’s vanished off the face of theearth,” said Dirk.

“Listen, the fact that they haven’t caught him yet’sone hell of an achievement,” said Ted. “I’d take tipsfrom him gladly; it’s what we’re trying to do, stay free,isn’t it?”

“Yeah, well, you’ve got a point there,” said Dirkheavily. “With the whole of the Ministry and all theirinformers looking for him I’d have expected him to becaught by now. Mind, who’s to say they haven’talready caught and killed him without publicizing it?”

“Ah, don’t say that, Dirk,” murmured Ted.

There was a long pause filled with more clattering ofknives and forks. When they spoke again it was todiscuss whether they ought to sleep on the bank orretreat back up the wooded slope. Deciding the treeswould give better cover, they extinguished their fire,then clambered back up the incline, their voicesfading away.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione reeled in the ExtendableEars. Harry, who had found the need to remain silent

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

increasingly difficult the longer they eavesdropped,now found himself unable to say more than, “Ginny— the sword —”

“I know!” said Hermione.

She lunged for the tiny beaded bag, this time sinkingher arm in it right up to the armpit.

“Here ... we ... are ...” she said between gritted teeth,and she pulled at something that was evidently in thedepths of the bag. Slowly the edge of an ornatepicture frame came into sight. Harry hurried to helpher. As they lifted the empty portrait of PhineasNigellus free of Hermione’s bag, she kept her wandpointing at it, ready to cast a spell at any moment.

“If somebody swapped the real sword for the fakewhile it was in Dumbledore’s office,” she panted, asthey propped the painting against the side of the tent,“Phineas Nigellus would have seen it happen, hehangs right beside the case!”

“Unless he was asleep,” said Harry, but he still heldhis breath as Hermione knelt down in front of theempty canvas, her wand directed at its center, clearedher throat, then said:

“Er — Phineas? Phineas Nigellus?”

Nothing happened.

“Phineas Nigellus?” said Hermione again. “ProfessorBlack? Please could we talk to you? Please?”

“ ‘Please’ always helps,” said a cold, snide voice, andPhineas Nigellus slid into his portrait. At once,Hermione cried:

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Obscuro\”

A black blindfold appeared over Phineas Nigellus’sclever, dark eyes, causing him to bump into the frameand shriek with pain.

“What — how dare — what are you — ?”

“I’m very sorry, Professor Black,” said Hermione, “butit’s a necessary precaution!”

“Remove this foul addition at once! Remove it, I say!You are ruining a great work of art! Where am I?

What is going on?”

“Never mind where we are,” said Harry, and PhineasNigellus froze, abandoning his attempts to peel off thepainted blindfold.

“Can that possibly be the voice of the elusive Mr.Potter?”

“Maybe,” said Harry, knowing that this would keepPhineas Nigellus’s interest. “We’ve got a couple ofquestions to ask you — about the sword ofGryffindor.”

“Ah,” said Phineas Nigellus, now turning his head thisway and that in an effort to catch sight of Harry, “yes.That silly girl acted most unwisely there —”

“Shut up about my sister,” said Ron roughly. PhineasNigellus raised supercilious eyebrows.

“Who else is here?” he asked, turning his head fromside to side. “Your tone displeases me! The girl andher friends were foolhardy in the extreme. Thievingfrom the headmaster!”

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“They weren’t thieving,” said Harry. “That sword isn’tSnape’s.”

“It belongs to Professor Snape’s school,” said PhineasNigellus. “Exactly what claim did the Weasley girlhave upon it? She deserved her punishment, as didthe idiot Longbottom and the Lovegood oddity!”

“Neville is not an idiot and Luna is not an oddity!”said Hermione.

“Where am I?” repeated Phineas Nigellus, starting towrestle with the blindfold again. “Where have youbrought me? Why have you removed me from thehouse of my forebears?”

“Never mind that! How did Snape punish Ginny,Neville, and Luna?” asked Harry urgently.

“Professor Snape sent them into the Forbidden Forest,to do some work for the oaf, Hagrid.”

“Hagrid’s not an oaf!” said Hermione shrilly.

“And Snape might’ve thought that was apunishment,” said Harry, “but Ginny, Neville, andLuna probably had a good laugh with Hagrid. TheForbidden Forest ... they’ve faced plenty worse thanthe Forbidden Forest, big deal!”

He felt relieved; he had been imagining horrors, theCruciatus Curse at the very least.

“What we really wanted to know, Professor Black, iswhether anyone else has, um, taken out the sword atall? Maybe it’s been taken away for cleaning or — orsomething?”

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Phineas Nigellus paused again in his struggles to freehis eyes and sniggered.

“Muggle-borns,” he said. “Goblin-made armor does notrequire cleaning, simple girl. Goblins’ silver repelsmundane dirt, imbibing only that which strengthensit.”

“Don’t call Hermione simple,” said Harry.

“I grow weary of contradiction,” said Phineas Nigellus.“Perhaps it is time for me to return to theheadmaster’s office?”

Still blindfolded, he began groping the side of hisframe, trying to feel his way out of his picture andback into the one at Hogwarts. Harry had a suddeninspiration.

“Dumbledore! Can’t you bring us Dumbledore?”

“I beg your pardon?” asked Phineas Nigellus.

“Professor Dumbledore’s portrait — couldn’t you bringhim along, here, into yours?”

Phineas Nigellus turned his face in the direction ofHarry’s voice.

“Evidently it is not only Muggle-borns who areignorant, Potter. The portraits of Hogwarts maycommune with each other, but they cannot traveloutside the castle except to visit a painting ofthemselves hanging elsewhere. Dumbledore cannotcome here with me, and after the treatment I havereceived at your hands, I can assure you that I shallnot be making a return visit!”

Page | 342 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Slightly crestfallen, Harry watched Phineas redoublehis attempts to leave his frame.

“Professor Black,” said Hermione, “couldn’t you justtell us, please, when was the last time the sword wastaken out of its case? Before Ginny took it out, Imean?”

Phineas snorted impatiently.

“I believe that the last time I saw the sword ofGryffindor leave its case was when ProfessorDumbledore used it to break open a ring.”

Hermione whipped around to look at Harry. Neither ofthem dared say more in front of Phineas Nigellus, whohad at last managed to locate the exit.

“Well, good night to you,” he said a little waspishly,and he began to move out of sight again. Only theedge of his hat brim remained in view when Harrygave a sudden shout.

“Wait! Have you told Snape you saw this?”

Phineas Nigellus stuck his blindfolded head back intothe picture.

“Professor Snape has more important things on hismind than the many eccentricities of AlbusDumbledore. Good-bye, Potter!”

And with that, he vanished completely, leaving behindhim nothing but his murky backdrop.

“Harry!” Hermione cried.

“I know!” Harry shouted. Unable to contain himself,he punched the air; it was more than he had dared to

Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

hope for. He strode up and down the tent, feeling thathe could have run a mile; he did not even feel hungryanymore. Hermione was squashing Phineas Nigellus’sportrait back into the beaded bag; when she hadfastened the clasp she threw the bag aside and raiseda shining face to Harry.

“The sword can destroy Horcruxes! Goblin-madeblades imbibe only that which strengthen them —Harry, that sword’s impregnated with basiliskvenom!”

“And Dumbledore didn’t give it to me because he stillneeded it, he wanted to use it on the locket —”

“— and he must have realized they wouldn’t let youhave it if he put it in his will —”

“— so he made a copy —”

“— and put a fake in the glass case —”

“— and he left the real one — where?”

They gazed at each other; Harry felt that the answerwas dangling invisibly in the air above them,tantalizingly close. Why hadn’t Dumbledore told him?Or had he, in fact, told Harry, but Harry had notrealized it at the time?

“Think!” whispered Hermione. “Think! Where wouldhe have left it?”

“Not at Hogwarts,” said Harry, resuming his pacing.

“Somewhere in Hogsmeade?” suggested Hermione.

“The Shrieking Shack?” said Harry. “Nobody ever goesin there.”

Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But Snape knows how to get in, wouldn’t that be abit risky?”

“Dumbledore trusted Snape,” Harry reminded her.

“Not enough to tell him that he had swapped theswords,” said Hermione.

“Yeah, you’re right!” said Harry, and he felt even morecheered at the thought that Dumbledore had hadsome reservations, however faint, about Snape’strustworthiness. “So, would he have hidden the swordwell away from Hogsmeade, then? What d’you reckon,Ron? Ron?”

Harry looked around. For one bewildered moment hethought that Ron had left the tent, then realized thatRon was lying in the shadow of a lower bunk, lookingstony.

“Oh, remembered me, have you?” he said.

“What?”

Ron snorted as he stared up at the underside of theupper bunk.

“You two carry on. Don’t let me spoil your fun.”

Perplexed, Harry looked to Hermione for help, but sheshook her head, apparently as nonplussed as he was.

“What’s the problem?” asked Harry.

“Problem? There’s no problem,” said Ron, stillrefusing to look at Harry. “Not according to you,anyway.”

Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There were several plunks on the canvas over theirheads. It had started to rain.

“Well, you’ve obviously got a problem,” said Harry.“Spit it out, will you?”

Ron swung his long legs off the bed and sat up. Helooked mean, unlike himself.

“All right, I’ll spit it out. Don’t expect me to skip upand down the tent because there’s some other damnthing we’ve got to find. Just add it to the list of stuffyou don’t know.”

“I don’t know?” repeated Harry, “I don’t know?”

Plunk, plunk, plunk. The rain was falling harder andheavier; it pattered on the leaf-strewn bank all aroundthem and into the river chattering through the dark.Dread doused Harry’s jubilation: Ron was sayingexactly what he had suspected and feared him to bethinking.

“It’s not like I’m not having the time of my life here,”said Ron, “you know, with my arm mangled andnothing to eat and freezing my backside off everynight. I just hoped, you know, after we’d beenrunning round a few weeks, we’d have achievedsomething.”

“Ron,” Hermione said, but in such a quiet voice thatRon could pretend not to have heard it over the loudtattoo the rain was now beating on the tent.

“I thought you knew what you’d signed up for,” saidHarry.

“Yeah, I thought I did too.”

Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“So what part of it isn’t living up to yourexpectations?” asked Harry. Anger was coming to hisdefense now. “Did you think we’d be staying in five-star hotels? Finding a Horcrux every other day? Didyou think you’d be back to Mummy by Christmas?”

“We thought you knew what you were doing!” shoutedRon, standing up, and his words pierced Harry likescalding knives. “We thought Dumbledore had toldyou what to do, we thought you had a real plan!”

“Ron!” said Hermione, this time clearly audible overthe rain thundering on the tent roof, but again, heignored her.

“Well, sorry to let you down,” said Harry, his voicequite calm even though he felt hollow, inadequate.

“I’ve been straight with you from the start, I told youeverything Dumbledore told me. And in case youhaven’t noticed, we’ve found one Horcrux —”

“Yeah, and we’re about as near getting rid of it as weare to finding the rest of them — nowhere effing near,in other words!”

“Take off the locket, Ron,” Hermione said, her voiceunusually high. “Please take it off. You wouldn’t betalking like this if you hadn’t been wearing it all day.”

“Yeah, he would,” said Harry, who did not wantexcuses made for Ron. “D’you think I haven’t noticedthe two of you whispering behind my back? D’youthink I didn’t guess you were thinking this stuff?”

“Harry, we weren’t —”

“Don’t lie!” Ron hurled at her. “You said it too, yousaid you were disappointed, you said you’d thoughthe had a bit more to go on than —”

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I didn’t say it like that — Harry, I didn’t!” she cried.

The rain was pounding the tent, tears were pouringdown Hermione’s face, and the excitement of a fewminutes before had vanished as if it had never been, ashort-lived firework that had flared and died, leavingeverything dark, wet, and cold. The sword ofGryffindor was hidden they knew not where, and theywere three teenagers in a tent whose onlyachievement was not, yet, to be dead.

“So why are you still here?” Harry asked Ron.

“Search me,” said Ron.

“Go home then,” said Harry.

“Yeah, maybe I will!” shouted Ron, and he tookseveral steps toward Harry, who did not back away.“Didn’t you hear what they said about my sister? Butyou don’t give a rat’s fart, do you, it’s only theForbidden Forest, Harry I’ve-Faced-Worse Potterdoesn’t care what happens to her in here — well, I do,all right, giant spiders and mental stuff —”

“I was only saying — she was with the others, theywere with Hagrid —”

“Yeah, I get it, you don’t care! And what about therest of my family, ‘the Weasleys don’t need anotherkid injured,’ did you hear that?”

“Yeah, I —”

“Not bothered what it meant, though?”

“Ron!” said Hermione, forcing her way between them.“I don’t think it means anything new has happened,anything we don’t know about; think, Ron, Bill’s

Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

already scarred, plenty of people must have seen thatGeorge has lost an ear by now, and you’re supposedto be on your deathbed with spattergroit, I’m surethat’s all he meant —”

“Oh, you’re sure, are you? Right then, well, I won’tbother myself about them. It’s all right for you two,isn’t it, with your parents safely out of the way —”

“My parents are dead).” Harry bellowed.

“And mine could be going the same way!” yelled Ron.

“Then GO!” roared Harry. “Go back to them, pretendyou’ve got over your spattergroit and Mummy’ll beable to feed you up and —”

Ron made a sudden movement: Harry reacted, butbefore either wand was clear of its owner’s pocket,Hermione had raised her own.

“Protego\” she cried, and an invisible shield expandedbetween her and Harry on the one side and Ron onthe other; all of them were forced backward a fewsteps by the strength of the spell, and Harry and Ronglared from either side of the transparent barrier asthough they were seeing each other clearly for thefirst time. Harry felt a corrosive hatred toward Ron:Something had broken between them.

“Leave the Horcrux,” Harry said.

Ron wrenched the chain from over his head and castthe locket into a nearby chair. He turned toHermione.

“What are you doing?”

“What do you mean?”

Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Are you staying, or what?”

“I ...” She looked anguished. “Yes — yes, I’m staying.Ron, we said we’d go with Harry, we said we’d help —”

“I get it. You choose him.”

“Ron, no — please — come back, come back!”

She was impeded by her own Shield Charm; by thetime she had removed it he had already stormed intothe night. Harry stood quite still and silent, listeningto her sobbing and calling Ron’s name amongst thetrees.

After a few minutes she returned, her sopping hairplastered to her face.

“He’s g-g-gone! Disapparated!”

She threw herself into a chair, curled up, and startedto cry.

Harry felt dazed. He stooped, picked up the Horcrux,and placed it around his own neck. He draggedblankets off Ron’s bunk and threw them overHermione. Then he climbed onto his own bed andstared up at the dark canvas roof, listening to thepounding of the rain.

Page | 350 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





GODRIC’S HOLLOW

When Harry woke the following day it was severalseconds before he remembered what had happened.Then he hoped, childishly, that it had been a dream,that Ron was still there and had never left. Yet byturning his head on his pillow he could see Ron’sdeserted bunk. It was like a dead body in the way itseemed to draw his eyes. Harry jumped down fromhis own bed, keeping his eyes averted from Ron’s.Hermione, who was already busy in the kitchen, didnot wish Harry good morning, but turned her faceaway quickly as he went by.

He’s gone, Harry told himself. He’s gone. He had tokeep thinking it as he washed and dressed, as thoughrepetition would dull the shock of it. He’s gone andhe’s not coming back. And that was the simple truthof it, Harry knew, because their protectiveenchantments meant that it would be impossible,once they vacated this spot, for Ron to find themagain.

Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He and Hermione ate breakfast in silence. Hermione’seyes were puffy and red; she looked as if she had notslept. They packed up their things, Hermionedawdling. Harry knew why she wanted to spin outtheir time on the riverbank; several times he saw herlook up eagerly, and he was sure she had deludedherself into thinking that she heard footsteps throughthe heavy rain, but no red-haired figure appearedbetween the trees. Every time Harry imitated her,looked around (for he could not help hoping a little,himself) and saw nothing but rain-swept woods,another little parcel of fury exploded inside him. Hecould hear Ron saying, “ We thought you knew whatyou were doing\”, and he resumed packing with ahard knot in the pit of his stomach.

The muddy river beside them was rising rapidly andwould soon spill over onto their bank. They hadlingered a good hour after they would usually havedeparted their campsite. Finally having entirelyrepacked the beaded bag three times, Hermioneseemed unable to find any more reasons to delay: Sheand Harry grasped hands and Disapparated,reappearing on a windswept heather-covered hillside.

The instant they arrived, Hermione dropped Harry’shand and walked away from him, finally sitting downon a large rock, her face on her knees, shaking withwhat he knew were sobs. He watched her, supposingthat he ought to go and comfort her, but somethingkept him rooted to the spot. Everything inside him feltcold and tight: Again he saw the contemptuousexpression on Ron’s face. Harry strode off through theheather, walking in a large circle with the distraughtHermione at its center, casting the spells she usuallyperformed to ensure their protection.

They did not discuss Ron at all over the next fewdays. Harry was determined never to mention his

Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

name again, and Hermione seemed to know that itwas no use forcing the issue, although sometimes atnight when she thought he was sleeping, he wouldhear her crying. Meanwhile Harry had startedbringing out the Marauder’s Map and examining it bywandlight. He was waiting for the moment whenRon’s labeled dot would reappear in the corridors ofHogwarts, proving that he had returned to thecomfortable castle, protected by his status ofpureblood. However, Ron did not appear on the map,and after a while Harry found himself taking it outsimply to stare at Ginny’s name in the girls’dormitory, wondering whether the intensity withwhich he gazed at it might break into her sleep, thatshe would somehow know he was thinking about her,hoping that she was all right.

By day, they devoted themselves to trying todetermine the possible locations of Gryffindor’ssword, but the more they talked about the places inwhich Dumbledore might have hidden it, the moredesperate and far-fetched their speculation became.Cudgel his brains though he might, Harry could notremember Dumbledore ever mentioning a place inwhich he might hide something. There were momentswhen he did not know whether he was angrier withRon or with Dumbledore. We thought you knew whatyou were doing. ... We thought Dumbledore had toldyou what to do. ... We thought you had a real plan\

He could not hide it from himself: Ron had been right.Dumbledore had left him with virtually nothing. Theyhad discovered one Horcrux, but they had no meansof destroying it: The others were as unattainable asthey had ever been. Hopelessness threatened toengulf him. He was staggered now to think of his ownpresumption in accepting his friends’ offers toaccompany him on this meandering, pointlessjourney. He knew nothing, he had no ideas, and hePage | 353 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

was constantly, painfully on the alert for anyindication that Hermione too was about to tell himthat she had had enough, that she was leaving.

They were spending many evenings in near silence,and Hermione took to bringing out Phineas Nigellus’sportrait and propping it up in a chair, as though hemight fill part of the gaping hole left by Ron’sdeparture. Despite his previous assertion that hewould never visit them again, Phineas Nigellus did notseem able to resist the chance to find out more aboutwhat Harry was up to, and consented to reappear,blindfolded, every few days or so. Harry was even gladto see him, because he was company, albeit of a snideand taunting kind. They relished any news aboutwhat was happening at Hogwarts, though PhineasNigellus was not an ideal informer. He veneratedSnape, the first Slytherin headmaster since hehimself had controlled the school, and they had to becareful not to criticize or ask impertinent questionsabout Snape, or Phineas Nigellus would instantlyleave his painting.

However, he did let drop certain snippets. Snapeseemed to be facing a constant, low level of mutinyfrom a hard core of students. Ginny had been bannedfrom going into Hogsmeade. Snape had reinstatedUmbridge’s old decree forbidding gatherings of threeor more students or any unofficial student societies.

From all of these things, Harry deduced that Ginny,and probably Neville and Luna along with her, hadbeen doing their best to continue Dumbledore’s Army.This scant news made Harry want to see Ginny sobadly it felt like a stomachache; but it also made himthink of Ron again, and of Dumbledore, and ofHogwarts itself, which he missed nearly as much ashis ex-girlfriend. Indeed, as Phineas Nigellus talkedabout Snape’s crackdown, Harry experienced a splitPage | 354 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

second of madness when he imagined simply goingback to school to join the destabilization of Snape’sregime: Being fed, and having a soft bed, and otherpeople being in charge, seemed the most wonderfulprospect in the world at that moment. But then heremembered that he was Undesirable Number One,that there was a ten-thousand-Galleon price on hishead, and that to walk into Hogwarts these days wasjust as dangerous as walking into the Ministry ofMagic. Indeed, Phineas Nigellus inadvertentlyemphasized this fact by slipping in leading questionsabout Harry and Hermione’s whereabouts. Hermioneshoved him back inside the beaded bag every time hedid this, and Phineas Nigellus invariably refused toreappear for several days after these unceremoniousgood-byes.

The weather grew colder and colder. They did notdare remain in any one area too long, so rather thanstaying in the south of England, where a hard groundfrost was the worst of their worries, they continued tomeander up and down the country, braving amountainside, where sleet pounded the tent; a wide,flat marsh, where the tent was flooded with chillwater; and a tiny island in the middle of a Scottishloch, where snow half buried the tent in the night.

They had already spotted Christmas trees twinklingfrom several sitting room windows before there camean evening when Harry resolved to suggest, again,what seemed to him the only unexplored avenue leftto them. They had just eaten an unusually good meal:Hermione had been to a supermarket under theInvisibility Cloak (scrupulously dropping the moneyinto an open till as she left), and Harry thought thatshe might be more persuadable than usual on astomach full of spaghetti Bolognese and tinned pears.He had also had the foresight to suggest that theytake a few hours’ break from wearing the Horcrux,Page | 355 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

which was hanging over the end of the bunk besidehim.

“Hermione?”

“Hmm?” She was curled up in one of the saggingarmchairs with The Tales of Beedle the Bard. He couldnot imagine how much more she could get out of thebook, which was not, after all, very long; but evidentlyshe was still deciphering something in it, becauseSpellman’s Syllabary lay open on the arm of the chair.

Harry cleared his throat. He felt exactly as he haddone on the occasion, several years previously, whenhe had asked Professor McGonagall whether he couldgo into Hogsmeade, despite the fact that he had notpersuaded the Dursleys to sign his permission slip.

“Hermione, I’ve been thinking, and —”

“Harry, could you help me with something?”

Apparently she had not been listening to him. Sheleaned forward and held out The Tales of Beedle theBard.

“Look at that symbol,” she said, pointing to the top ofa page. Above what Harry assumed was the title ofthe story (being unable to read runes, he could not besure), there was a picture of what looked like atriangular eye, its pupil crossed with a vertical line.

“I never took Ancient Runes, Hermione.”

“I know that, but it isn’t a rune and it’s not in thesyllabary, either. All along I thought it was a pictureof an eye, but I don’t think it is! It’s been inked in,look, somebody’s drawn it there, it isn’t really part ofthe book. Think, have you ever seen it before?”

Page | 356 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No ... No, wait a moment.” Harry looked closer. “Isn’tit the same symbol Luna’s dad was wearing round hisneck?”

“Well, that’s what I thought too!”

“Then it’s Grindelwald’s mark.”

She stared at him, openmouthed.

“What?”

“Krum told me ...”

He recounted the story that Viktor Krum had told himat the wedding. Hermione looked astonished.

“Grindelwald’s mark?”

She looked from Harry to the weird symbol and backagain. “I’ve never heard that Grindelwald had a mark.There’s no mention of it in anything I’ve ever readabout him.”

“Well, like I say, Krum reckoned that symbol wascarved on a wall at Durmstrang, and Grindelwald putit there.”

She fell back into the old armchair, frowning.

“That’s very odd. If it’s a symbol of Dark Magic, what’sit doing in a book of children’s stories?”

“Yeah, it is weird,” said Harry. “And you’d thinkScrimgeour would have recognized it. He wasMinister, he ought to have been expert on Dark stuff.”

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I know. ... Perhaps he thought it was an eye, just likeI did. All the other stories have little pictures over thetitles.”

She did not speak, but continued to pore over thestrange mark. Harry tried again.

“Hermione?”

“Hmm?”

“I’ve been thinking. I — I want to go to Godric’sHollow.”

She looked up at him, but her eyes were unfocused,and he was sure she was still thinking about themysterious mark on the book.

“Yes,” she said. “Yes, I’ve been wondering that too. Ireally think we’ll have to.”

“Did you hear me right?” he asked.

“Of course I did. You want to go to Godric’s Hollow. Iagree, I think we should. I mean, I can’t think ofanywhere else it could be either. It’ll be dangerous,but the more I think about it, the more likely it seemsit’s there.”

“Er — what’s there?” asked Harry.

At that, she looked just as bewildered as he felt.

“Well, the sword, Harry! Dumbledore must haveknown you’d want to go back there, and I mean,Godric’s Hollow is Godric Gryffindor’s birthplace —”

“Really? Gryffindor came from Godric’s Hollow?”

Page | 358 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, did you ever even open A History of Magic?”

“Erm,” he said, smiling for what felt like the first timein months: The muscles in his face felt oddly stiff. “Imight’ve opened it, you know, when I bought it ... justthe once. ...”

“Well, as the village is named after him I’d havethought you might have made the connection,” saidHermione. She sounded much more like her old selfthan she had done of late; Harry half expected her toannounce that she was off to the library. “There’s abit about the village in A History of Magic, wait ...”

She opened the beaded bag and rummaged for awhile, finally extracting her copy of their old schooltextbook, A History of Magic by Bathilda Bagshot,which she thumbed through until finding the pageshe wanted.

“ ‘Upon the signature of the International Statute ofSecrecy in 1689, wizards went into hiding for good. Itwas natural, perhaps, that they formed their ownsmall communities within a community. Many smallvillages and hamlets attracted several magicalfamilies, who banded together for mutual support andprotection. The villages of Tinworth in Cornwall, UpperFlagley in Yorkshire, and Ottery St. Catchpole on thesouth coast of England were notable homes to knots ofWizarding families who lived alongside tolerant andsometimes Confunded Muggles. Most celebrated ofthese half-magical dwelling places is, perhaps,

Godric’s Hollow, the West Country village where thegreat wizard Godric Gryffindor was born, and whereBowman Wright, Wizarding smith, forged the firstGolden Snitch. The graveyard is full of the names ofancient magical families, and this accounts, no doubt,for the stories of hauntings that have dogged the littlechurch beside it for many centuries.’

Page | 359 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You and your parents aren’t mentioned,” Hermionesaid, closing the book, “because Professor Bagshotdoesn’t cover anything later than the end of thenineteenth century. But you see? Godric’s Hollow,Godric Gryffindor, Gryffindor’s sword; don’t you thinkDumbledore would have expected you to make theconnection?”

“Ohyeah ...”

Harry did not want to admit that he had not beenthinking about the sword at all when he suggestedthey go to Godric’s Hollow. For him, the lure of thevillage lay in his parents’ graves, the house where hehad narrowly escaped death, and in the person ofBathilda Bagshot.

“Remember what Muriel said?” he asked eventually.“Who?”

“You know,” he hesitated: He did not want to sayRon’s name. “Ginny’s great-aunt. At the wedding. Theone who said you had skinny ankles.”

“Oh,” said Hermione. It was a sticky moment: Harryknew that she had sensed Ron’s name in the offing.He rushed on:

“She said Bathilda Bagshot still lives in Godric’sHollow.”

“Bathilda Bagshot,” murmured Hermione, runningher index finger over Bathilda’s embossed name onthe front cover of A History of Magic. “Well, I suppose

She gasped so dramatically that Harry’s insidesturned over; he drew his wand, looking around at the

Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

entrance, half expecting to see a hand forcing its waythrough the entrance flap, but there was nothingthere.

“What?” he said, half angry, half relieved. “What didyou do that for? I thought you’d seen a Death Eaterunzipping the tent, at least —”

“Harry, what if Bathilda’s got the sword? What ifDumbledore entrusted it to her?”

Harry considered this possibility. Bathilda would bean extremely old woman by now, and according toMuriel, she was “gaga.” Was it likely that Dumbledorewould have hidden the sword of Gryffindor with her?

If so, Harry felt that Dumbledore had left a great dealto chance: Dumbledore had never revealed that hehad replaced the sword with a fake, nor had he somuch as mentioned a friendship with Bathilda. Now,however, was not the moment to cast doubt onHermione’s theory, not when she was so surprisinglywilling to fall in with Harry’s dearest wish.

“Yeah, he might have done! So, are we going to go toGodric’s Hollow?”

“Yes, but we’ll have to think it through carefully,Harry.” She was sitting up now, and Harry could tellthat the prospect of having a plan again had lifted hermood as much as his. “We’ll need to practiceDisapparating together under the Invisibility Cloak fora start, and perhaps Disillusionment Charms wouldbe sensible too, unless you think we should go thewhole hog and use Polyjuice Potion? In that case we’llneed to collect hair from somebody. I actually thinkwe’d better do that, Harry, the thicker our disguisesthe better. ...”

Page | 361 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry let her talk, nodding and agreeing wheneverthere was a pause, but his mind had left theconversation. For the first time since he haddiscovered that the sword in Gringotts was a fake, hefelt excited.

He was about to go home, about to return to the placewhere he had had a family. It was in Godric’s Hollowthat, but for Voldemort, he would have grown up andspent every school holiday. He could have invitedfriends to his house. ... He might even have hadbrothers and sisters. ... It would have been hismother who had made his seventeenth birthday cake.The life he had lost had hardly ever seemed so real tohim as at this moment, when he knew he was aboutto see the place where it had been taken from him.After Hermione had gone to bed that night, Harryquietly extracted his rucksack from Hermione’sbeaded bag, and from inside it, the photograph albumHagrid had given him so long ago. For the first time inmonths, he perused the old pictures of his parents,smiling and waving up at him from the images, whichwere all he had left of them now.

Harry would gladly have set out for Godric’s Hollowthe following day, but Hermione had other ideas.Convinced as she was that Voldemort would expectHarry to return to the scene of his parents’ deaths,she was determined that they would set off only afterthey had ensured that they had the best disguisespossible. It was therefore a full week later — oncethey had surreptitiously obtained hairs from innocentMuggles who were Christmas shopping, and hadpracticed Apparating and Disapparating whileunderneath the Invisibility Cloak together — thatHermione agreed to make the journey.

They were to Apparate to the village under cover ofdarkness, so it was late afternoon when they finally

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

swallowed Polyjuice Potion, Harry transforming into abalding, middle-aged Muggle man, Hermione into hissmall and rather mousy wife. The beaded bagcontaining all of their possessions (apart from theHorcrux, which Harry was wearing around his neck)was tucked into an inside pocket of Hermione’sbuttoned-up coat. Harry lowered the Invisibility Cloakover them, then they turned into the suffocatingdarkness once again.

Heart beating in his throat, Harry opened his eyes.They were standing hand in hand in a snowy laneunder a dark blue sky, in which the night’s first starswere already glimmering feebly. Cottages stood oneither side of the narrow road, Christmas decorationstwinkling in their windows. A short way ahead ofthem, a glow of golden streetlights indicated thecenter of the village.

“All this snow!” Hermione whispered beneath thecloak. “Why didn’t we think of snow? After all ourprecautions, we’ll leave prints! We’ll just have to getrid of them — you go in front, I’ll do it —”

Harry did not want to enter the village like apantomime horse, trying to keep themselvesconcealed while magically covering their traces.

“Let’s take off the Cloak,” said Harry, and when shelooked frightened, “Oh, come on, we don’t look like usand there’s no one around.”

He stowed the Cloak under his jacket and they madetheir way forward unhampered, the icy air stingingtheir faces as they passed more cottages: Any one ofthem might have been the one in which James andLily had once lived or where Bathilda lived now. Harrygazed at the front doors, their snow-burdened roofs,and their front porches, wondering whether hePage | 363 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

remembered any of them, knowing deep inside that itwas impossible, that he had been little more than ayear old when he had left this place forever. He wasnot even sure whether he would be able to see thecottage at all; he did not know what happened whenthe subjects of a Fidelius Charm died. Then the littlelane along which they were walking curved to the leftand the heart of the village, a small square, wasrevealed to them.

Strung all around with colored lights, there was whatlooked like a war memorial in the middle, partlyobscured by a windblown Christmas tree. There wereseveral shops, a post office, a pub, and a little churchwhose stained-glass windows were glowing jewel-bright across the square.

The snow here had become impacted: It was hard andslippery where people had trodden on it all day.Villagers were crisscrossing in front of them, theirfigures briefly illuminated by streetlamps. They hearda snatch of laughter and pop music as the pub dooropened and closed; then they heard a carol start upinside the little church.

“Harry, I think it’s Christmas Eve!” said Hermione.

“Is it?”

He had lost track of the date; they had not seen anewspaper for weeks.

“I’m sure it is,” said Hermione, her eyes upon thechurch. “They ... they’ll be in there, won’t they? Yourmum and dad? I can see the graveyard behind it.”

Harry felt a thrill of something that was beyondexcitement, more like fear. Now that he was so near,he wondered whether he wanted to see after all.

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Perhaps Hermione knew how he was feeling, becauseshe reached for his hand and took the lead for thefirst time, pulling him forward. Halfway across thesquare, however, she stopped dead.

“Harry, look!”

She was pointing at the war memorial. As they hadpassed it, it had transformed. Instead of an obeliskcovered in names, there was a statue of three people:a man with untidy hair and glasses, a woman withlong hair and a kind, pretty face, and a baby boysitting in his mother’s arms. Snow lay upon all theirheads, like fluffy white caps.

Harry drew closer, gazing up into his parents’ faces.He had never imagined that there would be a statue.

... How strange it was to see himself represented instone, a happy baby without a scar on his forehead.

“C’mon,” said Harry, when he had looked his fill, andthey turned again toward the church. As they crossedthe road, he glanced over his shoulder; the statue hadturned back into the war memorial.

The singing grew louder as they approached thechurch. It made Harry’s throat constrict, it remindedhim so forcefully of Hogwarts, of Peeves bellowingrude versions of carols from inside suits of armor, ofthe Great Hall’s twelve Christmas trees, ofDumbledore wearing a bonnet he had won in acracker, of Ron in a hand-knitted sweater. ...

There was a kissing gate at the entrance to thegraveyard. Hermione pushed it open as quietly aspossible and they edged through it. On either side ofthe slippery path to the church doors, the snow laydeep and untouched. They moved off through thePage | 365 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

snow, carving deep trenches behind them as theywalked around the building, keeping to the shadowsbeneath the brilliant windows.

Behind the church, row upon row of snowytombstones protruded from a blanket of pale bluethat was flecked with dazzling red, gold, and greenwherever the reflections from the stained glass hit thesnow. Keeping his hand closed tightly on the wand inhis jacket pocket, Harry moved toward the nearestgrave.

“Look at this, it’s an Abbott, could be some long-lostrelation of Hannah’s!”

“Keep your voice down,” Hermione begged him.

They waded deeper and deeper into the graveyard,gouging dark tracks into the snow behind them,stooping to peer at the words on old headstones,every now and then squinting into the surroundingdarkness to make absolutely sure that they wereunaccompanied.

“Harry, here!”

Hermione was two rows of tombstones away; he hadto wade back to her, his heart positively banging inhis chest.

“Is it — ?”

“No, but look!”

She pointed to the dark stone. Harry stooped downand saw, upon the frozen, lichen-spotted granite, thewords KENDRA DUMBLEDORE and, a short waybelow her dates of birth and death, AND HERDAUGHTER ARIANA. There was also a quotation:Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

So Rita Skeeter and Muriel had got some of their factsright. The Dumbledore family had indeed lived here,and part of it had died here.

Seeing the grave was worse than hearing about it.Harry could not help thinking that he andDumbledore both had deep roots in this graveyard,and that Dumbledore ought to have told him so, yethe had never thought to share the connection. Theycould have visited the place together; for a momentHarry imagined coming here with Dumbledore, ofwhat a bond that would have been, of how much itwould have meant to him. But it seemed that toDumbledore, the fact that their families lay side byside in the same graveyard had been an unimportantcoincidence, irrelevant, perhaps, to the job he wantedHarry to do.

Hermione was looking at Harry, and he was glad thathis face was hidden in shadow. He read the words onthe tombstone again. Where your treasure is, therewill your heart be also. He did not understand whatthese words meant. Surely Dumbledore had chosenthem, as the eldest member of the family once hismother had died.

“Are you sure he never mentioned — ?” Hermionebegan.

“No,” said Harry curtly, then, “let’s keep looking,” andhe turned away, wishing he had not seen the stone:

He did not want his excited trepidation tainted withresentment.

“Here!” cried Hermione again a few moments laterfrom out of the darkness. “Oh no, sorry! I thought itsaid Potter.”

Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

She was rubbing at a crumbling, mossy stone, gazingdown at it, a little frown on her face.

“Harry, come back a moment.”

He did not want to be sidetracked again, and onlygrudgingly made his way back through the snowtoward her.

“What?”

“Look at this!”

The grave was extremely old, weathered so that Harrycould hardly make out the name. Hermione showedhim the symbol beneath it.

“Harry, that’s the mark in the book!”

He peered at the place she indicated: The stone wasso worn that it was hard to make out what wasengraved there, though there did seem to be atriangular mark beneath the nearly illegible name.

“Yeah ... it could be. ...”

Hermione lit her wand and pointed it at the name onthe headstone.

“It says Ig — Ignotus, I think. ...”

“I’m going to keep looking for my parents, all right?”Harry told her, a slight edge to his voice, and he setoff again, leaving her crouched beside the old grave.

Every now and then he recognized a surname that,like Abbott, he had met at Hogwarts. Sometimes therewere several generations of the same Wizarding familyrepresented in the graveyard: Harry could tell from

Page | 368 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the dates that it had either died out, or the currentmembers had moved away from Godric’s Hollow.Deeper and deeper amongst the graves he went, andevery time he reached a new headstone he felt a littlelurch of apprehension and anticipation.

The darkness and the silence seemed to become, all ofa sudden, much deeper. Harry looked around,worried, thinking of dementors, then realized that thecarols had finished, that the chatter and flurry ofchurchgoers were fading away as they made their wayback into the square. Somebody inside the churchhad just turned off the lights.

Then Hermione’s voice came out of the blackness forthe third time, sharp and clear from a few yardsaway.

“Harry, they’re here ... right here.”

And he knew by her tone that it was his mother andfather this time: He moved toward her, feeling as ifsomething heavy were pressing on his chest, thesame sensation he had had right after Dumbledorehad died, a grief that had actually weighed on hisheart and lungs.

The headstone was only two rows behind Kendra andAriana’s. It was made of white marble, just likeDumbledore’s tomb, and this made it easy to read, asit seemed to shine in the dark. Harry did not need tokneel or even approach very close to it to make outthe words engraved upon it.

JAMES POTTERBORN 27 MARCH 1960

LILY POTTER

BORN 30 JANUARY 1960

Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

DIED 31 OCTOBER 1981

The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death.

Harry read the words slowly, as though he wouldhave only one chance to take in their meaning, andhe read the last of them aloud.

“ The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death’...”

A horrible thought came to him, and with it a kind ofpanic. “Isn’t that a Death Eater idea? Why is thatthere?”

“It doesn’t mean defeating death in the way the DeathEaters mean it, Harry,” said Hermione, her voicegentle. “It means ... you know ... living beyond death.Living after death.”

But they were not living, thought Harry: They weregone. The empty words could not disguise the factthat his parents’ moldering remains lay beneath snowand stone, indifferent, unknowing. And tears camebefore he could stop them, boiling hot then instantlyfreezing on his face, and what was the point in wipingthem off or pretending? He let them fall, his lipspressed hard together, looking down at the thicksnow hiding from his eyes the place where the last ofLily and James lay, bones now, surely, or dust, notknowing or caring that their living son stood so near,his heart still beating, alive because of their sacrificeand close to wishing, at this moment, that he wassleeping under the snow with them.

Hermione had taken his hand again and was grippingit tightly. He could not look at her, but returned thepressure, now taking deep, sharp gulps of the nightair, trying to steady himself, trying to regain control.He should have brought something to give them, andhe had not thought of it, and every plant in thePage | 370 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

graveyard was leafless and frozen. But Hermioneraised her wand, moved it in a circle through the air,and a wreath of Christmas roses blossomed beforethem. Harry caught it and laid it on his parents’grave.

As soon as he stood up he wanted to leave: He did notthink he could stand another moment there. He puthis arm around Hermione’s shoulders, and she puthers around his waist, and they turned in silence andwalked away through the snow, past Dumbledore’smother and sister, back toward the dark church andthe out-of-sight kissing gate.

Page | 371 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





BATHILDA’S SECRET

“Harry, stop.”

“What’s wrong?”

They had only just reached the grave of the unknownAbbott.

“There’s someone there. Someone watching us. I cantell. There, over by the bushes.”

They stood quite still, holding on to each other, gazingat the dense black boundary of the graveyard. Harrycould not see anything.

“Are you sure?”

“I saw something move, I could have sworn I did. ...”She broke from him to free her wand arm.

“We look like Muggles,” Harry pointed out.

Page | 372 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Muggles who’ve just been laying flowers on yourparents’ grave! Harry, I’m sure there’s someone overthere!”

Harry thought of A History of Magic; the graveyardwas supposed to be haunted: what if — ? But then heheard a rustle and saw a little eddy of dislodged snowin the bush to which Hermione had pointed. Ghostscould not move snow.

“It’s a cat,” said Harry, after a second or two, “or abird. If it was a Death Eater we’d be dead by now. Butlet’s get out of here, and we can put the Cloak backon.”

They glanced back repeatedly as they made their wayout of the graveyard. Harry, who did not feel assanguine as he had pretended when reassuringHermione, was glad to reach the gate and the slipperypavement. They pulled the Invisibility Cloak back overthemselves. The pub was fuller than before: Manyvoices inside it were now singing the carol that theyhad heard as they approached the church. For amoment Harry considered suggesting they take refugeinside it, but before he could say anything Hermionemurmured, “Let’s go this way,” and pulled him downthe dark street leading out of the village in theopposite direction from which they had entered. Harrycould make out the point where the cottages endedand the lane turned into open country again. Theywalked as quickly as they dared, past more windowssparkling with multicolored lights, the outlines ofChristmas trees dark through the curtains.

“How are we going to find Bathilda’s house?” askedHermione, who was shivering a little and keptglancing back over her shoulder. “Harry? What do youthink? Harry?”

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

She tugged at his arm, but Harry was not payingattention. He was looking toward the dark mass thatstood at the very end of this row of houses. Nextmoment he had sped up, dragging Hermione alongwith him; she slipped a little on the ice.

“Harry —”

“Look. ... Look at it, Hermione. ...”

“I don’t ... oh!”

He could see it; the Fidelius Charm must have diedwith James and Lily. The hedge had grown wild in thesixteen years since Hagrid had taken Harry from therubble that lay scattered amongst the waist-highgrass. Most of the cottage was still standing, thoughentirely covered in dark ivy and snow, but the rightside of the top floor had been blown apart; that, Harrywas sure, was where the curse had backfired. He andHermione stood at the gate, gazing up at the wreck ofwhat must once have been a cottage just like thosethat flanked it.

“I wonder why nobody’s ever rebuilt it?” whisperedHermione.

“Maybe you can’t rebuild it?” Harry replied. “Maybeit’s like the injuries from Dark Magic and you can’trepair the damage?”

He slipped a hand from beneath the Cloak andgrasped the snowy and thickly rusted gate, notwishing to open it, but simply to hold some part of thehouse.

“You’re not going to go inside? It looks unsafe, itmight — oh, Harry, look!”

Page | 374 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

His touch on the gate seemed to have done it. A signhad risen out of the ground in front of them, upthrough the tangles of nettles and weeds, like somebizarre, fast-growing flower, and in golden lettersupon the wood it said:

On this spot, on the night of 31 October 1981, Lily andJames Potter lost their lives. Their son, Harry, remainsthe only wizard ever to have survived the Killing Curse.This house, invisible to Muggles, has been left in itsruined state as a monument to the Potters and as areminder of the violence that tore apart their family.

And all around these neatly lettered words, scribbleshad been added by other witches and wizards whohad come to see the place where the Boy Who Livedhad escaped. Some had merely signed their names inEverlasting Ink; others had carved their initials intothe wood, still others had left messages. The mostrecent of these, shining brightly over sixteen years’worth of magical graffiti, all said similar things.

Good luck, Harry, wherever you are.

If you read this, Harry, we’re all behind you!

Long live Harry Potter.

“They shouldn’t have written on the sign!” saidHermione, indignant.

But Harry beamed at her.

“It’s brilliant. I’m glad they did. I ...”

He broke off. A heavily muffled figure was hobbling upthe lane toward them, silhouetted by the bright lights

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

in the distant square. Harry thought, though it washard to judge, that the figure was a woman. She wasmoving slowly, possibly frightened of slipping on thesnowy ground. Her stoop, her stoutness, her shufflinggait all gave an impression of extreme age. Theywatched in silence as she drew nearer. Harry waswaiting to see whether she would turn into any of thecottages she was passing, but he knew instinctivelythat she would not. At last she came to a halt a fewyards from them and simply stood there in the middleof the frozen road, facing them.

He did not need Hermione’s pinch to his arm. Therewas next to no chance that this woman was a Muggle:She was standing there gazing at a house that oughtto have been completely invisible to her, if she wasnot a witch. Even assuming that she was a witch,however, it was odd behavior to come out on a nightthis cold, simply to look at an old ruin. By all therules of normal magic, meanwhile, she ought not tobe able to see Hermione and him at all. Nevertheless,Harry had the strangest feeling that she knew thatthey were there, and also who they were. Just as hehad reached this uneasy conclusion, she raised agloved hand and beckoned.

Hermione moved closer to him under the Cloak, herarm pressed against his.

“How does she know?”

He shook his head. The woman beckoned again, morevigorously. Harry could think of many reasons not toobey the summons, and yet his suspicions about heridentity were growing stronger every moment thatthey stood facing each other in the deserted street.

Was it possible that she had been waiting for them allthese long months? That Dumbledore had told her to

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

wait, and that Harry would come in the end? Was itnot likely that it was she who had moved in theshadows in the graveyard and had followed them tothis spot? Even her ability to sense them suggestedsome Dumbledore-ish power that he had neverencountered before.

Finally Harry spoke, causing Hermione to gasp andjump.

“Are you Bathilda?”

The muffled figure nodded and beckoned again.

Beneath the Cloak Harry and Hermione looked ateach other. Harry raised his eyebrows; Hermione gavea tiny, nervous nod.

They stepped toward the woman and, at once, sheturned and hobbled off back the way they had come.Leading them past several houses, she turned in at agate. They followed her up the front path through agarden nearly as overgrown as the one they had justleft. She fumbled for a moment with a key at the frontdoor, then opened it and stepped back to let thempass.

She smelled bad, or perhaps it was her house: Harrywrinkled his nose as they sidled past her and pulledoff the Cloak. Now that he was beside her, he realizedhow tiny she was; bowed down with age, she camebarely level with his chest. She closed the door behindthem, her knuckles blue and mottled against thepeeling paint, then turned and peered into Harry’sface. Her eyes were thick with cataracts and sunkeninto folds of transparent skin, and her whole face wasdotted with broken veins and liver spots. Hewondered whether she could make him out at all;

Page | 377 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

even if she could, it was the balding Muggle whoseidentity he had stolen that she would see.

The odor of old age, of dust, of unwashed clothes andstale food intensified as she unwound a moth-eatenblack shawl, revealing a head of scant white hairthrough which the scalp showed clearly.

“Bathilda?” Harry repeated.

She nodded again. Harry became aware of the locketagainst his skin; the thing inside it that sometimesticked or beat had woken; he could feel it pulsingthrough the cold gold. Did it know, could it sense,that the thing that would destroy it was near?

Bathilda shuffled past them, pushing Hermione asideas though she had not seen her, and vanished intowhat seemed to be a sitting room.

“Harry, I’m not sure about this,” breathed Hermione.

“Look at the size of her; I think we could overpowerher if we had to,” said Harry. “Listen, I should havetold you, I knew she wasn’t all there. Muriel called her‘gaga.’ ”

“Come!” called Bathilda from the next room.

Hermione jumped and clutched Harry’s arm.

“It’s okay,” said Harry reassuringly, and he led theway into the sitting room.

Bathilda was tottering around the place lightingcandles, but it was still very dark, not to mentionextremely dirty. Thick dust crunched beneath theirfeet, and Harry’s nose detected, underneath the dankand mildewed smell, something worse, like meat gonePage | 378 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

bad. He wondered when was the last time anyone hadbeen inside Bathilda’s house to check whether shewas coping. She seemed to have forgotten that shecould do magic, too, for she lit the candles clumsilyby hand, her trailing lace cuff in constant danger ofcatching fire.

“Let me do that,” offered Harry, and he took thematches from her. She stood watching him as hefinished lighting the candle stubs that stood onsaucers around the room, perched precariously onstacks of books and on side tables crammed withcracked and moldy cups.

The last surface on which Harry spotted a candle wasa bow-fronted chest of drawers on which there stooda large number of photographs. When the flamedanced into life, its reflection wavered on their dustyglass and silver. He saw a few tiny movements fromthe pictures. As Bathilda fumbled with logs for thefire, he muttered “Tergeo”: The dust vanished fromthe photographs, and he saw at once that half adozen were missing from the largest and most ornateframes. He wondered whether Bathilda or somebodyelse had removed them. Then the sight of aphotograph near the back of the collection caught hiseye, and he snatched it up.

It was the golden-haired, merry-faced thief, the youngman who had perched on Gregorovitch’s windowsill,smiling lazily up at Harry out of the silver frame. Andit came to Harry instantly where he had seen the boybefore: in The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore, armin arm with the teenage Dumbledore, and that mustbe where all the missing photographs were: in Rita’sbook.

“Mrs. — Miss — Bagshot?” he said, and his voiceshook slightly. “Who is this?”

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Bathilda was standing in the middle of the roomwatching Hermione light the fire for her.

“Miss Bagshot?” Harry repeated, and he advancedwith the picture in his hands as the flames burst intolife in the fireplace. Bathilda looked up at his voice,and the Horcrux beat faster upon his chest.

“Who is this person?” Harry asked her, pushing thepicture forward.

She peered at it solemnly, then up at Harry.

“Do you know who this is?” he repeated in a muchslower and louder voice than usual. “This man? Doyou know him? What’s he called?”

Bathilda merely looked vague. Harry felt an awfulfrustration. How had Rita Skeeter unlocked Bathilda’smemories?

“Who is this man?” he repeated loudly.

“Harry, what are you doing?” asked Hermione.

“This picture, Hermione, it’s the thief, the thief whostole from Gregorovitch! Please!” he said to Bathilda.“Who is this?”

But she only stared at him.

“Why did you ask us to come with you, Mrs. — Miss— Bagshot?” asked Hermione, raising her own voice.“Was there something you wanted to tell us?”

Giving no sign that she had heard Hermione, Bathildanow shuffled a few steps closer to Harry. With a littlejerk of her head she looked back into the hall.

Page | 380 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You want us to leave?” he asked.

She repeated the gesture, this time pointing firstly athim, then at herself, then at the ceiling.

“Oh, right ... Hermione, I think she wants me to goupstairs with her.”

“All right,” said Hermione, “let’s go.”

But when Hermione moved, Bathilda shook her headwith surprising vigor, once more pointing first atHarry, then to herself.

“She wants me to go with her, alone.”

“Why?” asked Hermione, and her voice rang out sharpand clear in the candlelit room; the old lady shook herhead a little at the loud noise.

“Maybe Dumbledore told her to give the sword to me,and only to me?”

“Do you really think she knows who you are?”

“Yes,” said Harry, looking down into the milky eyesfixed upon his own, “I think she does.”

“Well, okay then, but be quick, Harry.”

“Lead the way,” Harry told Bathilda.

She seemed to understand, because she shuffledaround him toward the door. Harry glanced back atHermione with a reassuring smile, but he was notsure she had seen it; she stood hugging herself in themidst of the candlelit squalor, looking toward thebookcase. As Harry walked out of the room, unseenby both Hermione and Bathilda, he slipped the silver-

P a g e | 381 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

framed photograph of the unknown thief inside hisjacket.

The stairs were steep and narrow: Harry was halftempted to place his hands on stout Bathilda’sbackside to ensure that she did not topple overbackward on top of him, which seemed only too likely.Slowly, wheezing a little, she climbed to the upperlanding, turned immediately right, and led him into alow-ceilinged bedroom.

It was pitch-black and smelled horrible: Harry hadjust made out a chamber pot protruding from underthe bed before Bathilda closed the door and even thatwas swallowed by the darkness.

“Lumos,” said Harry, and his wand ignited. He gave astart: Bathilda had moved close to him in those fewseconds of darkness, and he had not heard herapproach.

“You are Potter?” she whispered.

“Yes, I am.”

She nodded slowly, solemnly. Harry felt the Horcruxbeating fast, faster than his own heart: It was anunpleasant, agitating sensation.

“Have you got anything for me?” Harry asked, but sheseemed distracted by his lit wand-tip.

“Have you got anything for me?” he repeated.

Then she closed her eyes and several thingshappened at once: Harry’s scar prickled painfully; theHorcrux twitched so that the front of his sweateractually moved; the dark, fetid room dissolved

Page | 382 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

momentarily. He felt a leap of joy and spoke in a high,cold voice: Hold him).

Harry swayed where he stood: The dark, foul-smellingroom seemed to close around him again; he did notknow what had just happened.

“Have you got anything for me?” he asked for a thirdtime, much louder.

“Over here,” she whispered, pointing to the corner.Harry raised his wand and saw the outline of acluttered dressing table beneath the curtainedwindow.

This time she did not lead him. Harry edged betweenher and the unmade bed, his wand raised. He did notwant to look away from her.

“What is it?” he asked as he reached the dressingtable, which was heaped high with what looked andsmelled like dirty laundry.

“There,” she said, pointing at the shapeless mass.

And in the instant that he looked away, his eyesraking the tangled mess for a sword hilt, a ruby, shemoved weirdly: He saw it out of the corner of his eye;panic made him turn and horror paralyzed him as hesaw the old body collapsing and the great snakepouring from the place where her neck had been.

The snake struck as he raised his wand: The force ofthe bite to his forearm sent the wand spinning uptoward the ceiling; its light swung dizzyingly aroundthe room and was extinguished: Then a powerful blowfrom the tail to his midriff knocked the breath out ofhim: He fell backward onto the dressing table, intothe mound of filthy clothing —

Page | 383 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He rolled sideways, narrowly avoiding the snake’s tail,which thrashed down upon the table where he hadbeen a second earlier: Fragments of the glass surfacerained upon him as he hit the floor. From below heheard Hermione call, “Harry?”

He could not get enough breath into his lungs to callback: Then a heavy smooth mass smashed him to thefloor and he felt it slide over him, powerful, muscular

“No!” he gasped, pinned to the floor.

“Yes,” whispered the voice. “Yesss ... hold you ... holdyou ...”

“Accio ... Accio Wand ...”

But nothing happened and he needed his hands to tryto force the snake from him as it coiled itself aroundhis torso, squeezing the air from him, pressing theHorcrux hard into his chest, a circle of ice thatthrobbed with life, inches from his own frantic heart,and his brain was flooding with cold, white light, allthought obliterated, his own breath drowned, distantfootsteps, everything going. ...

A metal heart was banging outside his chest, and nowhe was flying, flying with triumph in his heart,without need of broomstick or thestral. ...

He was abruptly awake in the sour-smellingdarkness; Nagini had released him. He scrambled upand saw the snake outlined against the landing light:It struck, and Hermione dived aside with a shriek; herdeflected curse hit the curtained window, whichshattered. Frozen air filled the room as Harry duckedto avoid another shower of broken glass and his footslipped on a pencil-like something — his wand —Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He bent and snatched it up, but now the room wasfull of the snake, its tail thrashing; Hermione wasnowhere to be seen and for a moment Harry thoughtthe worst, but then there was a loud bang and a flashof red light, and the snake flew into the air, smackingHarry hard in the face as it went, coil after heavy coilrising up to the ceiling. Harry raised his wand, but ashe did so, his scar seared more painfully, morepowerfully than it had done in years.

“He’s coming! Hermione, he’s comingl”

As he yelled the snake fell, hissing wildly. Everythingwas chaos: It smashed shelves from the wall, andsplintered china flew everywhere as Harry jumpedover the bed and seized the dark shape he knew to beHermione —

She shrieked with pain as he pulled her back acrossthe bed: The snake reared again, but Harry knew thatworse than the snake was coming, was perhapsalready at the gate, his head was going to split openwith the pain from his scar —

The snake lunged as he took a running leap, draggingHermione with him; as it struck, Hermione screamed,

“ ConfringoV’ and her spell flew around the room,exploding the wardrobe mirror and ricocheting backat them, bouncing from floor to ceiling; Harry felt theheat of it sear the back of his hand. Glass cut hischeek as, pulling Hermione with him, he leapt frombed to broken dressing table and then straight out ofthe smashed window into nothingness, her screamreverberating through the night as they twisted inmidair. ...

And then his scar burst open and he was Voldemortand he was running across the fetid bedroom, hislong white hands clutching at the windowsill as he

Page | 385 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

glimpsed the bald man and the little woman twist andvanish, and he screamed with rage, a scream thatmingled with the girl’s, that echoed across the darkgardens over the church bells ringing in ChristmasDay. ...

And his scream was Harry’s scream, his pain wasHarry’s pain ... that it could happen here, where ithad happened before ... here, within sight of thathouse where he had come so close to knowing what itwas to die ... to die. ... The pain was so terrible ...ripped from his body. ... But if he had no body, whydid his head hurt so badly; if he was dead, how couldhe feel so unbearably, didn’t pain cease with death,didn’t it go ...

The night wet and windy, two children dressed aspumpkins waddling across the square, and the shopwindows covered in paper spiders, all the tawdryMuggle trappings of a world in which they did notbelieve. ... And he was gliding along, that sense ofpurpose and power and rightness in him that healways knew on these occasions. ... Not anger ... thatwas for weaker souls than he ... but triumph, yes. ...He had waited for this, he had hoped for it. ...

“Nice costume, mister!”

He saw the small boy’s smile falter as he ran nearenough to see beneath the hood of the cloak, saw thefear cloud his painted face: Then the child turned andran away. ... Beneath the robe he fingered the handleof his wand. ... One simple movement and the childwould never reach his mother ... but unnecessary,quite unnecessary. ...

And along a new and darker street he moved, andnow his destination was in sight at last, the FideliusCharm broken, though they did not know it yet. ...

Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

And he made less noise than the dead leavesslithering along the pavement as he drew level withthe dark hedge, and stared over it. ...

They had not drawn the curtains; he saw them quiteclearly in their little sitting room, the tall black-hairedman in his glasses, making puffs of colored smokeerupt from his wand for the amusement of the smallblack-haired boy in his blue pajamas. The child waslaughing and trying to catch the smoke, to grab it inhis small fist. ...

A door opened and the mother entered, saying wordshe could not hear, her long dark-red hair falling overher face. Now the father scooped up the son andhanded him to the mother. He threw his wand downupon the sofa and stretched, yawning. ...

The gate creaked a little as he pushed it open, butJames Potter did not hear. His white hand pulled outthe wand beneath his cloak and pointed it at thedoor, which burst open.

He was over the threshold as James came sprintinginto the hall. It was easy, too easy, he had not evenpicked up his wand. ...

“Lily, take Harry and go! It’s him! Go! Run! Ill holdhim off!”

Hold him off, without a wand in his hand! ... Helaughed before casting the curse. ...

“Avada Kedavra!”

The green light filled the cramped hallway, it lit thepram pushed against the wall, it made the banistersglare like lightning rods, and James Potter fell like amarionette whose strings were cut. ...

Page | 387 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He could hear her screaming from the upper floor,trapped, but as long as she was sensible, she, atleast, had nothing to fear. ... He climbed the steps,listening with faint amusement to her attempts tobarricade herself in. ... She had no wand upon hereither. ... How stupid they were, and how trusting,thinking that their safety lay in friends, that weaponscould be discarded even for moments. ...

He forced the door open, cast aside the chair andboxes hastily piled against it with one lazy wave of hiswand ... and there she stood, the child in her arms. Atthe sight of him, she dropped her son into the cribbehind her and threw her arms wide, as if this wouldhelp, as if in shielding him from sight she hoped to bechosen instead. ...

“Not Harry, not Harry, please not Harry!”

“Stand aside, you silly girl ... stand aside, now. ”

“Not Harry, please no, take me, kill me instead —”

“This is my last warning —”

“Not Harry! Please ... have mercy ... have mercy. ...

Not Harry! Not Harry! Please — I’ll do anything —”

“Stand aside. Stand aside, girl!”

He could have forced her away from the crib, but itseemed more prudent to finish them all. ...

The green light flashed around the room and shedropped like her husband. The child had not cried allthis time: He could stand, clutching the bars of his crib,and he looked up into the intruder’s face with a kind ofbright interest, perhaps thinking that it was his father

Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

who hid beneath the cloak, making more pretty lights,and his mother would pop up any moment, laughing —

He pointed the wand very carefully into the boy’s face:He wanted to see it happen, the destruction of this one,inexplicable danger. The child began to cry: It had seenthat he was not James. He did not like it crying, hehad never been able to stomach the small oneswhining in the orphanage —

“Avada Kedavra!”

And then he broke: He was nothing, nothing but painand terror, and he must hide himself, not here in therubble of the ruined house, where the child wastrapped and screaming, but far away ... far away. ...

“No,” he moaned.

The snake rustled on the filthy, cluttered floor, and hehad killed the boy, and yet he was the boy. ...

“No ...”

And now he stood at the broken window of Bathilda’shouse, immersed in memories of his greatest loss, andat his feet the great snake slithered over broken chinaand glass. ... He looked down and saw something ...something incredible. ...

“No ...”

“Harry, it’s all right, you’re all right!”

He stooped down and picked up the smashedphotograph. There he was, the unknown thief, thethief he was seeking. ...

“No ... I dropped it. ... I dropped it. ...”

Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, it’s okay, wake up, wake up!”

He was Harry. ... Harry, not Voldemort ... and thething that was rustling was not a snake. ... He openedhis eyes.

“Harry,” Hermione whispered. “Do you feel all — allright?”

“Yes,” he lied.

He was in the tent, lying on one of the lower bunksbeneath a heap of blankets. He could tell that it wasalmost dawn by the stillness and the quality of thecold, flat light beyond the canvas ceiling. He wasdrenched in sweat; he could feel it on the sheets andblankets.

“We got away.”

“Yes,” said Hermione. “I had to use a Hover Charm toget you into your bunk, I couldn’t lift you. You’vebeen ... Well, you haven’t been quite ...”

There were purple shadows under her brown eyes andhe noticed a small sponge in her hand: She had beenwiping his face.

“You’ve been ill,” she finished. “Quite ill.”

“How long ago did we leave?”

“Hours ago. It’s nearly morning.”

“And I’ve been ... what, unconscious?”

“Not exactly,” said Hermione uncomfortably. “You’vebeen shouting and moaning and ... things,” sheadded in a tone that made Harry feel uneasy. What

Page | 390 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

had he done? Screamed curses like Voldemort, criedlike the baby in the crib?

“I couldn’t get the Horcrux off you,” Hermione said,and he knew she wanted to change the subject. “Itwas stuck, stuck to your chest. You’ve got a mark; I’msorry, I had to use a Severing Charm to get it away.The snake bit you too, but I’ve cleaned the wound andput some dittany on it. ...”

He pulled the sweaty T-shirt he was wearing awayfrom himself and looked down. There was a scarletoval over his heart where the locket had burned him.He could also see the half-healed puncture marks tohis forearm.

“Where Ve you put the Horcrux?”

“In my bag. I think we should keep it off for a while.”

He lay back on his pillows and looked into herpinched gray face.

“We shouldn’t have gone to Godric’s Hollow. It’s myfault, it’s all my fault, Hermione, I’m sorry.”

“It’s not your fault. I wanted to go too; I really thoughtDumbledore might have left the sword there for you.”

“Yeah, well ... we got that wrong, didn’t we?”

“What happened, Harry? What happened when shetook you upstairs? Was the snake hiding somewhere?Did it just come out and kill her and attack you?”

“No,” he said. “She was the snake ... or the snake washer ... all along.”

“W-what?”

Page | 391 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He closed his eyes. He could still smell Bathilda’shouse on him: It made the whole thing horribly vivid.

“Bathilda must’ve been dead a while. The snake was... was inside her. You-Know-Who put it there inGodric’s Hollow, to wait. You were right. He knew I’dgo back.”

“The snake was inside her?”

He opened his eyes again: Hermione looked revolted,nauseated.

“Lupin said there would be magic we’d neverimagined,” Harry said. “She didn’t want to talk infront of you, because it was Parseltongue, allParseltongue, and I didn’t realize, but of course Icould understand her. Once we were up in the room,the snake sent a message to You-Know-Who, I heardit happen inside my head, I felt him get excited, hesaid to keep me there ... and then ...”

He remembered the snake coming our of Bathilda’sneck: Hermione did not need to know the details.

"... she changed, changed into the snake, andattacked.”

He looked down at the puncture marks.

“It wasn’t supposed to kill me, just keep me there tillYou-Know-Who came.”

If he had only managed to kill the snake, it wouldhave been worth it, all of it. ... Sick at heart, he sat upand threw back the covers.

“Harry, no, I’m sure you ought to rest!”

Page | 392 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’re the one who needs sleep. No offense, but youlook terrible. I’m fine. I’ll keep watch for a while.Where’s my wand?”

She did not answer, she merely looked at him.“Where’s my wand, Hermione?”

She was biting her lip, and tears swam in her eyes.“Harry ...”

“ Where’s my wand?”

She reached down beside the bed and held it out tohim.

The holly and phoenix wand was nearly severed intwo. One fragile strand of phoenix feather kept bothpieces hanging together. The wood had splinteredapart completely. Harry took it into his hands asthough it was a living thing that had suffered aterrible injury. He could not think properly:Everything was a blur of panic and fear. Then he heldout the wand to Hermione.

“Mend it. Please.”

“Harry, I don’t think, when it’s broken like this —”“Please, Hermione, try!”

“R-Reparo.”

The dangling half of the wand resealed itself. Harryheld it up.

“Lumosl”

Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The wand sparked feebly, then went out. Harrypointed it at Hermione.

“ Expelliarmusl”

Hermione’s wand gave a little jerk, but did not leaveher hand. The feeble attempt at magic was too muchfor Harry’s wand, which split into two again. Hestared at it, aghast, unable to take in what he wasseeing ... the wand that had survived so much ...

“Harry,” Hermione whispered so quietly he couldhardly hear her. “I’m so, so sorry. I think it was me.

As we were leaving, you know, the snake was comingfor us, and so I cast a Blasting Curse, and itrebounded everywhere, and it must have — musthave hit —”

“It was an accident,” said Harry mechanically. He feltempty, stunned. “We’ll — we’ll find a way to repair it.”

“Harry, I don’t think we’re going to be able to,” saidHermione, the tears trickling down her face.“Remember ... remember Ron? When he broke hiswand, crashing the car? It was never the same again,he had to get a new one.”

Harry thought of Ollivander, kidnapped and heldhostage by Voldemort; of Gregorovitch, who was dead.How was he supposed to find himself a new wand?

“Well,” he said, in a falsely matter-of-fact voice, “well,I’ll just borrow yours for now, then. While I keepwatch.”

Her face glazed with tears, Hermione handed over herwand, and he left her sitting beside his bed, desiringnothing more than to get away from her.

Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE LIFE AND LIES OF ALBUSDUMBLEDORE

The sun was coming up: The pure, colorless vastnessof the sky stretched over him, indifferent to him andhis suffering. Harry sat down in the tent entrance andtook a deep breath of clean air. Simply to be alive towatch the sun rise over the sparkling snowy hillsideought to have been the greatest treasure on earth, yethe could not appreciate it: His senses had beenspiked by the calamity of losing his wand. He lookedout over a valley blanketed in snow, distant churchbells chiming through the glittering silence.

Without realizing it, he was digging his fingers intohis arms as if he were trying to resist physical pain.

He had spilled his own blood more times than hecould count; he had lost all the bones in his right armonce; this journey had already given him scars to hischest and forearm to join those on his hand andforehead, but never, until this moment, had he felthimself to be fatally weakened, vulnerable, andnaked, as though the best part of his magical powerhad been torn from him. He knew exactly whatPage | 395 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hermione would say if he expressed any of this: Thewand is only as good as the wizard. But she waswrong, his case was different. She had not felt thewand spin like the needle of a compass and shootgolden flames at his enemy. He had lost theprotection of the twin cores, and only now that it wasgone did he realize how much he had been countingupon it.

He pulled the pieces of the broken wand out of hispocket and, without looking at them, tucked themaway in Hagrid’s pouch around his neck. The pouchwas now too full of broken and useless objects to takeany more. Harry’s hand brushed the old Snitchthrough the mokeskin and for a moment he had tofight the temptation to pull it out and throw it away.Impenetrable, unhelpful, useless, like everything elseDumbledore had left behind —

And his fury at Dumbledore broke over him now likelava, scorching him inside, wiping out every otherfeeling. Out of sheer desperation they had talkedthemselves into believing that Godric’s Hollow heldanswers, convinced themselves that they weresupposed to go back, that it was all part of somesecret path laid out for them by Dumbledore; butthere was no map, no plan. Dumbledore had left themto grope in the darkness, to wrestle with unknownand undreamed-of terrors, alone and unaided:

Nothing was explained, nothing was given freely, theyhad no sword, and now, Harry had no wand. And hehad dropped the photograph of the thief, and it wouldsurely be easy now for Voldemort to find out who hewas. ... Voldemort had all the information now. ...

“Harry?”

Hermione looked frightened that he might curse herwith her own wand. Her face streaked with tears, she

Page | 396 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

crouched down beside him, two cups of tea tremblingin her hands and something bulky under her arm.

“Thanks,” he said, taking one of the cups.

“Do you mind if I talk to you?”

“No,” he said because he did not want to hurt herfeelings.

“Harry, you wanted to know who that man in thepicture was. Well ... I’ve got the book.”

Timidly she pushed it onto his lap, a pristine copy ofThe Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore.

“Where — how — ?”

“It was in Bathilda’s sitting room, just lying there. ...This note was sticking out of the top of it.”

Hermione read the few lines of spiky, acid-greenwriting aloud.

“ ‘Dear Batty, Thanks for your help. Here’s a copy ofthe book, hope you like it. You said everything, even ifyou don’t remember it. Rita.’ I think it must havearrived while the real Bathilda was alive, but perhapsshe wasn’t in any fit state to read it?”

“No, she probably wasn’t.”

Harry looked down upon Dumbledore’s face andexperienced a surge of savage pleasure: Now he wouldknow all the things that Dumbledore had neverthought it worth telling him, whether Dumbledorewanted him to or not.

Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’re still really angry at me, aren’t you?” saidHermione; he looked up to see fresh tears leaking outof her eyes, and knew that his anger must haveshown in his face.

“No,” he said quietly. “No, Hermione, I know it was anaccident. You were trying to get us out of there alive,and you were incredible. I’d be dead if you hadn’tbeen there to help me.”

He tried to return her watery smile, then turned hisattention to the book. Its spine was stiff; it had clearlynever been opened before. He riffled through thepages, looking for photographs. He came across theone he sought almost at once, the young Dumbledoreand his handsome companion, roaring with laughterat some long-forgotten joke. Harry dropped his eyes tothe caption.

Albus Dumbledore, shortly after his mother’s death,with his friend Gellert Grindelwald.

Harry gaped at the last word for several longmoments. Grindelwald. His friend Grindelwald. Helooked sideways at Hermione, who was stillcontemplating the name as though she could notbelieve her eyes. Slowly she looked up at Harry.

“ Grindelwald?”

Ignoring the remainder of the photographs, Harrysearched the pages around them for a recurrence ofthat fatal name. He soon discovered it and readgreedily, but became lost: It was necessary to gofurther back to make sense of it all, and eventually hefound himself at the start of a chapter entitled “TheGreater Good.” Together, he and Hermione started toread:

Page | 398 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Now approaching his eighteenth birthday,

Dumbledore left Hogwarts in a blaze of glory — HeadBoy, Prefect, Winner of the Barnabus Finkley Prize forExceptional Spell-Casting, British YouthRepresentative to the Wizengamot, Gold Medal-Winner for Ground-Breaking Contribution to theInternational Alchemical Conference in Cairo.Dumbledore intended, next, to take a Grand Tourwith Elphias “Dogbreath” Doge, the dim-witted butdevoted sidekick he had picked up at school.

The two young men were staying at the LeakyCauldron in London, preparing to depart for Greece thefollowing morning, when an owl arrived bearing newsof Dumbledore’s mother’s death. “Dogbreath” Doge,who refused to be interviewed for this book, has giventhe public his own sentimental version of whathappened next. He represents Kendra’s death as atragic blow, and Dumbledore’s decision to give up hisexpedition as an act of noble self-sacrifice.

Certainly Dumbledore returned to Godric’s Hollow atonce, supposedly to “care” for his younger brotherand sister. But how much care did he actually givethem?

“He were a head case, that Aberforth,” says EnidSmeek, whose family lived on the outskirts of Godric’sHollow at that time. “Ran wild. ’Course, with his mumand dad gone you’d have felt sorry for him, only hekept chucking goat dung at my head. I don’t thinkAlbus was fussed about him, I never saw themtogether, anyway.”

So what was Albus doing, if not comforting his wildyoung brother? The answer, it seems, is ensuring thecontinued imprisonment of his sister. For, though herfirst jailer had died, there was no change in the pitifulcondition of Ariana Dumbledore. Her very existencePage | 399 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

continued to be known only to those few outsiderswho, like “Dogbreath” Doge, could be counted upon tobelieve in the story of her “ill health.”

Another such easily satisfied friend of the family wasBathilda Bagshot, the celebrated magical historianwho has lived in Godric’s Hollow for many years.Kendra, of course, had rebuffed Bathilda when shefirst attempted to welcome the family to the village.Several years later, however, the author sent an owl toAlbus at Hog warts, having been favorably impressedby his paper on trans-species transformation inTransfiguration Today. This initial contact led toacquaintance with the entire Dumbledore family. Atthe time of Kendra’s death, Bathilda was the onlyperson in Godric’s Hollow who was on speaking termswith Dumbledore’s mother.

Unfortunately, the brilliance that Bathilda exhibitedearlier in her life has now dimmed. “The fire’s lit, butthe cauldron’s empty,” as Ivor Dillonsby put it to me,or, in Enid Smeek’s slightly earthier phrase, “She’snutty as squirrel poo.” Nevertheless, a combination oftried-and-tested reporting techniques enabled me toextract enough nuggets of hard fact to string togetherthe whole scandalous story.

Like the rest of the Wizarding world, Bathilda putsKendra’s premature death down to a backfiringcharm, a story repeated by Albus and Aberforth inlater years. Bathilda also parrots the family line onAriana, calling her “frail” and “delicate.” On onesubject, however, Bathilda is well worth the effort Iput into procuring Veritaserum, for she, and shealone, knows the full story of the best-kept secret ofAlbus Dumbledore’s life. Now revealed for the firsttime, it calls into question everything that hisadmirers believed of Dumbledore: his supposedhatred of the Dark Arts, his opposition to thePage | 400 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

oppression of Muggles, even his devotion to his ownfamily.

The very same summer that Dumbledore went hometo Godric’s Hollow, now an orphan and head of thefamily, Bathilda Bagshot agreed to accept into herhome her great-nephew, Gellert Grindelwald.

The name of Grindelwald is justly famous: In a list ofMost Dangerous Dark Wizards of All Time, he wouldmiss out on the top spot only because You-Know-Whoarrived, a generation later, to steal his crown. AsGrindelwald never extended his campaign of terror toBritain, however, the details of his rise to power arenot widely known here.

Educated at Durmstrang, a school famous even thenfor its unfortunate tolerance of the Dark Arts,Grindelwald showed himself quite as precociouslybrilliant as Dumbledore. Rather than channel hisabilities into the attainment of awards and prizes,however, Gellert Grindelwald devoted himself to otherpursuits. At sixteen years old, even Durmstrang felt itcould no longer turn a blind eye to the twistedexperiments of Gellert Grindelwald, and he wasexpelled.

Hitherto, all that has been known of Grindelwald’snext movements is that he “traveled abroad for somemonths.” It can now be revealed that Grindelwaldchose to visit his great-aunt in Godric’s Hollow, andthat there, intensely shocking though it will be formany to hear it, he struck up a close friendship withnone other than Albus Dumbledore.

“He seemed a charming boy to me,” babbles Bathilda,“whatever he became later. Naturally I introduced himto poor Albus, who was missing the company of ladshis own age. The boys took to each other at once.”

Page | 401 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

They certainly did. Bathilda shows me a letter, keptby her, that Albus Dumbledore sent GellertGrindelwald in the dead of night.

“Yes, even after they’d spent all day in discussion —both such brilliant young boys, they got on like acauldron on fire — I’d sometimes hear an owl tappingat Gellert’s bedroom window, delivering a letter fromAlbus! An idea would have struck him, and he had tolet Gellert know immediately!”

And what ideas they were. Profoundly shockingthough Albus Dumbledore’s fans will find it, here arethe thoughts of their seventeen-year-old hero, asrelayed to his new best friend. (A copy of the originalletter may be seen on page 463.)

Gellert —

Your point about Wizard dominance being FOR THEMUGGLES’ OWN GOOD — this, I think, is the crucialpoint. Yes, we have been given power and yes, thatpower gives us the right to rule, but it also gives usresponsibilities over the ruled. We must stress thispoint, it will be the foundation stone upon which webuild. Where we are opposed, as we surely will be, thismust be the basis of all our counterarguments. Weseize control FOR THE GREATER GOOD. And from thisit follows that where we meet resistance, we must useonly the force that is necessary and no more. (This wasyour mistake at Durmstrang! But I do not complain,because if you had not been expelled, we would neverhave met.)

Albus

Astonished and appalled though his many admirerswill be, this letter constitutes proof that AlbusDumbledore once dreamed of overthrowing the Statute

Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

of Secrecy and establishing Wizard rule over Muggles.What a blow for those who have always portrayedDumbledore as the Muggle-boms’ greatest champion!How hollow those speeches promoting Muggle rightsseem in the light of this damning new evidence! Howdespicable does Albus Dumbledore appear, busyplotting his rise to power when he should have beenmourning his mother and caring for his sister!

No doubt those determined to keep Dumbledore onhis crumbling pedestal will bleat that he did not, afterall, put his plans into action, that he must havesuffered a change of heart, that he came to hissenses. However, the truth seems altogether moreshocking.

Barely two months into their great new friendship,Dumbledore and Grindelwald parted, never to see eachother again until they met for their legendary duel (formore, see chapter 22). What caused this abruptrupture? Had Dumbledore come to his senses? Had hetold Grindelwald he wanted no more part in his plans?Alas, no.

“It was poor little Ariana dying, I think, that did it,”says Bathilda. “It came as an awful shock. Gellert wasthere in the house when it happened, and he cameback to my house all of a dither, told me he wanted togo home the next day. Terribly distressed, you know.So I arranged a Portkey and that was the last I saw ofhim.

“Albus was beside himself at Ariana’s death. It was sodreadful for those two brothers. They had losteverybody except each other. No wonder tempers rana little high. Aberforth blamed Albus, you know, aspeople will under these dreadful circumstances. ButAberforth always talked a little madly, poor boy. Allthe same, breaking Albus’s nose at the funeral wasPage | 403 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

not decent. It would have destroyed Kendra to see hersons fighting like that, across her daughter’s body. Ashame Gellert could not have stayed for the funeral.

... He would have been a comfort to Albus, at least.

This dreadful coffin-side brawl, known only to thosefew who attended Ariana Dumbledore’s funeral, raisesseveral questions. Why exactly did AberforthDumbledore blame Albus for his sister’s death? Wasit, as “Batty” pretends, a mere effusion of grief? Orcould there have been some more concrete reason forhis fury? Grindelwald, expelled from Durmstrang fornear-fatal attacks upon fellow students, fled thecountry hours after the girl’s death, and Albus (out ofshame or fear?) never saw him again, not until forcedto do so by the pleas of the Wizarding world.

Neither Dumbledore nor Grindelwald ever seems tohave referred to this brief boyhood friendship in laterlife. However, there can be no doubt that Dumbledoredelayed, for some five years of turmoil, fatalities, anddisappearances, his attack upon Gellert Grindelwald.Was it lingering affection for the man or fear ofexposure as his once best friend that causedDumbledore to hesitate? Was it only reluctantly thatDumbledore set out to capture the man he was onceso delighted he had met?

And how did the mysterious Ariana die? Was she theinadvertent victim of some Dark rite? Did she stumbleacross something she ought not to have done, as thetwo young men sat practicing for their attempt atglory and domination? Is it possible that ArianaDumbledore was the first person to die “for thegreater good”?

Page | 404 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The chapter ended here and Harry looked up.Hermione had reached the bottom of the page beforehim. She tugged the book out of Harry’s hands,looking a little alarmed by his expression, and closedit without looking at it, as though hiding somethingindecent.

“Harry —”

But he shook his head. Some inner certainty hadcrashed down inside him; it was exactly as he had feltafter Ron left. He had trusted Dumbledore, believedhim the embodiment of goodness and wisdom. All wasashes: How much more could he lose? Ron,Dumbledore, the phoenix wand ...

“Harry.” She seemed to have heard his thoughts.“Listen to me. It — it doesn’t make very nice reading

“Yeah, you could say that —”

“— but don’t forget, Harry, this is Rita Skeeterwriting.”

“You did read that letter to Grindelwald, didn’t you?”

“Yes, I — I did.” She hesitated, looking upset, cradlingher tea in her cold hands. “I think that’s the worst bit.I know Bathilda thought it was all just talk, but ‘Forthe Greater Good’ became Grindelwald’s slogan, hisjustification for all the atrocities he committed later.And ... from that ... it looks like Dumbledore gave himthe idea. They say ‘For the Greater Good’ was evencarved over the entrance to Nurmengard.”

“What’s Nurmengard?”

Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“The prison Grindelwald had built to hold hisopponents. He ended up in there himself, onceDumbledore had caught him. Anyway, it’s — it’s anawful thought that Dumbledore’s ideas helpedGrindelwald rise to power. But on the other hand,even Rita can’t pretend that they knew each other formore than a few months one summer when they wereboth really young, and —”

“I thought you’d say that,” said Harry. He did notwant to let his anger spill out at her, but it was hardto keep his voice steady. “I thought you’d say Theywere young. ’ They were the same age as we are now.And here we are, risking our lives to fight the DarkArts, and there he was, in a huddle with his new bestfriend, plotting their rise to power over the Muggles.”

His temper would not remain in check much longer:He stood up and walked around, trying to work someof it off.

“I’m not trying to defend what Dumbledore wrote,”said Hermione. “All that ‘right to rule’ rubbish, it’s‘Magic Is Might’ all over again. But Harry, his motherhad just died, he was stuck alone in the house —”

“Alone? He wasn’t alone! He had his brother andsister for company, his Squib sister he was keepinglocked up —”

“I don’t believe it,” said Hermione. She stood up too.“Whatever was wrong with that girl, I don’t think shewas a Squib. The Dumbledore we knew would never,ever have allowed —”

“The Dumbledore we thought we knew didn’t want toconquer Muggles by force!” Harry shouted, his voiceechoing across the empty hilltop, and several

Page | 406 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

blackbirds rose into the air, squawking and spiralingagainst the pearly sky.

“He changed, Harry, he changed! It’s as simple asthat! Maybe he did believe these things when he wasseventeen, but the whole of the rest of his life wasdevoted to fighting the Dark Arts! Dumbledore wasthe one who stopped Grindelwald, the one who alwaysvoted for Muggle protection and Muggle-born rights,who fought You-Know-Who from the start, and whodied trying to bring him down!”

Rita’s book lay on the ground between them, so thatthe face of Albus Dumbledore smiled dolefully atboth.

“Harry, I’m sorry, but I think the real reason you’re soangry is that Dumbledore never told you any of thishimself.”

“Maybe I am!” Harry bellowed, and he flung his armsover his head, hardly knowing whether he was tryingto hold in his anger or protect himself from the weightof his own disillusionment. “Look what he asked fromme, Hermione! Risk your life, Harry! And again! Andagain! And don’t expect me to explain everything, justtrust me blindly, trust that I know what I’m doing,trust me even though I don’t trust you! Never thewhole truth! Never!”

His voice cracked with the strain, and they stoodlooking at each other in the whiteness and theemptiness, and Harry felt they were as insignificantas insects beneath that wide sky.

“He loved you,” Hermione whispered. “I know he lovedyou.”

Harry dropped his arms.

Page | 407 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t know who he loved, Hermione, but it wasnever me. This isn’t love, the mess he’s left me in. Heshared a damn sight more of what he was reallythinking with Gellert Grindelwald than he ever sharedwith me.”

Harry picked up Hermione’s wand, which he haddropped in the snow, and sat back down in theentrance of the tent.

“Thanks for the tea. I’ll finish the watch. You get backin the warm.”

She hesitated, but recognized the dismissal. Shepicked up the book and then walked back past himinto the tent, but as she did so, she brushed the topof his head lightly with her hand. He closed his eyesat her touch, and hated himself for wishing that whatshe said was true: that Dumbledore had really cared.

Page | 408 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



THE SILVER DOE

It was snowing by the time Hermione took over thewatch at midnight. Harry’s dreams were confused anddisturbing: Nagini wove in and out of them, firstthrough a gigantic, cracked ring, then through awreath of Christmas roses. He woke repeatedly,panicky, convinced that somebody had called out tohim in the distance, imagining that the windwhipping around the tent was footsteps or voices.

Finally he got up in the darkness and joinedHermione, who was huddled in the entrance to thetent reading A History of Magic by the light of herwand. The snow was still falling thickly, and shegreeted with relief his suggestion of packing up earlyand moving on.

“Well go somewhere more sheltered,” she agreed,shivering as she pulled on a sweatshirt over herpajamas. “I kept thinking I could hear people movingoutside. I even thought I saw somebody once ortwice.”

Page | 409 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry paused in the act of pulling on a jumper andglanced at the silent, motionless Sneakoscope on thetable.

“I’m sure I imagined it,” said Hermione, lookingnervous. “The snow in the dark, it plays tricks onyour eyes. ... But perhaps we ought to Disapparateunder the Invisibility Cloak, just in case?”

Half an hour later, with the tent packed, Harrywearing the Horcrux, and Hermione clutching thebeaded bag, they Disapparated. The usual tightnessengulfed them; Harry’s feet parted company with thesnowy ground, then slammed hard onto what felt likefrozen earth covered with leaves.

“Where are we?” he asked, peering around at a freshmass of trees as Hermione opened the beaded bagand began tugging out tent poles.

“The Forest of Dean,” she said. “I came camping hereonce with my mum and dad.”

Here too snow lay on the trees all around and it wasbitterly cold, but they were at least protected from thewind. They spent most of the day inside the tent,huddled for warmth around the useful bright blueflames that Hermione was so adept at producing, andwhich could be scooped up and carried around in ajar. Harry felt as though he was recuperating fromsome brief but severe illness, an impressionreinforced by Hermione’s solicitousness. Thatafternoon fresh flakes drifted down upon them, sothat even their sheltered clearing had a fresh dustingof powdery snow.

After two nights of little sleep, Harry’s senses seemedmore alert than usual. Their escape from Godric’sHollow had been so narrow that Voldemort seemed

Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

somehow closer than before, more threatening. Asdarkness drew in again Harry refused Hermione’soffer to keep watch and told her to go to bed.

Harry moved an old cushion into the tent mouth andsat down, wearing all the sweaters he owned but evenso, still shivery. The darkness deepened with thepassing hours until it was virtually impenetrable. Hewas on the point of taking out the Marauder’s Map, soas to watch Ginny’s dot for a while, before heremembered that it was the Christmas holidays andthat she would be back at the Burrow.

Every tiny movement seemed magnified in thevastness of the forest. Harry knew that it must be fullof living creatures, but he wished they would allremain still and silent so that he could separate theirinnocent scurryings and prowlings from noises thatmight proclaim other, sinister movements. Heremembered the sound of a cloak slithering over deadleaves many years ago, and at once thought he heardit again before mentally shaking himself. Theirprotective enchantments had worked for weeks; whyshould they break now? And yet he could not throwoff the feeling that something was different tonight.

Several times he jerked upright, his neck achingbecause he had fallen asleep, slumped at an awkwardangle against the side of the tent. The night reachedsuch a depth of velvety blackness that he might havebeen suspended in limbo between Disapparition andApparition. He had just held up a hand in front of hisface to see whether he could make out his fingerswhen it happened.

A bright silver light appeared right ahead of him,moving through the trees. Whatever the source, it wasmoving soundlessly. The light seemed simply to drifttoward him.

Page | 411 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He jumped to his feet, his voice frozen in his throat,and raised Hermione’s wand. He screwed up his eyesas the light became blinding, the trees in front of itpitch-black in silhouette, and still the thing camecloser. ...

And then the source of the light stepped out frombehind an oak. It was a silver-white doe, moon-brightand dazzling, picking her way over the ground, stillsilent, and leaving no hoofprints in the fine powderingof snow. She stepped toward him, her beautiful headwith its wide, long-lashed eyes held high.

Harry stared at the creature, filled with wonder, notat her strangeness, but at her inexplicable familiarity.He felt that he had been waiting for her to come, butthat he had forgotten, until this moment, that theyhad arranged to meet. His impulse to shout forHermione, which had been so strong a moment ago,had gone. He knew, he would have staked his life onit, that she had come for him, and him alone.

They gazed at each other for several long momentsand then she turned and walked away.

“No,” he said, and his voice was cracked with lack ofuse. “Come back!”

She continued to step deliberately through the trees,and soon her brightness was striped by their thickblack trunks. For one trembling second he hesitated.Caution murmured it could be a trick, a lure, a trap.But instinct, overwhelming instinct, told him that thiswas not Dark Magic. He set off in pursuit.

Snow crunched beneath his feet, but the doe made nonoise as she passed through the trees, for she wasnothing but light. Deeper and deeper into the forestshe led him, and Harry walked quickly, sure that

Page | 412 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

when she stopped, she would allow him to approachher properly. And then she would speak and the voicewould tell him what he needed to know.

At last, she came to a halt. She turned her beautifulhead toward him once more, and he broke into a run,a question burning in him, but as he opened his lipsto ask it, she vanished.

Though the darkness had swallowed her whole, herburnished image was still imprinted on his retinas; itobscured his vision, brightening when he lowered hiseyelids, disorienting him. Now fear came: Herpresence had meant safety.

“Lumos\” he whispered, and the wand-tip ignited.

The imprint of the doe faded away with every blink ofhis eyes as he stood there, listening to the sounds ofthe forest, to distant crackles of twigs, soft swishes ofsnow. Was he about to be attacked? Had she enticedhim into an ambush? Was he imagining thatsomebody stood beyond the reach of the wandlight,watching him?

He held the wand higher. Nobody ran out at him, noflash of green light burst from behind a tree. Why,then, had she led him to this spot?

Something gleamed in the light of the wand, andHarry spun about, but all that was there was a small,frozen pool, its cracked black surface glittering as heraised the wand higher to examine it.

He moved forward rather cautiously and looked down.The ice reflected his distorted shadow and the beamof wandlight, but deep below the thick, misty graycarapace, something else glinted. A great silver cross

Page | 413 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

His heart skipped into his mouth: He dropped to hisknees at the pool’s edge and angled the wand so as toflood the bottom of the pool with as much light aspossible. A glint of deep red ... It was a sword withglittering rubies in its hilt. ... The sword of Gryffindorwas lying at the bottom of the forest pool.

Barely breathing, he stared down at it. How was thispossible? How could it have come to be lying in aforest pool, this close to the place where they werecamping? Had some unknown magic drawn Hermioneto this spot, or was the doe, which he had taken to bea Patronus, some kind of guardian of the pool? Orhad the sword been put into the pool after they hadarrived, precisely because they were here? In whichcase, where was the person who had wanted to passit to Harry? Again he directed the wand at thesurrounding trees and bushes, searching for ahuman outline, for the glint of an eye, but he couldnot see anyone there. All the same, a little more fearleavened his exhilaration as he returned his attentionto the sword reposing upon the bottom of the frozenpool.

He pointed the wand at the silvery shape andmurmured, “Accio Sword.”

It did not stir. He had not expected it to. If it had beenthat easy, the sword would have lain on the groundfor him to pick up, not in the depths of a frozen pool.He set off around the circle of ice, thinking hardabout the last time the sword had delivered itself tohim. He had been in terrible danger then, and hadasked for help.

“Help,” he murmured, but the sword remained uponthe pool bottom, indifferent, motionless.

Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

What was it, Harry asked himself (walking again),that Dumbledore had told him the last time he hadretrieved the sword? Only a true Gryffindor could havepulled that out of the hat. And what were the qualitiesthat defined a Gryffindor? A small voice inside Harry’shead answered him: Their daring, nerve, and chivalryset Gryffindors apart.

Harry stopped walking and let out a long sigh, hissmoky breath dispersing rapidly upon the frozen air.He knew what he had to do. If he was honest withhimself, he had thought it might come to this fromthe moment he had spotted the sword through theice.

He glanced around at the surrounding trees again,but was convinced now that nobody was going toattack him. They had had their chance as he walkedalone through the forest, had had plenty ofopportunity as he examined the pool. The only reasonto delay at this point was because the immediateprospect was so deeply uninviting.

With fumbling fingers Harry started to remove hismany layers of clothing. Where “chivalry” entered intothis, he thought ruefully, he was not entirely sure,unless it counted as chivalrous that he was notcalling for Hermione to do it in his stead.

An owl hooted somewhere as he stripped off, and hethought with a pang of Hedwig. He was shiveringnow, his teeth chattering horribly, and yet hecontinued to strip off until at last he stood there inhis underwear, barefooted in the snow. He placed thepouch containing his wand, his mother’s letter, theshard of Sirius’s mirror, and the old Snitch on top ofhis clothes, then he pointed Hermione’s wand at theice.

Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Diffindo.”

It cracked with a sound like a bullet in the silence:

The surface of the pool broke and chunks of dark icerocked on the ruffled water. As far as Harry couldjudge, it was not deep, but to retrieve the sword hewould have to submerge himself completely.

Contemplating the task ahead would not make iteasier or the water warmer. He stepped to the pool’sedge and placed Hermione’s wand on the ground, stilllit. Then, trying not to imagine how much colder hewas about to become or how violently he would soonbe shivering, he jumped.

Every pore of his body screamed in protest: The veryair in his lungs seemed to freeze solid as he wassubmerged to his shoulders in the frozen water. Hecould hardly breathe; trembling so violently the waterlapped over the edges of the pool, he felt for the bladewith his numb feet. He only wanted to dive once.

Harry put off the moment of total submersion fromsecond to second, gasping and shaking, until he toldhimself that it must be done, gathered all his courage,and dived.

The cold was agony: It attacked him like fire. Hisbrain itself seemed to have frozen as he pushedthrough the dark water to the bottom and reachedout, groping for the sword. His fingers closed aroundthe hilt; he pulled it upward.

Then something closed tight around his neck. Hethought of water weeds, though nothing had brushedhim as he dived, and raised his empty hand to freehimself. It was not weed: The chain of the Horcruxhad tightened and was slowly constricting hiswindpipe.

Page | 416 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

Harry kicked out wildly, trying to push himself backto the surface, but merely propelled himself into therocky side of the pool. Thrashing, suffocating, hescrabbled at the strangling chain, his frozen fingersunable to loosen it, and now little lights were poppinginside his head, and he was going to drown, there wasnothing left, nothing he could do, and the arms thatclosed around his chest were surely Death’s. ...

Choking and retching, soaking and colder than hehad ever been in his life, he came to facedown in thesnow. Somewhere close by, another person waspanting and coughing and staggering around.Hermione had come again, as she had come when thesnake attacked. ... Yet it did not sound like her, notwith those deep coughs, not judging by the weight ofthe footsteps. ...

Harry had no strength to lift his head and see hissavior’s identity. All he could do was raise a shakinghand to his throat and feel the place where the lockethad cut tightly into his flesh. It was gone: Someonehad cut him free. Then a panting voice spoke fromover his head.

“Are — you — mental?”

Nothing but the shock of hearing that voice couldhave given Harry the strength to get up. Shiveringviolently, he staggered to his feet. There before himstood Ron, fully dressed but drenched to the skin, hishair plastered to his face, the sword of Gryffindor inone hand and the Horcrux dangling from its brokenchain in the other.

“Why the hell,” panted Ron, holding up the Horcrux,which swung backward and forward on its shortenedchain in some parody of hypnosis, “didn’t you takethis thing off before you dived?”

Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry could not answer. The silver doe was nothing,nothing compared with Ron’s reappearance; he couldnot believe it. Shuddering with cold, he caught up thepile of clothes still lying at the water’s edge and beganto pull them on. As he dragged sweater after sweaterover his head, Harry stared at Ron, half expecting himto have disappeared every time he lost sight of him,and yet he had to be real: He had just dived into thepool, he had saved Harry’s life.

“It was y-you?” Harry said at last, his teethchattering, his voice weaker than usual due to hisnear-strangulation.

“Well, yeah,” said Ron, looking slightly confused.“Y-you cast that doe?”

“What? No, of course not! I thought it was you doingit!”

“My Patronus is a stag.”

“Oh yeah. I thought it looked different. No antlers.”

Harry put Hagrid’s pouch back around his neck,pulled on a final sweater, stooped to pick upHermione’s wand, and faced Ron again.

“How come you’re here?”

Apparently Ron had hoped that this point would comeup later, if at all.

“Well, I’ve — you know — I’ve come back. If—” Hecleared his throat. “You know. You still want me.”

There was a pause, in which the subject of Ron’sdeparture seemed to rise like a wall between them.

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Yet he was here. He had returned. He had just savedHarry’s life.

Ron looked down at his hands. He seemedmomentarily surprised to see the things he washolding.

“Oh yeah, I got it out,” he said, rather unnecessarily,holding up the sword for Harry’s inspection. “That’swhy you jumped in, right?”

“Yeah,” said Harry. “But I don’t understand. How didyou get here? How did you find us?”

“Long story,” said Ron. “I’ve been looking for you forhours, it’s a big forest, isn’t it? And I was justthinking I’d have to kip under a tree and wait formorning when I saw that deer coming and youfollowing.”

“You didn’t see anyone else?”

“No,” said Ron. “I —”

But he hesitated, glancing at two trees growing closetogether some yards away.

“I did think I saw something move over there, but Iwas running to the pool at the time, because you’dgone in and you hadn’t come up, so I wasn’t going tomake a detour to — hey!”

Harry was already hurrying to the place Ron hadindicated. The two oaks grew close together; therewas a gap of only a few inches between the trunks ateye level, an ideal place to see but not be seen. Theground around the roots, however, was free of snow,and Harry could see no sign of footprints. He walked

Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

back to where Ron stood waiting, still holding thesword and the Horcrux.

“Anything there?” Ron asked.

“No,” said Harry.

“So how did the sword get in that pool?”

“Whoever cast the Patronus must have put it there.”

They both looked at the ornate silver sword, its rubiedhilt glinting a little in the light from Hermione’s wand.

“You reckon this is the real one?” asked Ron.

“One way to find out, isn’t there?” said Harry.

The Horcrux was still swinging from Ron’s hand. Thelocket was twitching slightly. Harry knew that thething inside it was agitated again. It had sensed thepresence of the sword and had tried to kill Harryrather than let him possess it. Now was not the timefor long discussions; now was the moment to destroythe locket once and for all. Harry looked around,holding Hermione’s wand high, and saw the place: aflattish rock lying in the shadow of a sycamore tree.

“Come here,” he said, and he led the way, brushedsnow from the rock’s surface, and held out his handfor the Horcrux. When Ron offered the sword,however, Harry shook his head.

“No, you should do it.”

“Me?” said Ron, looking shocked. “Why?”

“Because you got the sword out of the pool. I think it’ssupposed to be you.”

Page | 420 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He was not being kind or generous. As certainly as hehad known that the doe was benign, he knew thatRon had to be the one to wield the sword.

Dumbledore had at least taught Harry somethingabout certain kinds of magic, of the incalculablepower of certain acts.

“I’m going to open it,” said Harry, “and you stab it.Straightaway, okay? Because whatever’s in there willput up a fight. The bit of Riddle in the diary tried tokill me.”

“How are you going to open it?” asked Ron. He lookedterrified.

“I’m going to ask it to open, using Parseltongue,” saidHarry. The answer came so readily to his lips that hethought that he had always known it deep down:Perhaps it had taken his recent encounter with Naginito make him realize it. He looked at the serpentine S,inlaid with glittering green stones: It was easy tovisualize it as a minuscule snake, curled upon thecold rock.

“No!” said Ron. “No, don’t open it! I’m serious!”

“Why not?” asked Harry. “Let’s get rid of the damnthing, it’s been months —”

“I can’t, Harry, I’m serious — you do it —”

“But why?”

“Because that thing’s bad for me!” said Ron, backingaway from the locket on the rock. “I can’t handle it!

I’m not making excuses, Harry, for what I was like,but it affects me worse than it affected you andHermione, it made me think stuff— stuff I wasthinking anyway, but it made everything worse, IPage | 421 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

can’t explain it, and then I’d take it off and I’d get myhead on straight again, and then I’d have to put theeffing thing back on — I can’t do it, Harry!”

He had backed away, the sword dragging at his side,shaking his head.

“You can do it,” said Harry, “you can! You’ve just gotthe sword, I know it’s supposed to be you who uses it.Please, just get rid of it, Ron.”

The sound of his name seemed to act like a stimulant.Ron swallowed, then, still breathing hard through hislong nose, moved back toward the rock.

“Tell me when,” he croaked.

“On three,” said Harry, looking back down at thelocket and narrowing his eyes, concentrating on theletter S, imagining a serpent, while the contents of thelocket rattled like a trapped cockroach. It would havebeen easy to pity it, except that the cut aroundHarry’s neck still burned.

“One ... two ... three ... open.”

The last word came as a hiss and a snarl and thegolden doors of the locket swung wide with a littleclick.

Behind both of the glass windows within blinked aliving eye, dark and handsome as Tom Riddle’s eyeshad been before he turned them scarlet and slit-pupiled.

“Stab,” said Harry, holding the locket steady on therock.

Page | 422 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron raised the sword in his shaking hands: The pointdangled over the frantically swiveling eyes, and Harrygripped the locket tightly, bracing himself, alreadyimagining blood pouring from the empty windows.

Then a voice hissed from out of the Horcrux.

“I have seen your heart, and it is mine.”

“Don’t listen to it!” Harry said harshly. “Stab it!”

“I have seen your dreams, Ronald Weasley, and I haveseen your fears. All you desire is possible, but all thatyou dread is also possible. ...”

“Stab!” shouted Harry; his voice echoed off thesurrounding trees, the sword point trembled, and Rongazed down into Riddle’s eyes.

“Least loved, always, by the mother who craved adaughter ... Least loved, now, by the girl who prefersyour friend ... Second best, always, eternallyovershadowed ...”

“Ron, stab it now!” Harry bellowed: He could feel thelocket quivering in his grip and was scared of whatwas coming. Ron raised the sword still higher, and ashe did so, Riddle’s eyes gleamed scarlet.

Out of the locket’s two windows, out of the eyes, therebloomed, like two grotesque bubbles, the heads ofHarry and Hermione, weirdly distorted.

Ron yelled in shock and backed away as the figuresblossomed out of the locket, first chests, then waists,then legs, until they stood in the locket, side by sidelike trees with a common root, swaying over Ron andthe real Harry, who had snatched his fingers awayfrom the locket as it burned, suddenly, white-hot.Page | 423 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Ron!” he shouted, but the Riddle-Harry was nowspeaking with Voldemort’s voice and Ron was gazing,mesmerized, into its face.

“Why return? We were better without you, happierwithout you, glad of your absence. ... We laughed atyour stupidity, your cowardice, your presumption —”

“Presumption?’ echoed the Riddle-Hermione, who wasmore beautiful and yet more terrible than the realHermione: She swayed, cackling, before Ron, wholooked horrified yet transfixed, the sword hangingpointlessly at his side. “ Who could look at you, whowould ever look at you, beside Harry Potter? Whathave you ever done, compared with the Chosen One?What are you, compared with the Boy Who Lived?”

“Ron, stab it, STAB IT!” Harry yelled, but Ron did notmove: His eyes were wide, and the Riddle-Harry andthe Riddle-Hermione were reflected in them, their hairswirling like flames, their eyes shining red, theirvoices lifted in an evil duet.

“ Your mother confessed,” sneered Riddle-Harry, whileRiddle-Hermione jeered, “that she would havepreferred me as a son, would be glad to exchange ...”

“Who wouldn’t prefer him, what woman would takeyou, you are nothing, nothing, nothing to him,” croonedRiddle-Hermione, and she stretched like a snake andentwined herself around Riddle-Harry, wrapping himin a close embrace: Their lips met.

On the ground in front of them, Ron’s face filled withanguish. He raised the sword high, his arms shaking.

“Do it, Ron!” Harry yelled.

Page | 424 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron looked toward him, and Harry thought he saw atrace of scarlet in his eyes.

“Ron — ?”

The sword flashed, plunged: Harry threw himself outof the way, there was a clang of metal and a long,drawn-out scream. Harry whirled around, slipping inthe snow, wand held ready to defend himself: butthere was nothing to fight.

The monstrous versions of himself and Hermionewere gone: There was only Ron, standing there withthe sword held slackly in his hand, looking down atthe shattered remains of the locket on the flat rock.

Slowly, Harry walked back to him, hardly knowingwhat to say or do. Ron was breathing heavily: Hiseyes were no longer red at all, but their normal blue;they were also wet.

Harry stooped, pretending he had not seen, andpicked up the broken Horcrux. Ron had pierced theglass in both windows: Riddle’s eyes were gone, andthe stained silk lining of the locket was smokingslightly. The thing that had lived in the Horcrux hadvanished; torturing Ron had been its final act.

The sword clanged as Ron dropped it. He had sunk tohis knees, his head in his arms. He was shaking, butnot, Harry realized, from cold. Harry crammed thebroken locket into his pocket, knelt down beside Ron,and placed a hand cautiously on his shoulder. Hetook it as a good sign that Ron did not throw it off.

“After you left,” he said in a low voice, grateful for thefact that Ron’s face was hidden, “she cried for a week.Probably longer, only she didn’t want me to see. There

Page | 425 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

were loads of nights when we never even spoke toeach other. With you gone ...”

He could not finish; it was only now that Ron washere again that Harry fully realized how much hisabsence had cost them.

“She’s like my sister,” he went on. “I love her like asister and I reckon she feels the same way about me.It’s always been like that. I thought you knew.”

Ron did not respond, but turned his face away fromHarry and wiped his nose noisily on his sleeve. Harrygot to his feet again and walked to where Ron’senormous rucksack lay yards away, discarded as Ronhad run toward the pool to save Harry from drowning.He hoisted it onto his own back and walked back toRon, who clambered to his feet as Harry approached,eyes bloodshot but otherwise composed.

“I’m sorry,” he said in a thick voice. “I’m sorry I left. Iknow I was a — a —”

He looked around at the darkness, as if hoping a badenough word would swoop down upon him and claimhim.

“You’ve sort of made up for it tonight,” said Harry.“Getting the sword. Finishing off the Horcrux. Savingmy life.”

“That makes me sound a lot cooler than I was,” Ronmumbled.

“Stuff like that always sounds cooler than it reallywas,” said Harry. “I’ve been trying to tell you that foryears.”

Page | 426 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Simultaneously they walked forward and hugged,Harry gripping the still-sopping back of Ron’s jacket.

“And now,” said Harry as they broke apart, “all we’vegot to do is find the tent again.”

But it was not difficult. Though the walk through thedark forest with the doe had seemed lengthy, withRon by his side the journey back seemed to take asurprisingly short time. Harry could not wait to wakeHermione, and it was with quickening excitement thathe entered the tent, Ron lagging a little behind him.

It was gloriously warm after the pool and the forest,the only illumination the bluebell flames stillshimmering in a bowl on the floor. Hermione was fastasleep, curled up under her blankets, and did notmove until Harry had said her name several times.

“Hermionel”

She stirred, then sat up quickly, pushing her hair outof her face.

“What’s wrong? Harry? Are you all right?”

“It’s okay, everything’s fine. More than fine. I’m great.There’s someone here.”

“What do you mean? Who — ?”

She saw Ron, who stood there holding the sword anddripping onto the threadbare carpet. Harry backedinto a shadowy corner, slipped off Ron’s rucksack,and attempted to blend in with the canvas.

Hermione slid out of her bunk and moved like asleepwalker toward Ron, her eyes upon his pale face.She stopped right in front of him, her lips slightly

Page | 427 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

parted, her eyes wide. Ron gave a weak, hopeful smileand half raised his arms.

Hermione launched herself forward and startedpunching every inch of him that she could reach.

“Ouch — ow — gerroff! What the — ? Hermione —OW!”

“You — complete — arse — Ronald — Weasley!”

She punctuated every word with a blow: Ron backedaway, shielding his head as Hermione advanced.

“You — crawl — back — here — after — weeks — and— weeks — oh, where’s my wand?”

She looked as though ready to wrestle it out ofHarry’s hands and he reacted instinctively.

“Protegol”

The invisible shield erupted between Ron andHermione: The force of it knocked her backward ontothe floor. Spitting hair out of her mouth, she leapt upagain.

“Hermione!” said Harry. “Calm —”

“I will not calm down!” she screamed. Never beforehad he seen her lose control like this; she lookedquite demented. “Give me back my wand! Give it backto me\”

“Hermione, will you please —”

“Don’t you tell me what to do, Harry Potter!” shescreeched. “Don’t you dare! Give it back now! AndYOU!”

Page | 428 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

She was pointing at Ron in dire accusation: It waslike a malediction, and Harry could not blame Ron forretreating several steps.

“I came running after you! I called you! I begged youto come back!”

“I know,” Ron said, “Hermione, I’m sorry, I’m really —

“Oh, you’re sorry!”

She laughed, a high-pitched, out-of-control sound;Ron looked at Harry for help, but Harry merelygrimaced his helplessness.

“You come back after weeks — weeks — and youthink it’s all going to be all right if you just saysorry?”

“Well, what else can I say?” Ron shouted, and Harrywas glad that Ron was fighting back.

“Oh, I don’t know!” yelled Hermione with awfulsarcasm. “Rack your brains, Ron, that should onlytake a couple of seconds —”

“Hermione,” interjected Harry, who considered this alow blow, “he just saved my —”

“I don’t care!” she screamed. “I don’t care what he’sdone! Weeks and weeks, we could have been dead forall he knew —”

“I knew you weren’t dead!” bellowed Ron, drowningher voice for the first time, and approaching as closeas he could with the Shield Charm between them.“Harry’s all over the Prophet, all over the radio, they’relooking for you everywhere, all these rumors andPage | 429 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

mental stories, I knew I’d hear straight off if you weredead, you don’t know what it’s been like —”

“What it’s been like for you?”

Her voice was now so shrill only bats would be able tohear it soon, but she had reached a level ofindignation that rendered her temporarily speechless,and Ron seized his opportunity.

“I wanted to come back the minute I’d Disapparated,but I walked straight into a gang of Snatchers,Hermione, and I couldn’t go anywhere!”

“A gang of what?” asked Harry, as Hermione threwherself down into a chair with her arms and legscrossed so tightly it seemed unlikely that she wouldunravel them for several years.

“Snatchers,” said Ron. “They’re everywhere — gangstrying to earn gold by rounding up Muggle-borns andblood traitors, there’s a reward from the Ministry foreveryone captured. I was on my own and I look like Imight be school age; they got really excited, thought Iwas a Muggle-born in hiding. I had to talk fast to getout of being dragged to the Ministry.”

“What did you say to them?”

“Told them I was Stan Shunpike. First person I couldthink of.”

“And they believed that?”

“They weren’t the brightest. One of them wasdefinitely part troll, the smell off him. ...”

Ron glanced at Hermione, clearly hopeful she mightsoften at this small instance of humor, but her

Page | 430 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

expression remained stony above her tightly knottedlimbs.

“Anyway, they had a row about whether I was Stan ornot. It was a bit pathetic to be honest, but there werestill five of them and only one of me and they’d takenmy wand. Then two of them got into a fight and whilethe others were distracted I managed to hit the oneholding me in the stomach, grabbed his wand,Disarmed the bloke holding mine, and Disapparated.

I didn’t do it so well, Splinched myself again” — Ronheld up his right hand to show two missingfingernails; Hermione raised her eyebrows coldly —“and I came out miles from where you were. By thetime I got back to that bit of riverbank where we’dbeen ... you’d gone.”

“Gosh, what a gripping story,” Hermione said in thelofty voice she adopted when wishing to wound. “Youmust have been simply terrified. Meanwhile we wentto Godric’s Hollow and, let’s think, what happenedthere, Harry? Oh yes, You-Know-Who’s snake turnedup, it nearly killed both of us, and then You-Know-Who himself arrived and missed us by about asecond.”

“What?” Ron said, gaping from her to Harry, butHermione ignored him.

“Imagine losing fingernails, Harry! That really putsour sufferings into perspective, doesn’t it?”

“Hermione,” said Harry quietly, “Ron just saved mylife.”

She appeared not to have heard him.

“One thing I would like to know, though,” she said,fixing her eyes on a spot a foot over Ron’s head. “How

Page | 431 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

exactly did you find us tonight? That’s important.

Once we know, we’ll be able to make sure we’re notvisited by anyone else we don’t want to see.”

Ron glared at her, then pulled a small silver objectfrom his jeans pocket.

“This.”

She had to look at Ron to see what he was showingthem.

“The Deluminator?” she asked, so surprised sheforgot to look cold and fierce.

“It doesn’t just turn the lights on and off,” said Ron. “Idon’t know how it works or why it happened then andnot any other time, because I’ve been wanting to comeback ever since I left. But I was listening to the radioreally early on Christmas morning and I heard ... Iheard you.”

He was looking at Hermione.

“You heard me on the radio?” she askedincredulously.

“No, I heard you coming out of my pocket. Yourvoice,” he held up the Deluminator again, “came outof this.”

“And what exactly did I say?” asked Hermione, hertone somewhere between skepticism and curiosity.

“My name. ‘Ron.’And you said ... something about awand. ...”

Hermione turned a fiery shade of scarlet. Harryremembered: It had been the first time Ron’s name

Page | 432 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

had been said aloud by either of them since the dayhe had left; Hermione had mentioned it when talkingabout repairing Harry’s wand.

“So I took it out,” Ron went on, looking at theDeluminator, “and it didn’t seem different oranything, but I was sure I’d heard you. So I clicked it.And the light went out in my room, but another lightappeared right outside the window.”

Ron raised his empty hand and pointed in front ofhim, his eyes focused on something neither Harry norHermione could see.

“It was a ball of light, kind of pulsing, and bluish, likethat light you get around a Portkey, you know?”

“Yeah,” said Harry and Hermione togetherautomatically.

“I knew this was it,” said Ron. “I grabbed my stuff andpacked it, then I put on my rucksack and went outinto the garden.

“The little ball of light was hovering there, waiting forme, and when I came out it bobbed along a bit and Ifollowed it behind the shed and then it ... well, it wentinside me.”

“Sorry?” said Harry, sure he had not heard correctly.

“It sort of floated toward me,” said Ron, illustratingthe movement with his free index finger, “right to mychest, and then — it just went straight through. Itwas here,” he touched a point close to his heart, “Icould feel it, it was hot. And once it was inside me Iknew what I was supposed to do, I knew it would takeme where I needed to go. So I Disapparated and came

Page | 433 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

out on the side of a hill. There was snow everywhere.

“We were there,” said Harry. “We spent two nightsthere, and the second night I kept thinking I couldhear someone moving around in the dark and callingout!”

“Yeah, well, that would’ve been me,” said Ron. “Yourprotective spells work, anyway, because I couldn’t seeyou and I couldn’t hear you. I was sure you werearound, though, so in the end I got in my sleeping bagand waited for one of you to appear. I thought you’dhave to show yourselves when you packed up thetent.”

“No, actually,” said Hermione. “We’ve beenDisapparating under the Invisibility Cloak as an extraprecaution. And we left really early, because, as Harrysays, we’d heard somebody blundering around.”

“Well, I stayed on that hill all day,” said Ron. “I kepthoping you’d appear. But when it started to get dark Iknew I must have missed you, so I clicked theDeluminator again, the blue light came out and wentinside me, and I Disapparated and arrived here inthese woods. I still couldn’t see you, so I just had tohope one of you would show yourselves in the end —and Harry did. Well, I saw the doe first, obviously.”

“You saw the what?” said Hermione sharply.

They explained what had happened, and as the storyof the silver doe and the sword in the pool unfolded,Hermione frowned from one to the other of them,concentrating so hard she forgot to keep her limbslocked together.

Page | 434 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But it must have been a Patronus!” she said.“Couldn’t you see who was casting it? Didn’t you seeanyone? And it led you to the sword! I can’t believethis! Then what happened?”

Ron explained how he had watched Harry jump intothe pool and had waited for him to resurface; how hehad realized that something was wrong, dived in, andsaved Harry, then returned for the sword. He got asfar as the opening of the locket, then hesitated, andHarry cut in.

“— and Ron stabbed it with the sword.”

“And ... and it went? Just like that?” she whispered.

“Well, it — it screamed,” said Harry with half a glanceat Ron. “Here.”

He threw the locket into her lap; gingerly she picked itup and examined its punctured windows.

Deciding that it was at last safe to do so, Harryremoved the Shield Charm with a wave of Hermione’swand and turned to Ron.

“Did you just say you got away from the Snatcherswith a spare wand?”

“What?” said Ron, who had been watching Hermioneexamining the locket. “Oh — oh yeah.”

He tugged open a buckle on his rucksack and pulleda short, dark wand out of its pocket. “Here. I figuredit’s always handy to have a backup.”

“You were right,” said Harry, holding out his hand.“Mine’s broken.”

Page | 435 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’re kidding?” Ron said, but at that momentHermione got to her feet, and he looked apprehensiveagain.

Hermione put the vanquished Horcrux into thebeaded bag, then climbed back into her bed andsettled down without another word.

Ron passed Harry the new wand.

“About the best you could hope for, I think,”murmured Harry.

“Yeah,” said Ron. “Could’ve been worse. Rememberthose birds she set on me?”

“I still haven’t ruled it out,” came Hermione’s muffledvoice from beneath her blankets, but Harry saw Ronsmiling slightly as he pulled his maroon pajamas outof his rucksack.

Page | 436 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



XENOPHILIUS LOVEGOOD

Harry had not expected Hermione’s anger to abateovernight, and was therefore unsurprised that shecommunicated mainly by dirty looks and pointedsilences the next morning. Ron responded bymaintaining an unnaturally somber demeanor in herpresence as an outward sign of continuing remorse.

In fact, when all three of them were together Harryfelt like the only non-mourner at a poorly attendedfuneral. During those few moments he spent alonewith Harry, however (collecting water and searchingthe undergrowth for mushrooms), Ron becameshamelessly cheery.

“Someone helped us,” he kept saying. “Someone sentthat doe. Someone’s on our side. One Horcrux down,mate!”

Bolstered by the destruction of the locket, they set todebating the possible locations of the otherHorcruxes, and even though they had discussed thematter so often before, Harry felt optimistic, certainthat more breakthroughs would succeed the first.

Page | 437 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hermione’s sulkiness could not mar his buoyantspirits: The sudden upswing in their fortunes, theappearance of the mysterious doe, the recovery ofGryffindor’s sword, and above all, Ron’s return, madeHarry so happy that it was quite difficult to maintaina straight face.

Late in the afternoon he and Ron escaped Hermione’sbaleful presence again, and under the pretense ofscouring the bare hedges for nonexistentblackberries, they continued their ongoing exchangeof news. Harry had finally managed to tell Ron thewhole story of his and Hermione’s variouswanderings, right up to the full story of what hadhappened at Godric’s Hollow; Ron was now fillingHarry in on everything he had discovered about thewider Wizarding world during his weeks away.

"... and how did you find out about the Taboo?” heasked Harry after explaining the many desperateattempts of Muggle-borns to evade the Ministry.

“The what?”

“You and Hermione have stopped saying You-Know-Who’s name!”

“Oh, yeah. Well, it’s just a bad habit we’ve slippedinto,” said Harry. “But I haven’t got a problem callinghim V —”

“NO!” roared Ron, causing Harry to jump into thehedge and Hermione (nose buried in a book at thetent entrance) to scowl over at them. “Sorry,” saidRon, wrenching Harry back out of the brambles, “butthe name’s been jinxed, Harry, that’s how they trackpeople! Using his name breaks protectiveenchantments, it causes some kind of magical

Page | 438 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

disturbance — it’s how they found us in TottenhamCourt Road!”

“Because we used his name?”

“Exactly! You’ve got to give them credit, it makessense. It was only people who were serious aboutstanding up to him, like Dumbledore, who ever dareduse it. Now they’ve put a Taboo on it, anyone whosays it is trackable — quick-and-easy way to findOrder members! They nearly got Kingsley —”

“You’re kidding?”

“Yeah, a bunch of Death Eaters cornered him, Billsaid, but he fought his way out. He’s on the run now,just like us.” Ron scratched his chin thoughtfully withthe end of his wand. “You don’t reckon Kingsley couldhave sent that doe?”

“His Patronus is a lynx, we saw it at the wedding,remember?”

“Oh yeah ...”

They moved farther along the hedge, away from thetent and Hermione.

“Harry ... you don’t reckon it could’ve beenDumbledore?”

“Dumbledore what?”

Ron looked a little embarrassed, but said in a lowvoice, “Dumbledore ... the doe? I mean,” Ron waswatching Harry out of the corners of his eyes, “he hadthe real sword last, didn’t he?”

Page | 439 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry did not laugh at Ron, because he understoodtoo well the longing behind the question. The ideathat Dumbledore had managed to come back to them,that he was watching over them, would have beeninexpressibly comforting. He shook his head.

“Dumbledore’s dead,” he said. “I saw it happen, I sawthe body. He’s definitely gone. Anyway, his Patronuswas a phoenix, not a doe.”

“Patronuses can change, though, can’t they?” saidRon. “Tonks’s changed, didn’t it?”

“Yeah, but if Dumbledore was alive, why wouldn’t heshow himself? Why wouldn’t he just hand us thesword?”

“Search me,” said Ron. “Same reason he didn’t give itto you while he was alive? Same reason he left you anold Snitch and Hermione a book of kids’ stories?”

“Which is what?” asked Harry, turning to look Ronfull in the face, desperate for the answer.

“I dunno,” said Ron. “Sometimes I’ve thought, whenI’ve been a bit hacked off, he was having a laugh or —or he just wanted to make it more difficult. But I don’tthink so, not anymore. He knew what he was doingwhen he gave me the Deluminator, didn’t he? He —well,” Ron’s ears turned bright red and he becameengrossed in a tuft of grass at his feet, which heprodded with his toe, “he must’ve known I’d run outon you.”

“No,” Harry corrected him. “He must’ve known you’dalways want to come back.”

Ron looked grateful, but still awkward. Partly tochange the subject, Harry said, “Speaking of

Page | 440 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore, have you heard what Skeeter wroteabout him?”

“Oh yeah,” said Ron at once, “people are talking aboutit quite a lot. ’Course, if things were different, it’d behuge news, Dumbledore being pals with Grindelwald,but now it’s just something to laugh about for peoplewho didn’t like Dumbledore, and a bit of a slap in theface for everyone who thought he was such a goodbloke. I don’t know that it’s such a big deal, though.He was really young when they —”

“Our age,” said Harry, just as he had retorted toHermione, and something in his face seemed todecide Ron against pursuing the subject.

A large spider sat in the middle of a frosted web in thebrambles. Harry took aim at it with the wand Ron hadgiven him the previous night, which Hermione hadsince condescended to examine, and had decided wasmade of blackthorn.

“Engorgio.”

The spider gave a little shiver, bouncing slightly in theweb. Harry tried again. This time the spider grewslightly larger.

“Stop that,” said Ron sharply. “I’m sorry I saidDumbledore was young, okay?”

Harry had forgotten Ron’s hatred of spiders.

“Sorry — Reducio.”

The spider did not shrink. Harry looked down at theblackthorn wand. Every minor spell he had cast withit so far that day had seemed less powerful than thosehe had produced with his phoenix wand. The new one

Page | 441 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

felt intrusively unfamiliar, like having somebody else’shand sewn to the end of his arm.

“You just need to practice,” said Hermione, who hadapproached them noiselessly from behind and hadstood watching anxiously as Harry tried to enlargeand reduce the spider. “It’s all a matter of confidence,Harry.”

He knew why she wanted it to be all right: She stillfelt guilty about breaking his wand. He bit back theretort that sprang to his lips, that she could take theblackthorn wand if she thought it made no difference,and he would have hers instead. Keen for them all tobe friends again, however, he agreed; but when Rongave Hermione a tentative smile, she stalked off andvanished behind her book once more.

All three of them returned to the tent when darknessfell, and Harry took first watch. Sitting in theentrance, he tried to make the blackthorn wandlevitate small stones at his feet; but his magic stillseemed clumsier and less powerful than it had donebefore. Hermione was lying on her bunk reading,while Ron, after many nervous glances up at her, hadtaken a small wooden wireless out of his rucksackand started to try and tune it.

“There’s this one program,” he told Harry in a lowvoice, “that tells the news like it really is. All theothers are on You-Know-Who’s side and are followingthe Ministry line, but this one ... you wait till youhear it, it’s great. Only they can’t do it every night,they have to keep changing locations in case they’reraided, and you need a password to tune in. ...

Trouble is, I missed the last one. ...”

He drummed lightly on the top of the radio with hiswand, muttering random words under his breath. He

Page | 442 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

threw Hermione many covert glances, plainly fearingan angry outburst, but for all the notice she took ofhim he might not have been there. For ten minutes orso Ron tapped and muttered, Hermione turned thepages of her book, and Harry continued to practicewith the blackthorn wand.

Finally Hermione climbed down from her bunk. Ronceased his tapping at once.

“If it’s annoying you, 111 stop!” he told Hermionenervously.

Hermione did not deign to respond, but approachedHarry.

“We need to talk,” she said.

He looked at the book still clutched in her hand. Itwas The Life and Lies of Albus Dumbledore.

“What?” he said apprehensively. It flew through hismind that there was a chapter on him in there; hewas not sure he felt up to hearing Rita’s version of hisrelationship with Dumbledore. Hermione’s answer,however, was completely unexpected.

“I want to go and see Xenophilius Lovegood.”

He stared at her.

“Sorry?”

“Xenophilius Lovegood. Luna’s father. I want to goand talk to him!”

“Er — why?”

Page | 443 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

She took a deep breath, as though bracing herself,and said, “It’s that mark, the mark in Beedle theBard. Look at this!”

She thrust The Life and Lies ofAlbus Dumbledoreunder Harry’s unwilling eyes and he saw aphotograph of the original letter that Dumbledore hadwritten Grindelwald, with Dumbledore’s familiar thin,slanting handwriting. He hated seeing absolute proofthat Dumbledore really had written those words, thatthey had not been Rita’s invention.

“The signature,” said Hermione. “Look at thesignature, Harry!”

He obeyed. For a moment he had no idea what shewas talking about, but, looking more closely with theaid of his lit wand, he saw that Dumbledore hadreplaced the A of Albus with a tiny version of thesame triangular mark inscribed upon The Tales ofBeedle the Bard.

“Er — what are you — ?” said Ron tentatively, butHermione quelled him with a look and turned back toHarry.

“It keeps cropping up, doesn’t it?” she said. “I knowViktor said it was Grindelwald’s mark, but it wasdefinitely on that old grave in Godric’s Hollow, andthe dates on the headstone were long beforeGrindelwald came along! And now this! Well, we can’task Dumbledore or Grindelwald what it means — Idon’t even know whether Grindelwald’s still alive —but we can ask Mr. Lovegood. He was wearing thesymbol at the wedding. I’m sure this is important,Harry!”

Harry did not answer immediately. He looked into herintense, eager face and then out into the surrounding

Page | 444 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

darkness, thinking. After a long pause he said,“Hermione, we don’t need another Godric’s Hollow.

We talked ourselves into going there, and —”

“But it keeps appearing, Harry! Dumbledore left meThe Tales of Beedle the Bard, how do you know we’renot supposed to find out about the sign?”

“Here we go again!” Harry felt slightly exasperated.

“We keep trying to convince ourselves Dumbledore leftus secret signs and clues —”

“The Deluminator turned out to be pretty useful,”piped up Ron. “I think Hermione’s right, I think weought to go and see Lovegood.”

Harry threw him a dark look. He was quite sure thatRon’s support of Hermione had little to do with adesire to know the meaning of the triangular rune.

“It won’t be like Godric’s Hollow,” Ron added,“Lovegood’s on your side, Harry, The Quibbler’s beenfor you all along, it keeps telling everyone they’ve gotto help you!”

“I’m sure this is important!” said Hermione earnestly.

“But don’t you think if it was, Dumbledore wouldhave told me about it before he died?”

“Maybe ... maybe it’s something you need to find outfor yourself,” said Hermione with a faint air ofclutching at straws.

“Yeah,” said Ron sycophantically, “that makes sense.”

“No, it doesn’t,” snapped Hermione, “but I still thinkwe ought to talk to Mr. Lovegood. A symbol that links

Page | 445 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore, Grindelwald, and Godric’s Hollow?Harry, I’m sure we ought to know about this!”

“I think we should vote on it,” said Ron. “Those infavor of going to see Lovegood —”

His hand flew into the air before Hermione’s. Her lipsquivered suspiciously as she raised her own.

“Outvoted, Harry, sorry,” said Ron, clapping him onthe back.

“Fine,” said Harry, half amused, half irritated. “Only,once we’ve seen Lovegood, let’s try and look for somemore Horcruxes, shall we? Where do the Lovegoodslive, anyway? Do either of you know?”

“Yeah, they’re not far from my place,” said Ron. “Idunno exactly where, but Mum and Dad always pointtoward the hills whenever they mention them.Shouldn’t be hard to find.”

When Hermione had returned to her bunk, Harrylowered his voice.

“You only agreed to try and get back in her goodbooks.”

“All’s fair in love and war,” said Ron brightly, “andthis is a bit of both. Cheer up, it’s the Christmasholidays, Luna’ll be home!”

They had an excellent view of the village of Ottery St.Catchpole from the breezy hillside to which theyDisapparated next morning. From their high vantagepoint the village looked like a collection of toy housesin the great slanting shafts of sunlight stretching toearth in the breaks between clouds. They stood for aminute or two looking toward the Burrow, their handsPage | 446 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

shadowing their eyes, but all they could make outwere the high hedges and trees of the orchard, whichafforded the crooked little house protection fromMuggle eyes.

“It’s weird, being this near, but not going to visit,”said Ron.

“Well, it’s not like you haven’t just seen them. Youwere there for Christmas,” said Hermione coldly.

“I wasn’t at the Burrow!” said Ron with anincredulous laugh. “Do you think I was going to goback there and tell them all I’d walked out on you?Yeah, Fred and George would’ve been great about it.And Ginny, she’d have been really understanding.”

“But where have you been, then?” asked Hermione,surprised.

“Bill and Fleur’s new place. Shell Cottage. Bill’salways been decent to me. He — he wasn’t impressedwhen he heard what I’d done, but he didn’t go onabout it. He knew I was really sorry. None of the restof the family know I was there. Bill told Mum he andFleur weren’t going home for Christmas because theywanted to spend it alone. You know, first holiday afterthey were married. I don’t think Fleur minded. Youknow how much she hates Celestina Warbeck.”

Ron turned his back on the Burrow.

“Let’s try up here,” he said, leading the way over thetop of the hill.

They walked for a few hours, Harry, at Hermione’sinsistence, hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak. Thecluster of low hills appeared to be uninhabited apartfrom one small cottage, which seemed deserted.

Page | 447 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Do you think it’s theirs, and they’ve gone away forChristmas?” said Hermione, peering through thewindow at a neat little kitchen with geraniums on thewindowsill. Ron snorted.

“Listen, I’ve got a feeling you’d be able to tell who livedthere if you looked through the Lovegoods’ window.Let’s try the next lot of hills.”

So they Disapparated a few miles farther north.

“Aha!” shouted Ron, as the wind whipped their hairand clothes. Ron was pointing upward, toward the topof the hill on which they had appeared, where a moststrange-looking house rose vertically against the sky,a great black cylinder with a ghostly moon hangingbehind it in the afternoon sky. “That’s got to beLuna’s house, who else would live in a place like that?It looks like a giant rook!”

“It’s nothing like a bird,” said Hermione, frowning atthe tower.

“I was talking about a chess rook,” said Ron. “A castleto you.”

Ron’s legs were the longest and he reached the top ofthe hill first. When Harry and Hermione caught upwith him, panting and clutching stitches in theirsides, they found him grinning broadly.

“It’s theirs,” said Ron. “Look.”

Three hand-painted signs had been tacked to abroken-down gate. The first read,

THE QUIBBLER. EDITOR: X. LOVEGOOD

the second,

Page | 448 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

PICK YOUR OWN MISTLETOE

the third,

KEEP OFF THE DIRIGIBLE PLUMS

The gate creaked as they opened it. The zigzaggingpath leading to the front door was overgrown with avariety of odd plants, including a bush covered in theorange radishlike fruit Luna sometimes wore asearrings. Harry thought he recognized a Snargaluffand gave the wizened stump a wide berth. Two agedcrab apple trees, bent with the wind, stripped ofleaves but still heavy with berry-sized red fruits andbushy crowns of white-beaded mistletoe, stoodsentinel on either side of the front door. A little owlwith a slightly flattened, hawklike head peered downat them from one of the branches.

“You’d better take off the Invisibility Cloak, Harry,”said Hermione. “It’s you Mr. Lovegood wants to help,not us.”

He did as she suggested, handing her the Cloak tostow in the beaded bag. She then rapped three timeson the thick black door, which was studded with ironnails and bore a knocker shaped like an eagle.

Barely ten seconds passed, then the door was flungopen and there stood Xenophilius Lovegood, barefootand wearing what appeared to be a stained nightshirtHis long white candyfloss hair was dirty andunkempt. Xenophilius had been positively dapper atBill and Fleur’s wedding by comparison.

“What? What is it? Who are you? What do you want?”he cried in a high-pitched, querulous voice, lookingfirst at Hermione, then at Ron, and finally at Harry,

Page | 449 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

upon which his mouth fell open in a perfect, comical

O.

“Hello, Mr. Lovegood,” said Harry, holding out hishand. “I’m Harry, Harry Potter.”

Xenophilius did not take Harry’s hand, although theeye that was not pointing inward at his nose slidstraight to the scar on Harry’s forehead.

“Would it be okay if we came in?” asked Harry.“There’s something we’d like to ask you.”

“I ... I’m not sure that’s advisable,” whisperedXenophilius. He swallowed and cast a quick lookaround the garden. “Rather a shock ... My word ... I... I’m afraid I don’t really think I ought to —”

“It won’t take long,” said Harry, slightly disappointedby this less-than-warm welcome.

“I — oh, all right then. Come in, quickly. QuicklyV’

They were barely over the threshold when Xenophiliusslammed the door shut behind them. They werestanding in the most peculiar kitchen Harry had everseen. The room was perfectly circular, so that it feltlike being inside a giant pepper pot. Everything wascurved to fit the walls — the stove, the sink, and thecupboards — and all of it had been painted withflowers, insects, and birds in bright primary colors.Harry thought he recognized Luna’s style: The effect,in such an enclosed space, was slightlyoverwhelming.

In the middle of the floor, a wrought-iron spiralstaircase led to the upper levels. There was a greatdeal of clattering and banging coming from overhead:Harry wondered what Luna could be doing.

Page | 450 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’d better come up,” said Xenophilius, still lookingextremely uncomfortable, and he led the way.

The room above seemed to be a combination of livingroom and workplace, and as such, was even morecluttered than the kitchen. Though much smaller andentirely round, the room somewhat resembled theRoom of Requirement on the unforgettable occasionthat it had transformed itself into a gigantic labyrinthcomprised of centuries of hidden objects. There werepiles upon piles of books and papers on every surface.Delicately made models of creatures Harry did notrecognize, all flapping wings or snapping jaws, hungfrom the ceiling.

Luna was not there: The thing that was making sucha racket was a wooden object covered in magicallyturning cogs and wheels. It looked like the bizarreoffspring of a workbench and a set of old shelves, butafter a moment Harry deduced that it was an old-fashioned printing press, due to the fact that it waschurning out Quibblers.

“Excuse me,” said Xenophilius, and he strode over tothe machine, seized a grubby tablecloth from beneathan immense number of books and papers, which alltumbled onto the floor, and threw it over the press,somewhat muffling the loud bangs and clatters. Hethen faced Harry.

“Why have you come here?”

Before Harry could speak, however, Hermione let outa small cry of shock.

“Mr. Lovegood — what’s that?”

She was pointing at an enormous, gray spiral horn,not unlike that of a unicorn, which had been

Page | 451 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

mounted on the wall, protruding several feet into theroom.

“It is the horn of a Crumple-Horned Snorkack,” saidXenophilius.

“No it isn’t!” said Hermione.

“Hermione,” muttered Harry, embarrassed, “now’s notthe moment —”

“But Harry, it’s an Erumpent horn! It’s a Class BTradeable Material and it’s an extraordinarilydangerous thing to have in a house!”

“How d’you know it’s an Erumpent horn?” asked Ron,edging away from the horn as fast as he could, giventhe extreme clutter of the room.

“There’s a description in Fantastic Beasts and Whereto Find Them.! Mr. Lovegood, you need to get rid of itstraightaway, don’t you know it can explode at theslightest touch?”

“The Crumple-Horned Snorkack,” said Xenophiliusvery clearly, a mulish look upon his face, “is a shyand highly magical creature, and its horn —”

“Mr. Lovegood, I recognize the grooved markingsaround the base, that’s an Erumpent horn and it’sincredibly dangerous — I don’t know where you got it

“I bought it,” said Xenophilius dogmatically, “twoweeks ago, from a delightful young wizard who knewof my interest in the exquisite Snorkack. A Christmassurprise for my Luna. Now,” he said, turning toHarry, “why exactly have you come here, Mr. Potter?”

Page | 452 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We need some help,” said Harry, before Hermionecould start again.

“Ah,” said Xenophilius. “Help. Hmm.”

His good eye moved again to Harry’s scar. He seemedsimultaneously terrified and mesmerized.

“Yes. The thing is ... helping Harry Potter ... ratherdangerous ...”

“Aren’t you the one who keeps telling everyone it’stheir first duty to help Harry?” said Ron. “In thatmagazine of yours?”

Xenophilius glanced behind him at the concealedprinting press, still banging and clattering beneaththe tablecloth.

“Er — yes, I have expressed that view. However —”

“That’s for everyone else to do, not you personally?”said Ron.

Xenophilius did not answer. He kept swallowing, hiseyes darting between the three of them. Harry had theimpression that he was undergoing some painfulinternal struggle.

“Where’s Luna?” asked Hermione. “Let’s see what shethinks.”

Xenophilius gulped. He seemed to be steeling himself.Finally he said in a shaky voice difficult to hear overthe noise of the printing press, “Luna is down at thestream, fishing for Freshwater Plimpies. She ... shewill like to see you. I’ll go and call her and then —yes, very well. I shall try to help you.”

Page | 453 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He disappeared down the spiral staircase and theyheard the front door open and close. They looked ateach other.

“Cowardly old wart,” said Ron. “Luna’s got ten timeshis guts.”

“He’s probably worried about what’ll happen to themif the Death Eaters find out I was here,” said Harry.

“Well, I agree with Ron,” said Hermione. “Awful oldhypocrite, telling everyone else to help you and tryingto worm out of it himself. And for heaven’s sake keepaway from that horn.”

Harry crossed to the window on the far side of theroom. He could see a stream, a thin, glittering ribbonlying far below them at the base of the hill. They werevery high up; a bird fluttered past the window as hestared in the direction of the Burrow, now invisiblebeyond another line of hills. Ginny was over theresomewhere. They were closer to each other today thanthey had been since Bill and Fleur’s wedding, but shecould have no idea he was gazing toward her now,thinking of her. He supposed he ought to be glad of it;anyone he came into contact with was in danger,Xenophilius’s attitude proved that.

He turned away from the window and his gaze fellupon another peculiar object standing upon thecluttered, curved sideboard: a stone bust of abeautiful but austere-looking witch wearing a mostbizarre-looking headdress. Two objects thatresembled golden ear trumpets curved out from thesides. A tiny pair of glittering blue wings was stuck toa leather strap that ran over the top of her head,while one of the orange radishes had been stuck to asecond strap around her forehead.

Page | 454 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Look at this,” said Harry.

“Fetching,” said Ron. “Surprised he didn’t wear thatto the wedding.”

They heard the front door close, and a moment laterXenophilius had climbed back up the spiral staircaseinto the room, his thin legs now encased inWellington boots, bearing a tray of ill-assortedteacups and a steaming teapot.

“Ah, you have spotted my pet invention,” he said,shoving the tray into Hermione’s arms and joiningHarry at the statue’s side. “Modeled, fittingly enough,upon the head of the beautiful Rowena Ravenclaw.

‘Wit beyond measure is man’s greatest treasureV ”

He indicated the objects like ear trumpets.

“These are the Wrackspurt siphons — to remove allsources of distraction from the thinker’s immediatearea. Here,” he pointed out the tiny wings, “a billywigpropeller, to induce an elevated frame of mind.Finally,” he pointed to the orange radish, “theDirigible Plum, so as to enhance the ability to acceptthe extraordinary.”

Xenophilius strode back to the tea tray, whichHermione had managed to balance precariously onone of the cluttered side tables.

“May I offer you all an infusion of Gurdyroots?” saidXenophilius. “We make it ourselves.” As he started topour out the drink, which was as deeply purple asbeetroot juice, he added, “Luna is down beyondBottom Bridge, she is most excited that you are here.She ought not to be too long, she has caught nearlyenough Plimpies to make soup for all of us. Do sitdown and help yourselves to sugar.

Page | 455 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Now,” he removed a tottering pile of papers from anarmchair and sat down, his Wellingtoned legscrossed, “how may I help you, Mr. Potter?”

“Well,” said Harry, glancing at Hermione, who noddedencouragingly, “it’s about that symbol you werewearing around your neck at Bill and Fleur’swedding, Mr. Lovegood. We wondered what it meant.”

Xenophilius raised his eyebrows.

“Are you referring to the sign of the Deathly Hallows?”

Page | 456 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



THE TALE OF THE THREEBROTHERS

Harry turned to look at Ron and Hermione. Neither ofthem seemed to have understood what Xenophiliushad said either.

“The Deathly Hallows?”

“That’s right,” said Xenophilius. “You haven’t heard ofthem? I’m not surprised. Very, very few wizardsbelieve. Witness that knuckle-headed young man atyour brother’s wedding,” he nodded at Ron, “whoattacked me for sporting the symbol of a well-knownDark wizard! Such ignorance. There is nothing Darkabout the Hallows — at least, not in that crude sense.One simply uses the symbol to reveal oneself to otherbelievers, in the hope that they might help one withthe Quest.”

He stirred several lumps of sugar into his Gurdyrootinfusion and drank some.

Page | 457 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I’m sorry,” said Harry. “I still don’t reallyunderstand.”

To be polite, he took a sip from his cup too, andalmost gagged: The stuff was quite disgusting, asthough someone had liquidized bogey-flavored EveryFlavor Beans.

“Well, you see, believers seek the Deathly Hallows,”said Xenophilius, smacking his lips in apparentappreciation of the Gurdyroot infusion.

“But what are the Deathly Hallows?” asked Hermione.

Xenophilius set aside his empty teacup.

“I assume that you are all familiar with “The Tale ofthe Three Brothers’?”

Harry said, “No,” but Ron and Hermione both said,“Yes.” Xenophilius nodded gravely.

“Well, well, Mr. Potter, the whole thing starts withThe Tale of the Three Brothers’ ... I have a copysomewhere. ...”

He glanced vaguely around the room, at the piles ofparchment and books, but Hermione said, “I’ve got acopy, Mr. Lovegood, I’ve got it right here.”

And she pulled out The Tales of Beedle the Bard fromthe small, beaded bag.

“The original?” inquired Xenophilius sharply, andwhen she nodded, he said, “Well then, why don’t youread it aloud? Much the best way to make sure we allunderstand.”

Page | 458 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Er ... all right,” said Hermione nervously. She openedthe book, and Harry saw that the symbol they wereinvestigating headed the top of the page as she gave alittle cough, and began to read.

“ ‘There were once three brothers who were travelingalong a lonely, winding road at twilight —’ ”

“Midnight, our mum always told us,” said Ron, whohad stretched out, arms behind his head, to listen.Hermione shot him a look of annoyance.

“Sorry, I just think it’s a bit spookier if it’s midnight!”said Ron.

“Yeah, because we really need a bit more fear in ourlives,” said Harry before he could stop himself.Xenophilius did not seem to be paying muchattention, but was staring out of the window at thesky. “Go on, Hermione.”

“ ‘In time, the brothers reached a river too deep towade through and too dangerous to swim across.However, these brothers were learned in the magicalarts, and so they simply waved their wands and madea bridge appear across the treacherous water. Theywere halfway across it when they found their pathblocked by a hooded figure.

“ ‘And Death spoke to them —’ ”

“Sorry,” interjected Harry, “but Death spoke to them?”“It’s a fairy tale, Harry!”

“Right, sorry. Go on.”

“ ‘And Death spoke to them. He was angry that he hadbeen cheated out of three new victims, for travelers

Page | 459 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

usually drowned in the river. But Death was cunning.He pretended to congratulate the three brothers upontheir magic, and said that each had earned a prize forhaving been clever enough to evade him.

“ ‘So the oldest brother, who was a combative man,asked for a wand more powerful than any in existence:a wand that must always win duels for its owner, awand worthy of a wizard who had conquered Death!

So Death crossed to an elder tree on the banks of theriver, fashioned a wand from a branch that hung there,and gave it to the oldest brother.

“ ‘Then the second brother, who was an arrogant man,decided that he wanted to humiliate Death still further,and asked for the power to recall others from Death. SoDeath picked up a stone from the riverbank and gave itto the second brother, and told him that the stonewould have the power to bring back the dead.

“ ‘And then Death asked the third and youngestbrother what he would like. The youngest brother wasthe humblest and also the wisest of the brothers, andhe did not trust Death. So he asked for something thatwould enable him to go forth from that place withoutbeing followed by Death. And Death, most unwillingly,handed over his own Cloak of Invisibility.’ ”

“Death’s got an Invisibility Cloak?” Harry interruptedagain.

“So he can sneak up on people,” said Ron.

“Sometimes he gets bored of running at them,flapping his arms and shrieking ... sorry, Hermione.”

“ ‘Then Death stood aside and allowed the threebrothers to continue on their way, and they did so,talking with wonder of the adventure they had had,and admiring Death’s gifts.

Page | 460 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“ ‘In due course the brothers separated, each for hisown destination.

“ ‘The first brother traveled on for a week or more, andreaching a distant village, sought out a fellow wizardwith whom he had a quarrel. Naturally, with the ElderWand as his weapon, he could not fail to win the duelthat followed. Leaving his enemy dead upon the floor,the oldest brother proceeded to an inn, where heboasted loudly of the powerful wand he had snatchedfrom Death himself, and of how it made him invincible.

“ ‘That very night, another wizard crept upon the oldestbrother as he lay, wine-sodden, upon his bed. The thieftook the wand and, for good measure, slit the oldestbrother’s throat.

“ ‘And so Death took the first brother for his own.

“ ‘Meanwhile, the second brother journeyed to his ownhome, where he lived alone. Here he took out the stonethat had the power to recall the dead, and turned itthrice in his hand. To his amazement and his delight,the figure of the girl he had once hoped to marry,before her untimely death, appeared at once beforehim.

“ ‘Yet she was sad and cold, separated from him as bya veil. Though she had returned to the mortal world,she did not truly belong there and suffered. Finally thesecond brother, driven mad with hopeless longing,killed himself so as truly to join her.

“ ‘And so Death took the second brother for his own.

“ ‘But though Death searched for the third brother formany years, he was never able to find him. It was onlywhen he had attained a great age that the youngestbrother finally took off the Cloak of Invisibility and

Page | 461 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

gave it to his son. And then he greeted Death as an oldfriend, and went with him gladly, and, equals, theydeparted this life. ’ ”

Hermione closed the book. It was a moment or twobefore Xenophilius seemed to realize that she hadstopped reading, then he withdrew his gaze from thewindow and said, “Well, there you are.”

“Sorry?” said Hermione, sounding confused.

“Those are the Deathly Hallows,” said Xenophilius.

He picked up a quill from a packed table at his elbow,and pulled a torn piece of parchment from betweenmore books.

“The Elder Wand,” he said, and he drew a straightvertical line upon the parchment. “The ResurrectionStone,” he said, and he added a circle on top of theline. “The Cloak of Invisibility,” he finished, enclosingboth line and circle in a triangle, to make the symbolthat so intrigued Hermione. “Together,” he said, “theDeathly Hallows.”

“But there’s no mention of the words ‘DeathlyHallows’ in the story,” said Hermione.

“Well, of course not,” said Xenophilius, maddeninglysmug. “That is a children’s tale, told to amuse ratherthan to instruct. Those of us who understand thesematters, however, recognize that the ancient storyrefers to three objects, or Hallows, which, if united,will make the possessor master of Death.”

There was a short silence in which Xenophiliusglanced out of the window. Already the sun was lowin the sky.

Page | 462 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Luna ought to have enough Plimpies soon,” he saidquietly.

“When you say ‘master of Death’ —” said Ron.

“Master,” said Xenophilius, waving an airy hand.“Conqueror. Vanquisher. Whichever term you prefer.”

“But then ... do you mean ...” said Hermione slowly,and Harry could tell that she was trying to keep anytrace of skepticism out of her voice, “that you believethese objects — these Hallows — actually exist?”

Xenophilius raised his eyebrows again.

“Well, of course.”

“But,” said Hermione, and Harry could hear herrestraint starting to crack, “Mr. Lovegood, how canyou possibly believe — ?”

“Luna has told me all about you, young lady,” saidXenophilius. “You are, I gather, not unintelligent, butpainfully limited. Narrow. Close-minded.”

“Perhaps you ought to try on the hat, Hermione,” saidRon, nodding toward the ludicrous headdress. Hisvoice shook with the strain of not laughing.

“Mr. Lovegood,” Hermione began again. “We all knowthat there are such things as Invisibility Cloaks. Theyare rare, but they exist. But —”

“Ah, but the Third Hallow is a true Cloak ofInvisibility, Miss Granger! I mean to say, it is not atraveling cloak imbued with a Disillusionment Charm,or carrying a Bedazzling Hex, or else woven fromDemiguise hair, which will hide one initially but fadewith the years until it turns opaque. We are talkingPage | 463 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

about a cloak that really and truly renders the wearercompletely invisible, and endures eternally, givingconstant and impenetrable concealment, no matterwhat spells are cast at it. How many cloaks have youever seen like that, Miss Granger?”

Hermione opened her mouth to answer, then closed itagain, looking more confused than ever. She, Harry,and Ron glanced at one another, and Harry knew thatthey were all thinking the same thing. It so happenedthat a cloak exactly like the one Xenophilius had justdescribed was in the room with them at that verymoment.

“Exactly,” said Xenophilius, as if he had defeatedthem all in reasoned argument. “None of you haveever seen such a thing. The possessor would beimmeasurably rich, would he not?”

He glanced out of the window again. The sky was nowtinged with the faintest trace of pink.

“All right,” said Hermione, disconcerted. “Say theCloak existed ... what about the stone, Mr. Lovegood?The thing you call the Resurrection Stone?”

“What of it?”

“Well, how can that be real?”

“Prove that it is not,” said Xenophilius.

Hermione looked outraged.

“But that’s — I’m sorry, but that’s completelyridiculous! How can I possibly prove it doesn’t exist?Do you expect me to get hold of— of all the pebblesin the world and test them? I mean, you could claim

Page | 464 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

that anything’s real if the only basis for believing in itis that nobody’s proved it doesn’t exist!”

“Yes, you could,” said Xenophilius. “I am glad to seethat you are opening your mind a little.”

“So the Elder Wand,” said Harry quickly, beforeHermione could retort, “you think that exists too?”

“Oh, well, in that case there is endless evidence,” saidXenophilius. “The Elder Wand is the Hallow that ismost easily traced, because of the way in which itpasses from hand to hand.”

“Which is what?” asked Harry.

“Which is that the possessor of the wand mustcapture it from its previous owner, if he is to be trulymaster of it,” said Xenophilius. “Surely you haveheard of the way the wand came to Egbert theEgregious, after his slaughter of Emeric the Evil? Ofhow Godelot died in his own cellar after his son,Hereward, took the wand from him? Of the dreadfulLoxias, who took the wand from Barnabas Deverill,whom he had killed? The bloody trail of the ElderWand is splattered across the pages of Wizardinghistory.”

Harry glanced at Hermione. She was frowning atXenophilius, but she did not contradict him.

“So where do you think the Elder Wand is now?”asked Ron.

“Alas, who knows?” said Xenophilius, as he gazed outof the window. “Who knows where the Elder Wandlies hidden? The trail goes cold with Arcus and Livius.Who can say which of them really defeated Loxias,

Page | 465 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and which took the wand? And who can say who mayhave defeated them? History, alas, does not tell us.”

There was a pause. Finally Hermione asked stiffly,“Mr. Lovegood, does the Peverell family have anythingto do with the Deathly Hallows?”

Xenophilius looked taken aback as something shiftedin Harry’s memory, but he could not locate it. Peverell...he had heard that name before. ...

“But you have been misleading me, young woman!”said Xenophilius, now sitting up much straighter inhis chair and goggling at Hermione. “I thought youwere new to the Hallows Quest! Many of us Questersbelieve that the Peverells have everything —everything! — to do with the Hallows!”

“Who are the Peverells?” asked Ron.

“That was the name on the grave with the mark on it,in Godric’s Hollow,” said Hermione, still watchingXenophilius. “Ignotus Peverell.”

“Exactly!” said Xenophilius, his forefinger raisedpedantically. “The sign of the Deathly Hallows onIgnotus’s grave is conclusive proof!”

“Of what?” asked Ron.

“Why, that the three brothers in the story wereactually the three Peverell brothers, Antioch, Cadmus,and Ignotus! That they were the original owners of theHallows!”

With another glance at the window he got to his feet,picked up the tray, and headed for the spiralstaircase.

Page | 466 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You will stay for dinner?” he called, as he vanisheddownstairs again. “Everybody always requests ourrecipe for Freshwater Plimpy soup.”

“Probably to show the Poisoning Department at St.Mungo’s,” said Ron under his breath.

Harry waited until they could hear Xenophiliusmoving about in the kitchen downstairs beforespeaking.

“What do you think?” he asked Hermione.

“Oh, Harry,” she said wearily, “it’s a pile of utterrubbish. This can’t be what the sign really means.This must just be his weird take on it. What a wasteof time.”

“I s’pose this is the man who brought us Crumple-Horned Snorkacks,” said Ron.

“You don’t believe it either?” Harry asked him.

“Nah, that story’s just one of those things you tellkids to teach them lessons, isn’t it? ‘Don’t go lookingfor trouble, don’t pick fights, don’t go messing aroundwith stuff that’s best left alone! Just keep your headdown, mind your own business, and you’ll be okay’Come to think of it,” Ron added, “maybe that story’swhy elder wands are supposed to be unlucky.”

“What are you talking about?”

“One of those superstitions, isn’t it? ‘May-bornwitches will marry Muggles.’ ‘Jinx by twilight, undoneby midnight.’ ‘Wand of elder, never prosper.’ Youmust’ve heard them. My mum’s full of them.”

Page | 467 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry and I were raised by Muggles,” Hermionereminded him. “We were taught differentsuperstitions.” She sighed deeply as a rather pungentsmell drifted up from the kitchen. The one good thingabout her exasperation with Xenophilius was that itseemed to have made her forget that she was annoyedat Ron. “I think you’re right,” she told him. “It’s just amorality tale, it’s obvious which gift is best, which oneyou’d choose —”

The three of them spoke at the same time; Hermionesaid, “the Cloak,” Ron said, “the wand,” and Harrysaid, “the stone.”

They looked at each other, half surprised, halfamused.

“You’re supposed to say the Cloak,” Ron toldHermione, “but you wouldn’t need to be invisible ifyou had the wand. An unbeatable wand, Hermione,come on!”

“We’ve already got an Invisibility Cloak,” said Harry.

“And it’s helped us rather a lot, in case you hadn’tnoticed!” said Hermione. “Whereas the wand would bebound to attract trouble —”

“Only if you shouted about it,” argued Ron. “Only ifyou were prat enough to go dancing around, waving itover your head, and singing, ‘I’ve got an unbeatablewand, come and have a go if you think you’re hardenough.’ As long as you kept your trap shut —”

“Yes, but could you keep your trap shut?” saidHermione, looking skeptical. “You know, the only truething he said to us was that there have been storiesabout extra-powerful wands for hundreds of years.”

Page | 468 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“There have?” asked Harry.

Hermione looked exasperated: The expression was soendearingly familiar that Harry and Ron grinned ateach other.

“The Deathstick, the Wand of Destiny, they crop upunder different names through the centuries, usuallyin the possession of some Dark wizard who’s boastingabout them. Professor Binns mentioned some ofthem, but — oh, it’s all nonsense. Wands are only aspowerful as the wizards who use them. Some wizardsjust like to boast that theirs are bigger and betterthan other people’s.”

“But how do you know,” said Harry, “that thosewands — the Deathstick and the Wand of Destiny —aren’t the same wand, surfacing over the centuriesunder different names?”

“What, and they’re all really the Elder Wand, made byDeath?” said Ron.

Harry laughed: The strange idea that had occurred tohim was, after all, ridiculous. His wand, he remindedhimself, had been of holly, not elder, and it had beenmade by Ollivander, whatever it had done that nightVoldemort had pursued him across the skies. And if ithad been unbeatable, how could it have been broken?

“So why would you take the stone?” Ron asked him.

“Well, if you could bring people back, we could haveSirius ... Mad-Eye ... Dumbledore ... my parents. ...”

Neither Ron nor Hermione smiled.

“But according to Beedle the Bard, they wouldn’twant to come back, would they?” said Harry, thinking

Page | 469 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

about the tale they had just heard. “I don’t supposethere have been loads of other stories about a stonethat can raise the dead, have there?” he askedHermione.

“No,” she replied sadly. “I don’t think anyone exceptMr. Lovegood could kid themselves that’s possible.Beedle probably took the idea from the Sorcerer’sStone; you know, instead of a stone to make youimmortal, a stone to reverse death.”

The smell from the kitchen was getting stronger: Itwas something like burning underpants. Harrywondered whether it would be possible to eat enoughof whatever Xenophilius was cooking to spare hisfeelings.

“What about the Cloak, though?” said Ron slowly.“Don’t you realize, he’s right? I’ve got so used toHarry’s Cloak and how good it is, I never stopped tothink. I’ve never heard of one like Harry’s. It’sinfallible. We’ve never been spotted under it —”

“Of course not — we’re invisible when we’re under it,Ron!”

“But all the stuff he said about other cloaks, andthey’re not exactly ten a Knut, you know, is true! It’snever occurred to me before, but I’ve heard stuffabout charms wearing off cloaks when they get old, orthem being ripped apart by spells so they’ve got holesin. Harry’s was owned by his dad, so it’s not exactlynew, is it, but it’s just ... perfect!”

“Yes, all right, but Ron, the stone ...”

As they argued in whispers, Harry moved around theroom, only half listening. Reaching the spiral stair, heraised his eyes absently to the next level and was

Page | 470 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

distracted at once. His own face was looking back athim from the ceiling of the room above.

After a moment’s bewilderment, he realized that itwas not a mirror, but a painting. Curious, he beganto climb the stairs.

“Harry, what are you doing? I don’t think you shouldlook around when he’s not here!”

But Harry had already reached the next level.

Luna had decorated her bedroom ceiling with fivebeautifully painted faces: Harry, Ron, Hermione,Ginny, and Neville. They were not moving as theportraits at Hogwarts moved, but there was a certainmagic about them all the same: Harry thought theybreathed. What appeared to be fine golden chainswove around the pictures, linking them together, butafter examining them for a minute or so, Harryrealized that the chains were actually one word,repeated a thousand times in golden ink: friends ...friends ... friends ...

Harry felt a great rush of affection for Luna. He lookedaround the room. There was a large photographbeside the bed, of a young Luna and a woman wholooked very like her. They were hugging. Luna lookedrather better-groomed in this picture than Harry hadever seen her in life. The picture was dusty. Thisstruck Harry as slightly odd. He stared around.

Something was wrong. The pale blue carpet was alsothick with dust. There were no clothes in thewardrobe, whose doors stood ajar. The bed had acold, unfriendly look, as though it had not been sleptin for weeks. A single cobweb stretched over thenearest window, across a bloodred sky.

Page | 471 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“What’s wrong?” Hermione asked as Harry descendedthe staircase, but before he could respond,Xenophilius reached the top of the stairs from thekitchen, now holding a tray laden with bowls.

“Mr. Lovegood,” said Harry. “Where’s Luna?”

“Excuse me?”

“Where’s Luna?”

Xenophilius halted on the top step.

“I — I’ve already told you. She is down at BottomBridge, fishing for Plimpies.”

“So why have you only laid that tray for four?”

Xenophilius tried to speak, but no sound came out.The only noise was the continued chugging of theprinting press, and a slight rattle from the tray asXenophilius’s hands shook.

“I don’t think Luna’s been here for weeks,” said Harry.“Her clothes are gone, her bed hasn’t been slept in.Where is she? And why do you keep looking out of thewindow?”

Xenophilius dropped the tray: The bowls bounced andsmashed. Harry, Ron, and Hermione drew theirwands: Xenophilius froze, his hand about to enter hispocket. At that moment the printing press gave ahuge bang and numerous Quibblers came streamingacross the floor from underneath the tablecloth; thepress fell silent at last.

Hermione stooped down and picked up one of themagazines, her wand still pointing at Mr. Lovegood.

Page | 472 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, look at this.”

He strode over to her as quickly as he could throughall the clutter. The front of The Quibbler carried hisown picture, emblazoned with the wordsUNDESIRABLE NUMBER ONE and captioned withthe reward money.

“The Quibbler’s going for a new angle, then?” Harryasked coldly, his mind working very fast. “Is thatwhat you were doing when you went into the garden,Mr. Lovegood? Sending an owl to the Ministry?”

Xenophilius licked his lips.

“They took my Luna,” he whispered. “Because of whatI’ve been writing. They took my Luna and I don’t knowwhere she is, what they’ve done to her. But theymight give her back to me if I — if I —”

“Hand over Harry?” Hermione finished for him.

“No deal,” said Ron flatly. “Get out of the way, we’releaving.”

Xenophilius looked ghastly, a century old, his lipsdrawn back into a dreadful leer.

“They will be here at any moment. I must save Luna. Icannot lose Luna. You must not leave.”

He spread his arms in front of the staircase, andHarry had a sudden vision of his mother doing thesame thing in front of his crib.

“Don’t make us hurt you,” Harry said. “Get out of theway, Mr. Lovegood.”

“HARRY!” Hermione screamed.

Page | 473 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Figures on broomsticks were flying past the windows.As the three of them looked away from him,Xenophilius drew his wand. Harry realized theirmistake just in time: He launched himself sideways,shoving Ron and Hermione out of harm’s way asXenophilius’s Stunning Spell soared across the roomand hit the Erumpent horn.

There was a colossal explosion. The sound of itseemed to blow the room apart: Fragments of woodand paper and rubble flew in all directions, along withan impenetrable cloud of thick white dust. Harry flewthrough the air, then crashed to the floor, unable tosee as debris rained upon him, his arms over hishead. He heard Hermione’s scream, Ron’s yell, and aseries of sickening metallic thuds, which told himthat Xenophilius had been blasted off his feet andfallen backward down the spiral stairs.

Half buried in rubble, Harry tried to raise himself: Hecould barely breathe or see for dust. Half of theceiling had fallen in, and the end of Luna’s bed washanging through the hole. The bust of RowenaRavenclaw lay beside him with half its face missing,fragments of torn parchment were floating throughthe air, and most of the printing press lay on its side,blocking the top of the staircase to the kitchen. Thenanother white shape moved close by, and Hermione,coated in dust like a second statue, pressed her fingerto her lips.

The door downstairs crashed open.

“Didn’t I tell you there was no need to hurry,

Travers?” said a rough voice. “Didn’t 1 tell you thisnutter was just raving as usual?”

There was a bang and a scream of pain fromXenophilius.

Page | 474 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No ... no ... upstairs ... Potter!”

“I told you last week, Lovegood, we weren’t comingback for anything less than some solid information!Remember last week? When you wanted to swap yourdaughter for that stupid bleeding headdress? And theweek before” — another bang, another squeal —“when you thought we’d give her back if you offeredus proof there are Crumple” — bang — “Headed” —bang — “Snorkacks?”

“No — no — I beg you!” sobbed Xenophilius. “It reallyis Potter! Really!”

“And now it turns out you only called us here to tryand blow us up!” roared the Death Eater, and therewas a volley of bangs interspersed with squeals ofagony from Xenophilius.

“The place looks like it’s about to fall in, Selwyn,” saida cool second voice, echoing up the mangledstaircase. “The stairs are completely blocked. Couldtry clearing it? Might bring the place down.”

“You lying piece of filth,” shouted the wizard namedSelwyn. “You’ve never seen Potter in your life, haveyou? Thought you’d lure us here to kill us, did you?And you think you’ll get your girl back like this?”

“I swear ... I swear ... Potter’s upstairs!”

“Homenum revelio,” said the voice at the foot of thestairs.

Harry heard Hermione gasp, and he had the oddsensation that something was swooping low over him,immersing his body in its shadow.

Page | 475 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“There’s someone up there all right, Selwyn,” said thesecond man sharply.

“It’s Potter, I tell you, it’s Potter!” sobbed Xenophilius.“Please ... please ... give me Luna, just let me haveLuna. ...”

“You can have your little girl, Lovegood,” said Selwyn,“if you get up those stairs and bring me down HarryPotter. But if this is a plot, if it’s a trick, if you’ve gotan accomplice waiting up there to ambush us, we’llsee if we can spare a bit of your daughter for you tobury.”

Xenophilius gave a wail of fear and despair. Therewere scurryings and scrapings: Xenophilius wastrying to get through the debris on the stairs.

“Come on,” Harry whispered, “we’ve got to get out ofhere.”

He started to dig himself out under cover of all thenoise Xenophilius was making on the staircase. Ronwas buried deepest: Harry and Hermione climbed, asquietly as they could, over all the wreckage to wherehe lay, trying to prise a heavy chest of drawers off hislegs. While Xenophilius’s banging and scraping drewnearer and nearer, Hermione managed to free Ronwith the use of a Hover Charm.

“All right,” breathed Hermione, as the broken printingpress blocking the top of the stairs began to tremble;Xenophilius was feet away from them. She was stillwhite with dust. “Do you trust me, Harry?”

Harry nodded.

“Okay then,” Hermione whispered, “give me theInvisibility Cloak. Ron, you’re going to put it on.”

Page | 476 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Me? But Harry —”

“Please, Ron\ Harry, hold on tight to my hand, Ron,grab my shoulder.”

Harry held out his left hand. Ron vanished beneaththe Cloak. The printing press blocking the stairs wasvibrating: Xenophilius was trying to shift it using aHover Charm. Harry did not know what Hermionewas waiting for.

“Hold tight,” she whispered. “Hold tight ... any second

Xenophilius’s paper-white face appeared over the topof the sideboard.

“Obliviate\” cried Hermione, pointing her wand firstinto his face, then at the floor beneath them.“Deprimo\”

She had blasted a hole in the sitting room floor. Theyfell like boulders, Harry still holding onto her hand fordear life; there was a scream from below, and heglimpsed two men trying to get out of the way as vastquantities of rubble and broken furniture rained allaround them from the shattered ceiling. Hermionetwisted in midair and the thundering of the collapsinghouse rang in Harry’s ears as she dragged him oncemore into darkness.

Page | 477 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE DEATHLY HALLOWS

Harry fell, panting, onto grass and scrambled up atonce. They seemed to have landed in the corner of afield at dusk; Hermione was already running in acircle around them, waving her wand.

“Protego Totalum ... Salvio Hexia ...”

“That treacherous old bleeder!” Ron panted, emergingfrom beneath the Invisibility Cloak and throwing it toHarry. “Hermione, you’re a genius, a total genius, Ican’t believe we got out of that!”

“Cave Inimicum ... Didn’t I say it was an Erumpenthorn, didn’t I tell him? And now his house has beenblown apart!”

“Serves him right,” said Ron, examining his torn jeansand the cuts to his legs. “What d’you reckon they’ll doto him?”

“Oh, I hope they don’t kill him!” groaned Hermione.“That’s why I wanted the Death Eaters to get a

Page | 478 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

glimpse of Harry before we left, so they knewXenophilius hadn’t been lying!”

“Why hide me, though?” asked Ron.

“You’re supposed to be in bed with spattergroit, Ron!They’ve kidnapped Luna because her fathersupported Harry! What would happen to your family ifthey knew you’re with him?”

“But what about your mum and dad?”

“They’re in Australia,” said Hermione. “They shouldbe all right. They don’t know anything.”

“You’re a genius,” Ron repeated, looking awed.

“Yeah, you are, Hermione,” agreed Harry fervently. “Idon’t know what we’d do without you.”

She beamed, but became solemn at once.

“What about Luna?”

“Well, if they’re telling the truth and she’s still alive —” began Ron.

“Don’t say that, don’t say it!” squealed Hermione.

“She must be alive, she must!”

“Then she’ll be in Azkaban, I expect,” said Ron.“Whether she survives the place, though ... Loadsdon’t. ...”

“She will,” said Harry. He could not bear tocontemplate the alternative. “She’s tough, Luna,much tougher than you’d think. She’s probablyteaching all the inmates about Wrackspurts andNargles.”

Page | 479 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I hope you’re right,” said Hermione. She passed ahand over her eyes. “I’d feel so sorry for Xenophilius if

“— if he hadn’t just tried to sell us to the DeathEaters, yeah,” said Ron.

They put up the tent and retreated inside it, whereRon made them tea. After their narrow escape, thechilly, musty old place felt like home: safe, familiar,and friendly.

“Oh, why did we go there?” groaned Hermione after afew minutes’ silence. “Harry, you were right, it wasGodric’s Hollow all over again, a complete waste oftime! The Deathly Hallows ... such rubbish ...although actually,” a sudden thought seemed to havestruck her, “he might have made it all up, mightn’the? He probably doesn’t believe in the DeathlyHallows at all, he just wanted to keep us talking untilthe Death Eaters arrived!”

“I don’t think so,” said Ron. “It’s a damn sight hardermaking stuff up when you’re under stress than you’dthink. I found that out when the Snatchers caughtme. It was much easier pretending to be Stan,because I knew a bit about him, than inventing awhole new person. Old Lovegood was under loads ofpressure, trying to make sure we stayed put. I reckonhe told us the truth, or what he thinks is the truth,just to keep us talking.”

“Well, I don’t suppose it matters,” sighed Hermione.“Even if he was being honest, I never heard such a lotof nonsense in all my life.”

“Hang on, though,” said Ron. “The Chamber ofSecrets was supposed to be a myth, wasn’t it?”

Page | 480 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But the Deathly Hallows can’t exist, Ron!”

“You keep saying that, but one of them can,” saidRon. “Harry’s Invisibility Cloak —”

“ The Tale of the Three Brothers’ is a story,” saidHermione firmly. “A story about how humans arefrightened of death. If surviving was as simple ashiding under the Invisibility Cloak, we’d haveeverything we need already!”

“I don’t know. We could do with an unbeatable wand,”said Harry, turning the blackthorn wand he sodisliked over in his fingers.

“There’s no such thing, Harry!”

“You said there have been loads of wands — theDeathstick and whatever they were called —”

“All right, even if you want to kid yourself the ElderWand’s real, what about the Resurrection Stone?” Herfingers sketched quotation marks around the name,and her tone dripped sarcasm. “No magic can raisethe dead, and that’s that!”

“When my wand connected with You-Know-Who’s, itmade my mum and dad appear ... and Cedric ...”

“But they weren’t really back from the dead, werethey?” said Hermione. “Those kinds of— of paleimitations aren’t the same as truly bringing someoneback to life.”

“But she, the girl in the tale, didn’t really come back,did she? The story says that once people are dead,they belong with the dead. But the second brotherstill got to see her and talk to her, didn’t he? He evenlived with her for a while. ...”

Page | 481 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He saw concern and something less easily definablein Hermione’s expression. Then, as she glanced atRon, Harry realized that it was fear: He had scaredher with his talk of living with dead people.

“So that Peverell bloke who’s buried in Godric’sHollow,” he said hastily, trying to sound robustlysane, “you don’t know anything about him, then?”

“No,” she replied, looking relieved at the change ofsubject. “I looked him up after I saw the mark on hisgrave; if he’d been anyone famous or done anythingimportant, I’m sure he’d be in one of our books. Theonly place I’ve managed to find the name ‘Peverell’ isNature’s Nobility: A Wizarding Genealogy. I borrowedit from Kreacher,” she explained as Ron raised hiseyebrows. “It lists the pure-blood families that arenow extinct in the male line. Apparently the Peverellswere one of the earliest families to vanish.”

“ ‘Extinct in the male line’?” repeated Ron.

“It means the name’s died out,” said Hermione,“centuries ago, in the case of the Peverells. They couldstill have descendants, though, they’d just be calledsomething different.”

And then it came to Harry in one shining piece, thememory that had stirred at the sound of the name“Peverell”: a filthy old man brandishing an ugly ringin the face of a Ministry official, and he cried aloud,“Marvolo Gaunt!”

“Sorry?” said Ron and Hermione together.

“Marvolo Gaunti You-Know-Who’s grandfather! In thePensieve! With Dumbledore! Marvolo Gaunt said hewas descended from the Peverells!”

Page | 482 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron and Hermione looked bewildered.

“The ring, the ring that became the Horcrux, MarvoloGaunt said it had the Peverell coat of arms on it! Isaw him waving it in the bloke from the Ministry’sface, he nearly shoved it up his nose!”

“The Peverell coat of arms?” said Hermione sharply.“Could you see what it looked like?”

“Not really,” said Harry, trying to remember. “Therewas nothing fancy on there, as far as I could see;maybe a few scratches. I only ever saw it really closeup after it had been cracked open.”

Harry saw Hermione’s comprehension in the suddenwidening of her eyes. Ron was looking from one to theother, astonished.

“Blimey ... You reckon it was this sign again? Thesign of the Hallows?”

“Why not?” said Harry excitedly. “Marvolo Gaunt wasan ignorant old git who lived like a pig, all he caredabout was his ancestry. If that ring had been passeddown through the centuries, he might not haveknown what it really was. There were no books in thathouse, and trust me, he wasn’t the type to read fairytales to his kids. He’d have loved to think thescratches on the stone were a coat of arms, becauseas far as he was concerned, having pure blood madeyou practically royal.”

“Yes ... and that’s all very interesting,” said Hermionecautiously, “but Harry, if you’re thinking what I thinkyou’re think —”

Page | 483 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Well, why not? Why not?” said Harry, abandoningcaution. “It was a stone, wasn’t it?” He looked at Ronfor support. “What if it was the Resurrection Stone?”

Ron’s mouth fell open.

“Blimey — but would it still work if Dumbledore broke— ?”

“Work? Work? Ron, it never worked! There’s no suchthing as a Resurrection Stone\”

Hermione had leapt to her feet, looking exasperatedand angry. “Harry, you’re trying to fit everything intothe Hallows story —”

“Fit everything in?” he repeated. “Hermione, it fits ofits own accord! I know the sign of the Deathly Hallowswas on that stone! Gaunt said he was descended fromthe Peverells!”

“A minute ago you told us you never saw the mark onthe stone properly!”

“Where d’you reckon the ring is now?” Ron askedHarry. “What did Dumbledore do with it after hebroke it open?”

But Harry’s imagination was racing ahead, far beyondRon and Hermione’s. ...

Three objects, or Hallows, which, if united, will makethe possessor master of Death ... Master ... Conqueror... Vanquisher ... The last enemy that shall bedestroyed is death. ...

And he saw himself, possessor of the Hallows, facingVoldemort, whose Horcruxes were no match ...

Neither can live while the other survives. ... Was this

Page | 484 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the answer? Hallows versus Horcruxes? Was there away, after all, to ensure that he was the one whotriumphed? If he were the master of the DeathlyHallows, would he be safe?

“Harry?”

But he scarcely heard Hermione: He had pulled outhis Invisibility Cloak and was running it through hisfingers, the cloth supple as water, light as air. He hadnever seen anything to equal it in his nearly sevenyears in the Wizarding world. The Cloak was exactlywhat Xenophilius had described: A cloak that reallyand truly renders the wearer completely invisible, andendures eternally, giving constant and impenetrableconcealment, no matter what spells are cast at it ...

And then, with a gasp, he remembered —

“Dumbledore had my Cloak the night my parentsdied!”

His voice shook and he could feel the color in his face,but he did not care.

“My mum told Sirius that Dumbledore borrowed theCloak! This is why! He wanted to examine it, becausehe thought it was the third Hallow! Ignotus Peverell isburied in Godric’s Hollow. ...” Harry was walkingblindly around the tent, feeling as though great newvistas of truth were opening all around him. “He’s myancestor! I’m descended from the third brother! It allmakes sense!”

He felt armed in certainty, in his belief in the Hallows,as if the mere idea of possessing them was giving himprotection, and he felt joyous as he turned back tothe other two.

Page | 485 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry,” said Hermione again, but he was busyundoing the pouch around his neck, his fingersshaking hard.

“Read it,” he told her, pushing his mother’s letter intoher hand. “Read it! Dumbledore had the Cloak,Hermione! Why else would he want it? He didn’t needa Cloak, he could perform a Disillusionment Charmso powerful that he made himself completely invisiblewithout one!”

Something fell to the floor and rolled, glittering, undera chair: He had dislodged the Snitch when he pulledout the letter. He stooped to pick it up, and then thenewly tapped spring of fabulous discoveries threwhim another gift, and shock and wonder eruptedinside him so that he shouted out.

“IT’S IN HERE! He left me the ring — it’s in theSnitch!”

“You — you reckon?”

He could not understand why Ron looked takenaback. It was so obvious, so clear to Harry:

Everything fit, everything. ... His Cloak was the thirdHallow, and when he discovered how to open theSnitch he would have the second, and then all heneeded to do was find the first Hallow, the ElderWand, and then —

But it was as though a curtain fell on a lit stage: Allhis excitement, all his hope and happiness wereextinguished at a stroke, and he stood alone in thedarkness, and the glorious spell was broken.

“That’s what he’s after.”

Page | 486 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The change in his voice made Ron and Hermione lookeven more scared.

“You-Know-Who’s after the Elder Wand.”

He turned his back on their strained, incredulousfaces. He knew it was the truth. It all made sense.Voldemort was not seeking a new wand; he wasseeking an old wand, a very old wand indeed. Harrywalked to the entrance of the tent, forgetting aboutRon and Hermione as he looked out into the night,thinking. ...

Voldemort had been raised in a Muggle orphanage.Nobody could have told him The Tales of Beedle theBard when he was a child, any more than Harry hadheard them. Hardly any wizards believed in theDeathly Hallows. Was it likely that Voldemort knewabout them?

Harry gazed into the darkness. ... If Voldemort hadknown about the Deathly Hallows, surely he wouldhave sought them, done anything to possess them:three objects that made the possessor master ofDeath? If he had known about the Deathly Hallows,he might not have needed Horcruxes in the firstplace. Didn’t the simple fact that he had taken aHallow, and turned it into a Horcrux, demonstratethat he did not know this last great Wizarding secret?

Which meant that Voldemort sought the Elder Wandwithout realizing its full power, withoutunderstanding that it was one of three ... for thewand was the Hallow that could not be hidden, whoseexistence was best known. ... The bloody trail of theElder Wand is splattered across the pages ofWizarding history ...

Page | 487 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry watched the cloudy sky, curves of smoke-grayand silver sliding over the face of the white moon. Hefelt lightheaded with amazement at his discoveries.

He turned back into the tent. It was a shock to seeRon and Hermione standing exactly where he had leftthem, Hermione still holding Lily’s letter, Ron at herside looking slightly anxious. Didn’t they realize howfar they had traveled in the last few minutes?

“This is it,” Harry said, trying to bring them inside theglow of his own astonished certainty. “This explainseverything. The Deathly Hallows are real, and I’ve gotone — maybe two —”

He held up the Snitch.

“— and You-Know-Who’s chasing the third, but hedoesn’t realize ... he just thinks it’s a powerful wand

“Harry,” said Hermione, moving across to him andhanding him back Lily’s letter, “I’m sorry, but I thinkyou’ve got this wrong, all wrong.”

“But don’t you see? It all fits —”

“No, it doesn’t,” she said. “It doesn’t, Harry, you’rejust getting carried away. Please,” she said as hestarted to speak, “please just answer me this: If theDeathly Hallows really existed, and Dumbledore knewabout them, knew that the person who possessed allthree of them would be master of Death — Harry, whywouldn’t he have told you? Why?”

He had his answer ready.

“But you said it, Hermione! You’ve got to find outabout them for yourself! It’s a Quest!”

Page | 488 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

“But I only said that to try and persuade you to cometo the Lovegoods’!” cried Hermione in exasperation. “Ididn’t really believe it!”

Harry took no notice.

“Dumbledore usually let me find out stuff for myself.He let me try my strength, take risks. This feels likethe kind of thing he’d do.”

“Harry, this isn’t a game, this isn’t practice! This isthe real thing, and Dumbledore left you very clearinstructions: Find and destroy the Horcruxes! Thatsymbol doesn’t mean anything, forget the DeathlyHallows, we can’t afford to get sidetracked —”

Harry was barely listening to her. He was turning theSnitch over and over in his hands, half expecting it tobreak open, to reveal the Resurrection Stone, to proveto Hermione that he was right, that the DeathlyHallows were real.

She appealed to Ron.

“You don’t believe in this, do you?”

Harry looked up. Ron hesitated.

“I dunno ... I mean ... bits of it sort of fit together,”said Ron awkwardly. “But when you look at the wholething ...” He took a deep breath. “I think we’resupposed to get rid of Horcruxes, Harry. That’s whatDumbledore told us to do. Maybe ... maybe we shouldforget about this Hallows business.”

“Thank you, Ron,” said Hermione. “I’ll take firstwatch.”

Page | 489 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

And she strode past Harry and sat down in the tententrance, bringing the action to a fierce full stop.

But Harry hardly slept that night. The idea of theDeathly Hallows had taken possession of him, and hecould not rest while agitating thoughts whirledthrough his mind: the wand, the stone, and theCloak, if he could just possess them all. ...

Iopen at the close. ... But what was ‘the close’? Whycouldn’t he have the stone now? If only he had thestone, he could ask Dumbledore these questions inperson ... and Harry murmured words to the Snitchin the darkness, trying everything, even Parseltongue,but the golden ball would not open. ...

And the wand, the Elder Wand, where was thathidden? Where was Voldemort searching now? Harrywished his scar would burn and show himVoldemort’s thoughts, because for the first time ever,he and Voldemort were united in wanting the verysame thing. ... Hermione would not like that idea, ofcourse. ... But then, she did not believe ...

Xenophilius had been right, in a way ... Limited.Narrow. Close-minded. The truth was that she wasscared of the idea of the Deathly Hallows, especially ofthe Resurrection Stone ... and Harry pressed hismouth again to the Snitch, kissing it, nearlyswallowing it, but the cold metal did not yield. ...

It was nearly dawn when he remembered Luna, alonein a cell in Azkaban, surrounded by dementors, andhe suddenly felt ashamed of himself. He had forgottenall about her in his feverish contemplation of theHallows. If only they could rescue her; but dementorsin those numbers would be virtually unassailable.

Now he came to think about it, he had not yet triedcasting a Patronus with the blackthorn wand. ... Hemust try that in the morning. ...

Page | 490 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

If only there was a way of getting a better wand ...

And desire for the Elder Wand, the Deathstick,unbeatable, invincible, swallowed him once more. ...

They packed up the tent next morning and moved onthrough a dreary shower of rain. The downpourpursued them to the coast, where they pitched thetent that night, and persisted through the wholeweek, through sodden landscapes that Harry foundbleak and depressing. He could think only of theDeathly Hallows. It was as though a flame had beenlit inside him that nothing, not Hermione’s flatdisbelief nor Ron’s persistent doubts, couldextinguish. And yet the fiercer the longing for theHallows burned inside him, the less joyful it madehim. He blamed Ron and Hermione: Their determinedindifference was as bad as the relentless rain fordampening his spirits, but neither could erode hiscertainty, which remained absolute. Harry’s belief inand longing for the Hallows consumed him so muchthat he felt quite isolated from the other two and theirobsession with the Horcruxes.

“Obsession?” said Hermione in a low fierce voice,when Harry was careless enough to use the word oneevening, after Hermione had told him off for his lackof interest in locating more Horcruxes. “We’re not theones with an obsession, Harry! We’re the ones tryingto do what Dumbledore wanted us to do!”

But he was impervious to the veiled criticism.Dumbledore had left the sign of the Hallows forHermione to decipher, and he had also, Harryremained convinced of it, left the Resurrection Stonehidden in the golden Snitch. Neither can live while theother survives. ... master of Death ... Why didn’t Ronand Hermione understand?

Page | 491 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“ ‘The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death,’ ”Harry quoted calmly.

“I thought it was You-Know-Who we were supposed tobe fighting?” Hermione retorted, and Harry gave upon her.

Even the mystery of the silver doe, which the othertwo insisted on discussing, seemed less important toHarry now, a vaguely interesting sideshow. The onlyother thing that mattered to him was that his scarhad begun to prickle again, although he did all hecould to hide this fact from the other two. He soughtsolitude whenever it happened, but was disappointedby what he saw. The visions he and Voldemort weresharing had changed in quality; they had becomeblurred, shifting as though they were moving in andout of focus. Harry was just able to make out theindistinct features of an object that looked like askull, and something like a mountain that was moreshadow than substance. Used to images sharp asreality, Harry was disconcerted by the change. He wasworried that the connection between himself andVoldemort had been damaged, a connection that heboth feared and, whatever he had told Hermione,prized. Somehow Harry connected these unsatisfying,vague images with the destruction of his wand, as if itwas the blackthorn wand’s fault that he could nolonger see into Voldemort’s mind as well as before.

As the weeks crept on, Harry could not help butnotice, even through his new self-absorption, thatRon seemed to be taking charge. Perhaps because hewas determined to make up for having walked out onthem, perhaps because Harry’s descent intolistlessness galvanized his dormant leadershipqualities, Ron was the one now encouraging andexhorting the other two into action.

Page | 492 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Three Horcruxes left,” he kept saying. “We need aplan of action, come on! Where haven’t we looked?Let’s go through it again. The orphanage ...”

Diagon Alley, Hogwarts, the Riddle House, Borgin andBurkes, Albania, every place that they knew TomRiddle had ever lived or worked, visited or murdered,Ron and Hermione raked over them again, Harryjoining in only to stop Hermione pestering him. Hewould have been happy to sit alone in silence, tryingto read Voldemort’s thoughts, to find out more aboutthe Elder Wand, but Ron insisted on journeying toever more unlikely places simply, Harry was aware, tokeep them moving.

“You never know,” was Ron’s constant refrain. “UpperFlagley is a Wizarding village, he might’ve wanted tolive there. Let’s go and have a poke around.”

These frequent forays into Wizarding territory broughtthem within occasional sight of Snatchers.

“Some of them are supposed to be as bad as DeathEaters,” said Ron. “The lot that got me were a bitpathetic, but Bill reckons some of them are reallydangerous. They said on Potterwatch —”

“On what?” said Harry.

“Potterwatch, didn’t I tell you that’s what it wascalled? The program I keep trying to get on the radio,the only one that tells the truth about what’s goingon! Nearly all the programs are following You-Know-Who’s line, all except Potterwatch. I really want you tohear it, but it’s tricky tuning in. ...”

Ron spent evening after evening using his wand tobeat out various rhythms on top of the wireless whilethe dials whirled. Occasionally they would catch

Page | 493 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows-J.K. Rowling

snatches of advice on how to treat dragon pox, andonce a few bars of “A Cauldron Full of Hot StrongLove.” While he tapped, Ron continued to try to hit onthe correct password, muttering strings of randomwords under his breath.

“They’re normally something to do with the Order,” hetold them. “Bill had a real knack for guessing them.I’m bound to get one in the end. ...”

But not until March did luck favor Ron at last. Harrywas sitting in the tent entrance, on guard duty,staring idly at a clump of grape hyacinths that hadforced their way through the chilly ground, when Ronshouted excitedly from inside the tent.

“I’ve got it, I’ve got it! Password was Altars’! Get inhere, Harry!”

Roused for the first time in days from hiscontemplation of the Deathly Hallows, Harry hurriedback inside the tent to find Ron and Hermionekneeling on the floor beside the little radio. Hermione,who had been polishing the sword of Gryffindor justfor something to do, was sitting open-mouthed,staring at the tiny speaker, from which a mostfamiliar voice was issuing.

"... apologize for our temporary absence from theairwaves, which was due to a number of house callsin our area by those charming Death Eaters.”

“But that’s Lee Jordan!” said Hermione.

“I know!” beamed Ron. “Cool, eh?”

"... now found ourselves another secure location,” Leewas saying, “and I’m pleased to tell you that two of

Page | 494 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

our regular contributors have joined me here thisevening. Evening, boys!”

“Hi.”

“Evening, River.”

“ ‘River,’ that’s Lee,” Ron explained. “They’ve all gotcode names, but you can usually tell —”

“Shh!” said Hermione.

“But before we hear from Royal and Romulus,” Leewent on, “let’s take a moment to report those deathsthat the Wizarding Wireless Network News and DailyProphet don’t think important enough to mention. It iswith great regret that we inform our listeners of themurders of Ted Tonks and Dirk Cresswell.”

Harry felt a sick, swooping in his belly. He, Ron, andHermione gazed at one another in horror.

“A goblin by the name of Gornuk was also killed. It isbelieved that Muggle-born Dean Thomas and asecond goblin, both believed to have been travelingwith Tonks, Cresswell, and Gornuk, may haveescaped. If Dean is listening, or if anyone has anyknowledge of his whereabouts, his parents and sistersare desperate for news.

“Meanwhile, in Gaddley, a Muggle family of five hasbeen found dead in their home. Muggle authoritiesare attributing the deaths to a gas leak, but membersof the Order of the Phoenix inform me that it was theKilling Curse — more evidence, as if it were needed, ofthe fact that Muggle slaughter is becoming little morethan a recreational sport under the new regime.

Page | 495 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Finally, we regret to inform our listeners that theremains of Bathilda Bagshot have been discovered inGodric’s Hollow. The evidence is that she died severalmonths ago. The Order of the Phoenix informs us thather body showed unmistakable signs of injuriesinflicted by Dark Magic.

“Listeners, I’d like to invite you now to join us in aminute’s silence in memory of Ted Tonks, DirkCresswell, Bathilda Bagshot, Gornuk, and theunnamed, but no less regretted, Muggles murderedby the Death Eaters.”

Silence fell, and Harry, Ron, and Hermione did notspeak. Half of Harry yearned to hear more, half of himwas afraid of what might come next. It was the firsttime he had felt fully connected to the outside worldfor a long time.

“Thank you,” said Lee’s voice. “And now we turn toregular contributor Royal, for an update on how thenew Wizarding order is affecting the Muggle world.”

“Thanks, River,” said an unmistakable voice, deep,measured, reassuring.

“Kingsley!” burst out Ron.

“We know!” said Hermione, hushing him.

“Muggles remain ignorant of the source of theirsuffering as they continue to sustain heavycasualties,” said Kingsley. “However, we continue tohear truly inspirational stories of wizards and witchesrisking their own safety to protect Muggle friends andneighbors, often without the Muggles’ knowledge. I’dlike to appeal to all our listeners to emulate theirexample, perhaps by casting a protective charm over

Page | 496 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

any Muggle dwellings in your street. Many lives couldbe saved if such simple measures are taken.”

“And what would you say, Royal, to those listenerswho reply that in these dangerous times, it should beWizards first’?” asked Lee.

“I’d say that it’s one short step from Wizards first’ to‘Purebloods first,’ and then to ‘Death Eaters,’ ” repliedKingsley. “We’re all human, aren’t we? Every humanlife is worth the same, and worth saving.”

“Excellently put, Royal, and you’ve got my vote forMinister of Magic if ever we get out of this mess,” saidLee. “And now, over to Romulus for our popularfeature ‘Pals of Potter. ’ ”

“Thanks, River,” said another very familiar voice; Ronstarted to speak, but Hermione forestalled him in awhisper.

“We know it’s Lupin\”

“Romulus, do you maintain, as you have every timeyou’ve appeared on our program, that Harry Potter isstill alive?”

“I do,” said Lupin firmly. “There is no doubt at all inmy mind that his death would be proclaimed aswidely as possible by the Death Eaters if it hadhappened, because it would strike a deadly blow atthe morale of those resisting the new regime. The BoyWho Lived’ remains a symbol of everything for whichwe are fighting: the triumph of good, the power ofinnocence, the need to keep resisting.”

A mixture of gratitude and shame welled up in Harry.Had Lupin forgiven him, then, for the terrible thingshe had said when they had last met?

Page | 497 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“And what would you say to Harry if you knew he waslistening, Romulus?”

“I’d tell him we’re all with him in spirit,” said Lupin,then hesitated slightly. “And I’d tell him to follow hisinstincts, which are good and nearly always right.”

Harry looked at Hermione, whose eyes were full oftears.

“Nearly always right,” she repeated.

“Oh, didn’t I tell you?” said Ron in surprise. “Bill toldme Lupin’s living with Tonks again! And apparentlyshe’s getting pretty big too. ...”

“... and our usual update on those friends of HarryPotter’s who are suffering for their allegiance?” Leewas saying.

“Well, as regular listeners will know, several of themore outspoken supporters of Harry Potter have nowbeen imprisoned, including Xenophilius Lovegood,erstwhile editor of The Quibbler,” said Lupin.

“At least he’s still alive!” muttered Ron.

“We have also heard within the last few hours thatRubeus Hagrid” — all three of them gasped, and sonearly missed the rest of the sentence — “well-knowngamekeeper at Hogwarts School, has narrowlyescaped arrest within the grounds of Hogwarts, wherehe is rumored to have hosted a ‘Support Harry Potter’party in his house. However, Hagrid was not takeninto custody, and is, we believe, on the run.”

“I suppose it helps, when escaping from Death Eaters,if you’ve got a sixteen-foot-high half brother?” askedLee.

Page | 498 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It would tend to give you an edge,” agreed Lupingravely. “May I just add that while we here atPotterwatch applaud Hagrid’s spirit, we would urgeeven the most devoted of Harry’s supporters againstfollowing Hagrid’s lead. ‘Support Harry Potter’ partiesare unwise in the present climate.”

“Indeed they are, Romulus,” said Lee, “so we suggestthat you continue to show your devotion to the manwith the lightning scar by listening to PotterwatcMAnd now let’s move to news concerning the wizardwho is proving just as elusive as Harry Potter. We liketo refer to him as the Chief Death Eater, and here togive his views on some of the more insane rumorscirculating about him, I’d like to introduce a newcorrespondent: Rodent.”

“ ‘Rodent’?” said yet another familiar voice, and Harry,Ron, and Hermione cried out together:

“Fred!”

“No — is it George?”

“It’s Fred, I think,” said Ron, leaning in closer, aswhichever twin it was said,

“I’m not being ‘Rodent,’ no way, I told you I wanted tobe ‘Rapier’!”

“Oh, all right then. ‘Rapier,’ could you please give usyour take on the various stories we’ve been hearingabout the Chief Death Eater?”

“Yes, River, I can,” said Fred. “As our listeners willknow, unless they’ve taken refuge at the bottom of agarden pond or somewhere similar, You-Know-Who’sstrategy of remaining in the shadows is creating anice little climate of panic. Mind you, if all the allegedPage | 499 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

sightings of him are genuine, we must have a goodnineteen You-Know-Whos running around the place.”

“Which suits him, of course,” said Kingsley. “The airof mystery is creating more terror than actuallyshowing himself.”

“Agreed,” said Fred. “So, people, let’s try and calmdown a bit. Things are bad enough without inventingstuff as well. For instance, this new idea that You-Know-Who can kill with a single glance from his eyes.That’s a basilisk, listeners. One simple test: Checkwhether the thing that’s glaring at you has got legs. Ifit has, it’s safe to look into its eyes, although if itreally is You-Know-Who, that’s still likely to be thelast thing you ever do.”

For the first time in weeks and weeks, Harry waslaughing: He could feel the weight of tension leavinghim.

“And the rumors that he keeps being sighted abroad?”asked Lee.

“Well, who wouldn’t want a nice little holiday after allthe hard work he’s been putting in?” asked Fred.“Point is, people, don’t get lulled into a false sense ofsecurity, thinking he’s out of the country. Maybe heis, maybe he isn’t, but the fact remains he can movefaster than Severus Snape confronted with shampoowhen he wants to, so don’t count on him being a longway away if you’re planning on taking any risks. Inever thought I’d hear myself say it, but safety first!”

“Thank you very much for those wise words, Rapier,”said Lee. “Listeners, that brings us to the end ofanother Potterwatch. We don’t know when it will bepossible to broadcast again, but you can be sure weshall be back. Keep twiddling those dials: The nextPage | 500 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

password will be ‘Mad-Eye.’ Keep each other safe:Keep faith. Good night.”

The radio’s dial twirled and the lights behind thetuning panel went out. Harry, Ron, and Hermionewere still beaming. Hearing familiar, friendly voiceswas an extraordinary tonic; Harry had become soused to their isolation he had nearly forgotten thatother people were resisting Voldemort. It was likewaking from a long sleep.

“Good, eh?” said Ron happily.

“Brilliant,” said Harry.

“It’s so brave of them,” sighed Hermione admiringly.“If they were found ...”

“Well, they keep on the move, don’t they?” said Ron.“Like us.”

“But did you hear what Fred said?” asked Harryexcitedly; now the broadcast was over, his thoughtsturned again toward his all-consuming obsession.“He’s abroad! He’s still looking for the Wand, I knewit!”

“Harry —”

“Come on, Hermione, why are you so determined notto admit it? Vol —”

“HARRY, NO!”

“— demort’s after the Elder Wand!”

“The name’s Taboo!” Ron bellowed, leaping to his feetas a loud crack sounded outside the tent. “I told you,Harry, I told you, we can’t say it anymore — we’ve got

Page | 501 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

to put the protection back around us — quickly — it’show they find —”

But Ron stopped talking, and Harry knew why. TheSneakoscope on the table had lit up and begun tospin; they could hear voices coming nearer andnearer: rough, excited voices. Ron pulled theDeluminator out of his pocket and clicked it: Theirlamps went out.

“Come out of there with your hands up!” came arasping voice through the darkness. “We know you’rein there! You’ve got half a dozen wands pointing atyou and we don’t care who we curse!”

Page | 502 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





MALFOY MANOR

Harry looked around at the other two, now mereoutlines in the darkness. He saw Hermione point herwand, not toward the outside, but into his face; therewas a bang, a burst of white light, and he buckled inagony, unable to see. He could feel his face swellingrapidly under his hands as heavy footfallssurrounded him.

“Get up, vermin.”

Unknown hands dragged Harry roughly off theground. Before he could stop them, someone hadrummaged through his pockets and removed theblackthorn wand. Harry clutched at his excruciatinglypainful face, which felt unrecognizable beneath hisfingers, tight, swollen, and puffy as though he hadsuffered some violent allergic reaction. His eyes hadbeen reduced to slits through which he could barelysee; his glasses fell off as he was bundled out of thetent; all he could make out were the blurred shapes offour or five people wrestling Ron and Hermioneoutside too.

Page | 503 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Get — off— her!” Ron shouted. There was theunmistakable sound of knuckles hitting flesh: Rongrunted in pain and Hermione screamed, “No! Leavehim alone, leave him alone!”

“Your boyfriend’s going to have worse than that doneto him if he’s on my list,” said the horribly familiar,rasping voice. “Delicious girl ... What a treat ... I doenjoy the softness of the skin. ...”

Harry’s stomach turned over. He knew who this was:Fenrir Grey back, the werewolf who was permitted towear Death Eater robes in return for his hiredsavagery.

“Search the tent!” said another voice.

Harry was thrown facedown onto the ground. A thudtold him that Ron had been cast down beside him.They could hear footsteps and crashes; the men werepushing over chairs inside the tent as they searched.

“Now, let’s see who we’ve got,” said Greyback’sgloating voice from overhead, and Harry was rolledover onto his back. A beam of wandlight fell into hisface and Grey back laughed.

“I’ll be needing butterbeer to wash this one down.What happened to you, ugly?”

Harry did not answer immediately.

“I said,” repeated Greyback, and Harry received ablow to the diaphragm that made him double over inpain, “what happened to you?”

“Stung,” Harry muttered. “Been stung.”

“Yeah, looks like it,” said a second voice.

Page | 504 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“What’s your name?” snarled Greyback.

“Dudley,” said Harry.

“And your first name?”

“I — Vernon. Vernon Dudley.”

“Check the list, Scabior,” said Greyback, and Harryheard him move sideways to look down at Ron,instead. “And what about you, ginger?”

“Stan Shunpike,” said Ron.

“Like ’ell you are,” said the man called Scabior. “Weknow Stan Shunpike, ’e’s put a bit of work our way.”

There was another thud.

“I’b Bardy,” said Ron, and Harry could tell that hismouth was full of blood. “Bardy Weadley.”

“A Weasley?” rasped Greyback. “So you’re related toblood traitors even if you’re not a Mudblood. Andlastly, your pretty little friend ...” The relish in hisvoice made Harry’s flesh crawl.

“Easy, Greyback,” said Scabior over the jeering of theothers.

“Oh, I’m not going to bite just yet. We’ll see if she’s abit quicker at remembering her name than Barny.Who are you, girly?”

“Penelope Clearwater,” said Hermione. She soundedterrified, but convincing.

“What’s your blood status?”

Page | 505 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Half-blood,” said Hermione.

“Easy enough to check,” said Scabior. “But the ’ole lotof ’em look like they could still be ’ogwarts age —”

“Weh lebt,” said Ron.

“Left, ’ave you, ginger?” said Scabior. “And youdecided to go camping? And you thought, just for alaugh, you’d use the Dark Lord’s name?”

“Nod a laugh,” said Ron. “Aggiden.”

“Accident?” There was more jeering laughter.

“You know who used to like using the Dark Lord’sname, Weasley?” growled Greyback. “The Order of thePhoenix. Mean anything to you?”

“Doh.”

“Well, they don’t show the Dark Lord proper respect,so the name’s been Tabooed. A few Order membershave been tracked that way. We’ll see. Bind them upwith the other two prisoners!”

Someone yanked Harry up by the hair, dragged him ashort way, pushed him down into a sitting position,then started binding him back-to-back with otherpeople. Harry was still half blind, barely able to seeanything through his puffed-up eyes. When at lastthe man tying them had walked away, Harrywhispered to the other prisoners.

“Anyone still got a wand?”

“No,” said Ron and Hermione from either side of him.

“This is all my fault. I said the name, I’m sorry —”

Page | 506 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry?”

It was a new, but familiar, voice, and it came fromdirectly behind Harry, from the person tied toHermione’s left.

“Dean?”

“It is you! If they find out who they’ve got — ! They’reSnatchers, they’re only looking for truants to sell forgold —”

“Not a bad little haul for one night,” Greyback wassaying, as a pair of hobnailed boots marched close byHarry and they heard more crashes from inside thetent. “A Mudblood, a runaway goblin, and threetruants. You checked their names on the list yet,Scabior?” he roared.

“Yeah. There’s no Vernon Dudley on ’ere, Greyback.”

“Interesting,” said Greyback. “That’s interesting.”

He crouched down beside Harry, who saw, throughthe infinitesimal gap left between his swollen eyelids,a face covered in matted gray hair and whiskers, withpointed brown teeth and sores at the corners of hismouth. Greyback smelled as he had done at the top ofthe tower where Dumbledore had died: of dirt, sweat,and blood.

“So you aren’t wanted, then, Vernon? Or are you onthat list under a different name? What House wereyou in at Hogwarts?”

“Slytherin,” said Harry automatically.

Page | 507 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Funny ’ow they all thinks we wants to ’ear that,”jeered Scabior out of the shadows. “But none of ’emcan tell us where the common room is.”

“It’s in the dungeons,” said Harry clearly. “You enterthrough the wall. It’s full of skulls and stuff and it’sunder the lake, so the light’s all green.”

There was a short pause.

“Well, well, looks like we really ’ave caught a littleSlytherin,” said Scabior. “Good for you, Vernon,

’cause there ain’t a lot of Mudblood Slytherins. Who’syour father?”

“He works at the Ministry,” Harry lied. He knew thathis whole story would collapse with the smallestinvestigation, but on the other hand, he only haduntil his face regained its usual appearance beforethe game was up in any case. “Department of MagicalAccidents and Catastrophes.”

“You know what, Greyback,” said Scabior. “I thinkthere is a Dudley in there.”

Harry could barely breathe: Could luck, sheer luck,get them safely out of this?

“Well, well,” said Greyback, and Harry could hear thetiniest note of trepidation in that callous voice, andknew that Greyback was wondering whether he hadindeed just attacked and bound the son of a Ministryofficial. Harry’s heart was pounding against the ropesaround his ribs; he would not have been surprised toknow that Greyback could see it. “If you’re telling thetruth, ugly, you’ve got nothing to fear from a trip tothe Ministry. I expect your father’ll reward us just forpicking you up.”

Page | 508 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But,” said Harry, his mouth bone dry, “if you just letus —”

“Hey!” came a shout from inside the tent. “Look atthis, Greyback!”

A dark figure came bustling toward them, and Harrysaw a glint of silver in the light of their wands. Theyhad found Gryffindor’s sword.

“Ve-e-ry nice,” said Greyback appreciatively, taking itfrom his companion. “Oh, very nice indeed. Looksgoblin-made, that. Where did you get something likethis?”

“It’s my father’s,” Harry lied, hoping against hope thatit was too dark for Greyback to see the name etchedjust below the hilt. “We borrowed it to cut firewood —”

“ ’ang on a minute, Greyback! Look at this, in thePropheti”

As Scabior said it, Harry’s scar, which was stretchedtight across his distended forehead, burned savagely.More clearly than he could make out anything aroundhim, he saw a towering building, a grim fortress, jet-black and forbidding; Voldemort’s thoughts hadsuddenly become razor-sharp again; he was glidingtoward the gigantic building with a sense of calmlyeuphoric purpose. ...

So close ...So close ...

With a huge effort of will Harry closed his mind toVoldemort’s thoughts, pulling himself back to wherehe sat, tied to Ron, Hermione, Dean, and Griphook inthe darkness, listening to Greyback and Scabior.

Page | 509 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“ ‘’ermione Granger,’ ” Scabior was saying, “ ‘theMudblood who is known to be traveling with ’arryPotter.’ ”

Harry’s scar burned in the silence, but he made asupreme effort to keep himself present, not to slipinto Voldemort’s mind. He heard the creak ofGreyback’s boots as he crouched down in front ofHermione.

“You know what, little girly? This picture looks a hellof a lot like you.”

“It isn’t! It isn’t me!”

Hermione’s terrified squeak was as good as aconfession.

“ ‘... known to be traveling with Harry Potter,’ ”repeated Grey back quietly.

A stillness had settled over the scene. Harry’s scarwas exquisitely painful, but he struggled with all hisstrength against the pull of Voldemort’s thoughts: Ithad never been so important to remain in his ownright mind.

“Well, this changes things, doesn’t it?” whisperedGreyback. Nobody spoke: Harry sensed the gang ofSnatchers watching, frozen, and felt Hermione’s armtrembling against his. Greyback got up and took acouple of steps to where Harry sat, crouching downagain to stare closely at his misshapen features.

“What’s that on your forehead, Vernon?” he askedsoftly, his breath foul in Harry’s nostrils as hepressed a filthy finger to the taut scar.

Page | 510 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t touch it!” Harry yelled; he could not stophimself; he thought he might be sick from the pain ofit.

“I thought you wore glasses, Potter?” breathedGreyback.

“I found glasses!” yelped one of the Snatchersskulking in the background. “There was glasses in thetent, Greyback, wait —”

And seconds later Harry’s glasses had been rammedback onto his face. The Snatchers were closing innow, peering at him.

“It is!” rasped Greyback. “We’ve caught Potter!”

They all took several steps backward, stunned bywhat they had done. Harry, still fighting to remainpresent inside his own splitting head, could think ofnothing to say: Fragmented visions were breakingacross the surface of his mind —

— He was gliding around the high walls of the blackfortress —

No, he was Harry, tied up and wandless, in gravedanger —

— looking up, up to the topmost window, the highesttower —

He was Harry, and they were discussing his fate inlow voices —

— Time to fly ...

“...to the Ministry?”

Page | 511 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“To hell with the Ministry,” growled Greyback. “They’lltake the credit, and we won’t get a look in. I say wetake him straight to You-Know-Who.”

“Will you summon ’im? ’ere?” said Scabior, soundingawed, terrified.

“No,” snarled Greyback, “I haven’t got — they say he’susing the Malfoys’ place as a base. We’ll take the boythere.”

Harry thought he knew why Greyback was not callingVoldemort. The werewolf might be allowed to wearDeath Eater robes when they wanted to use him, butonly Voldemort’s inner circle were branded with theDark Mark: Greyback had not been granted thishighest honor.

Harry’s scar seared again —

— and he rose into the night, flying straight up to thewindow at the very top of the tower —

"... completely sure it’s him? ’Cause if it ain’t,Greyback, we’re dead.”

“Who’s in charge here?” roared Greyback, covering hismoment of inadequacy. “I say that’s Potter, and himplus his wand, that’s two hundred thousand Galleonsright there! But if you’re too gutless to come along,any of you, it’s all for me, and with any luck, I’ll getthe girl thrown in!”

— The window was the merest slit in the black rock,not big enough for a man to enter. ...A skeletal figurewas just visible through it, curled beneath a blanket. ...Dead, or sleeping ... ?

Page | 512 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“All right!” said Scabior. “All right, we’re in! And whatabout the rest of ’em, Greyback, what’ll we do with

’em?

“Might as well take the lot. We’ve got two Mudbloods,that’s another ten Galleons. Give me the sword aswell. If they’re rubies, that’s another small fortuneright there.”

The prisoners were dragged to their feet. Harry couldhear Hermione’s breathing, fast and terrified.

“Grab hold and make it tight. I’ll do Potter!” saidGreyback, seizing a fistful of Harry’s hair; Harry couldfeel his long yellow nails scratching his scalp. “Onthree! One — two — three —”

They Disapparated, pulling the prisoners with them.Harry struggled, trying to throw off Greyback’s hand,but it was hopeless: Ron and Hermione weresqueezed tightly against him on either side, he couldnot separate from the group, and as the breath wassqueezed out of him his scar seared more painfullystill —

— as he forced himself through the slit of a windowlike a snake and landed, lightly as vapor, inside thecell-like room —

The prisoners lurched into one another as theylanded in a country lane. Harry’s eyes, still puffy, tooka moment to acclimatize, then he saw a pair ofwrought-iron gates at the foot of what looked like along drive. He experienced the tiniest trickle of relief.The worst had not happened yet: Voldemort was nothere. He was, Harry knew, for he was fighting toresist the vision, in some strange, fortresslike place,at the top of a tower. How long it would take

Page | 513 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort to get to this place, once he knew thatHarry was here, was another matter. ...

One of the Snatchers strode to the gates and shookthem.

“How do we get in? They’re locked, Greyback, I can’t— blimey!”

He whipped his hands away in fright. The iron wascontorting, twisting itself out of the abstract furls andcoils into a frightening face, which spoke in aclanging, echoing voice: “State your purpose!”

“We’ve got Potter!” Greyback roared triumphantly.“We’ve captured Harry Potter!”

The gates swung open.

“Come on!” said Greyback to his men, and theprisoners were shunted through the gates and up thedrive, between high hedges that muffled theirfootsteps. Harry saw a ghostly white shape abovehim, and realized it was an albino peacock. Hestumbled and was dragged onto his feet by Greyback;now he was staggering along sideways, tied back-to-back to the four other prisoners. Closing his puffyeyes, he allowed the pain in his scar to overcome himfor a moment, wanting to know what Voldemort wasdoing, whether he knew yet that Harry was caught. ...

The emaciated figure stirred beneath its thin blanketand rolled over toward him, eyes opening in a skull ofa face. ... The frail man sat up, great sunken eyesfixed upon him, upon Voldemort, and then he smiled.Most of his teeth were gone. ...

“So, you have come. I thought you would ... one day.But your journey was pointless. I never had it.”

Page | 514 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You lie]”

As Voldemort’s anger throbbed inside him, Harry’sscar threatened to burst with pain, and he wrenchedhis mind back to his own body, fighting to remainpresent as the prisoners were pushed over gravel.

Light spilled out over all of them.

“What is this?” said a woman’s cold voice.

“We’re here to see He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!”rasped Greyback.

“Who are you?”

“You know me!” There was resentment in thewerewolf’s voice. “Fenrir Greyback! We’ve caughtHarry Potter!”

Greyback seized Harry and dragged him around toface the light, forcing the other prisoners to shufflearound too.

“I know ’e’s swollen, ma’am, but it’s ’im!” piped upScabior. “If you look a bit closer, you’ll see ’is scar.And this ’ere, see the girl? The Mudblood who’s beentraveling around with ’im, ma’am. There’s no doubtit’s ’im, and we’ve got ’is wand as well! ’Ere, ma’am —”

Through his puffy eyelids Harry saw Narcissa Malfoyscrutinizing his swollen face. Scabior thrust theblackthorn wand at her. She raised her eyebrows.

“Bring them in,” she said.

Harry and the others were shoved and kicked upbroad stone steps into a hallway lined with portraits.

Page | 515 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Follow me,” said Narcissa, leading the way across thehall. “My son, Draco, is home for his Easter holidays.If that is Harry Potter, he will know.”

The drawing room dazzled after the darkness outside;even with his eyes almost closed Harry could makeout the wide proportions of the room. A crystalchandelier hung from the ceiling, more portraitsagainst the dark purple walls. Two figures rose fromchairs in front of an ornate marble fireplace as theprisoners were forced into the room by the Snatchers.

“What is this?”

The dreadfully familiar, drawling voice of LuciusMalfoy fell on Harry’s ears. He was panicking now: Hecould see no way out, and it was easier, as his fearmounted, to block out Voldemort’s thoughts, thoughhis scar was still burning.

“They say they’ve got Potter,” said Narcissa’s coldvoice. “Draco, come here.”

Harry did not dare look directly at Draco, but sawhim obliquely: a figure slightly taller than he was,rising from an armchair, his face a pale and pointedblur beneath white-blond hair.

Greyback forced the prisoners to turn again so as toplace Harry directly beneath the chandelier.

“Well, boy?” rasped the werewolf.

Harry was facing a mirror over the fireplace, a greatgilded thing in an intricately scrolled frame. Throughthe slits of his eyes he saw his own reflection for thefirst time since leaving Grimmauld Place.

Page | 516 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

His face was huge, shiny, and pink, every featuredistorted by Hermione’s jinx. His black hair reachedhis shoulders and there was a dark shadow aroundhis jaw. Had he not known that it was he who stoodthere, he would have wondered who was wearing hisglasses. He resolved not to speak, for his voice wassure to give him away; yet he still avoided eye contactwith Draco as the latter approached.

“Well, Draco?” said Lucius Malfoy. He sounded avid.“Is it? Is it Harry Potter?”

“I can’t — I can’t be sure,” said Draco. He was keepinghis distance from Greyback, and seemed as scared oflooking at Harry as Harry was of looking at him.

“But look at him carefully, look! Come closer!”

Harry had never heard Lucius Malfoy so excited.

“Draco, if we are the ones who hand Potter over to theDark Lord, everything will be forgiv —”

“Now, we won’t be forgetting who actually caught him,I hope, Mr. Malfoy?” said Greyback menacingly.

“Of course not, of course not!” said Luciusimpatiently. He approached Harry himself, came soclose that Harry could see the usually languid, paleface in sharp detail even through his swollen eyes.With his face a puffy mask, Harry felt as though hewas peering out from between the bars of a cage.

“What did you do to him?” Lucius asked Greyback.“How did he get into this state?”

“That wasn’t us.”

“Looks more like a Stinging Jinx to me,” said Lucius.

Page | 517 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

His gray eyes raked Harry’s forehead.

“There’s something there,” he whispered, “it could bethe scar, stretched tight. ... Draco, come here, lookproperly! What do you think?”

Harry saw Draco’s face up close now, right beside hisfather’s. They were extraordinarily alike, except thatwhile his father looked beside himself withexcitement, Draco’s expression was full of reluctance,even fear.

“I don’t know,” he said, and he walked away towardthe fireplace where his mother stood watching.

“We had better be certain, Lucius,” Narcissa called toher husband in her cold, clear voice. “Completely surethat it is Potter, before we summon the Dark Lord ...They say this is his” — she was looking closely at theblackthorn wand — “but it does not resembleOllivander’s description. ... If we are mistaken, if wecall the Dark Lord here for nothing ... Rememberwhat he did to Rowle and Dolohov?”

“What about the Mudblood, then?” growled Greyback.Harry was nearly thrown off his feet as the Snatchersforced the prisoners to swivel around again, so thatthe light fell on Hermione instead.

“Wait,” said Narcissa sharply. “Yes — yes, she was inMadam Malkin’s with Potter! I saw her picture in theProphett Look, Draco, isn’t it the Granger girl?”

“I ... maybe ... yeah.”

“But then, that’s the Weasley boy!” shouted Lucius,striding around the bound prisoners to face Ron. “It’sthem, Potter’s friends — Draco, look at him, isn’t itArthur Weasley’s son, what’s his name — ?”

Page | 518 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah,” said Draco again, his back to the prisoners.

“It could be.”

The drawing room door opened behind Harry. Awoman spoke, and the sound of the voice woundHarry’s fear to an even higher pitch.

“What is this? What’s happened, Cissy?”

Bellatrix Lestrange walked slowly around theprisoners, and stopped on Harry’s right, staring atHermione through her heavily lidded eyes.

“But surely,” she said quietly, “this is the Mudbloodgirl? This is Granger?”

“Yes, yes, it’s Granger!” cried Lucius. “And beside her,we think, Potter! Potter and his friends, caught atlast!”

“Potter?” shrieked Bellatrix, and she backed away, thebetter to take in Harry. “Are you sure? Well then, theDark Lord must be informed at once!”

She dragged back her left sleeve: Harry saw the DarkMark burned into the flesh of her arm, and knew thatshe was about to touch it, to summon her belovedmaster —

“I was about to call him!” said Lucius, and his handactually closed upon Bellatrix’s wrist, preventing herfrom touching the Mark. “I shall summon him, Bella,Potter has been brought to my house, and it istherefore upon my authority —”

“Your authority!” she sneered, attempting to wrenchher hand from his grasp. “You lost your authoritywhen you lost your wand, Lucius! How dare you! Takeyour hands off me!”

Page | 519 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“This is nothing to do with you, you did not capturethe boy —”

“Begging your pardon, Mr. Malfoy,” interjectedGreyback, “but it’s us that caught Potter, and it’s usthat 11 be claiming the gold —”

“Gold!” laughed Bellatrix, still attempting to throw offher brother-in-law, her free hand groping in herpocket for her wand. “Take your gold, filthyscavenger, what do I want with gold? I seek only thehonor of his — of —”

She stopped struggling, her dark eyes fixed uponsomething Harry could not see. Jubilant at hercapitulation, Lucius threw her hand from him andripped up his own sleeve —

“STOP!” shrieked Bellatrix. “Do not touch it, we shallall perish if the Dark Lord comes now!”

Lucius froze, his index finger hovering over his ownMark. Bellatrix strode out of Harry’s limited line ofvision.

“What is that?” he heard her say.

“Sword,” grunted an out-of-sight Snatcher.

“Give it to me.”

“It’s not yorn, missus, it’s mine, I reckon I found it.”

There was a bang and a flash of red light: Harry knewthat the Snatcher had been Stunned. There was aroar of anger from his fellows: Scabior drew his wand.

“What d’you think you’re playing at, woman?”

Page | 520 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Stupefyl” she screamed. “Stupefyl”

They were no match for her, even though there werefour of them against one of her: She was a witch, asHarry knew, with prodigious skill and no conscience.They fell where they stood, all except Greyback, whohad been forced into a kneeling position, his armsoutstretched. Out of the corners of his eyes Harry sawBellatrix bearing down upon the werewolf, the swordof Gryffindor gripped tightly in her hand, her facewaxen.

“Where did you get this sword?” she whispered toGreyback as she pulled his wand out of hisunresisting grip.

“How dare you?” he snarled, his mouth the only thingthat could move as he was forced to gaze up at her.

He bared his pointed teeth. “Release me, woman!”

“Where did you find this sword?” she repeated,brandishing it in his face. “Snape sent it to my vaultin Gringotts!”

“It was in their tent,” rasped Greyback. “Release me, Isay!”

She waved her wand, and the werewolf sprang to hisfeet, but appeared too wary to approach her. Heprowled behind an armchair, his filthy curved nailsclutching its back.

“Draco, move this scum outside,” said Bellatrix,indicating the unconscious men. “If you haven’t gotthe guts to finish them, then leave them in thecourtyard for me.”

“Don’t you dare speak to Draco like —” said Narcissafuriously, but Bellatrix screamed,

Page | 521 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Be quiet! The situation is graver than you canpossibly imagine, Cissy! We have a very seriousproblem!”

She stood, panting slightly, looking down at thesword, examining its hilt. Then she turned to look atthe silent prisoners.

“If it is indeed Potter, he must not be harmed,” shemuttered, more to herself than to the others. “TheDark Lord wishes to dispose of Potter himself. ... Butif he finds out ... I must ... I must know. ...”

She turned back to her sister again.

“The prisoners must be placed in the cellar, while Ithink what to do!”

“This is my house, Bella, you don’t give orders in my

“Do it! You have no idea of the danger we are in!”shrieked Bellatrix. She looked frightening, mad; athin stream of fire issued from her wand and burneda hole in the carpet.

Narcissa hesitated for a moment, then addressed thewerewolf.

“Take these prisoners down to the cellar, Greyback.”

“Wait,” said Bellatrix sharply. “All except ... except forthe Mudblood.”

Greyback gave a grunt of pleasure.

“No!” shouted Ron. “You can have me, keep me!”

Page | 522 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Bellatrix hit him across the face; the blow echoedaround the room.

“If she dies under questioning, I’ll take you next,” shesaid. “Blood traitor is next to Mudblood in my book.Take them downstairs, Greyback, and make sure theyare secure, but do nothing more to them — yet.”

She threw Greyback’s wand back to him, then took ashort silver knife from under her robes. She cutHermione free from the other prisoners, then draggedher by the hair into the middle of the room, whileGreyback forced the rest of them to shuffle across toanother door, into a dark passageway, his wand heldout in front of him, projecting an invisible andirresistible force.

“Reckon she’ll let me have a bit of the girl when she’sfinished with her?” Greyback crooned as he forcedthem along the corridor. “I’d say I’ll get a bite or two,wouldn’t you, ginger?”

Harry could feel Ron shaking. They were forced downa steep flight of stairs, still tied back-to-back and indanger of slipping and breaking their necks at anymoment. At the bottom was a heavy door. Greybackunlocked it with a tap of his wand, then forced theminto a dank and musty room and left them in totaldarkness. The echoing bang of the slammed cellardoor had not died away before there was a terrible,drawn-out scream from directly above them.

“HERMIONE!” Ron bellowed, and he started to writheand struggle against the ropes tying them together, sothat Harry staggered. “HERMIONE!”

“Be quiet!” Harry said. “Shut up, Ron, we need towork out a way —”

Page | 523 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“HERMIONE! HERMIONE!”

“We need a plan, stop yelling — we need to get theseropes off—”

“Harry?” came a whisper through the darkness. “Ron?Is that you?”

Ron stopped shouting. There was a sound ofmovement close by them, then Harry saw a shadowmoving closer.

“Harry? Ron?”

“Luna?”

“Yes, it’s me! Oh no, I didn’t want you to be caught!”

“Luna, can you help us get these ropes off?” saidHarry.

“Oh yes, I expect so. ... There’s an old nail we use ifwe need to break anything. ... Just a moment ...”

Hermione screamed again from overhead, and theycould hear Bellatrix screaming too, but her wordswere inaudible, for Ron shouted again, “HERMIONE!HERMIONE!”

“Mr. Ollivander?” Harry could hear Luna saying. “Mr.Ollivander, have you got the nail? If you just moveover a little bit... I think it was beside the water jug.

She was back within seconds.“You’ll need to stay still,” she said.

Page | 524 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry could feel her digging at the rope’s tough fibersto work the knots free. From upstairs they heardBellatrix’s voice.

“I’m going to ask you again! Where did you get thissword? Where?”

“We found it — we found it — PLEASE!” Hermionescreamed again; Ron struggled harder than ever, andthe rusty nail slipped onto Harry’s wrist.

“Ron, please stay still!” Luna whispered. “I can’t seewhat I’m doing —”

“My pocket!” said Ron. “In my pocket, there’s aDeluminator, and it’s full of light!”

A few seconds later, there was a click, and theluminescent spheres the Deluminator had suckedfrom the lamps in the tent flew into the cellar: Unableto rejoin their sources, they simply hung there, liketiny suns, flooding the underground room with light.Harry saw Luna, all eyes in her white face, and themotionless figure of Ollivander the wandmaker,curled up on the floor in the corner. Craning around,he caught sight of their fellow prisoners: Dean andGriphook the goblin, who seemed barely conscious,kept standing by the ropes that bound him to thehumans.

“Oh, that’s much easier, thanks, Ron,” said Luna,and she began hacking at their bindings again.

“Hello, Dean!”

From above came Bellatrix’s voice.

“You are lying, filthy Mudblood, and I know it! Youhave been inside my vault at Gringotts! Tell the truth,tell the truth\”

Page | 525 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Another terrible scream

“HERMIONE!”

“What else did you take? What else have you got? Tellme the truth or, I swear, I shall run you through withthis knife!”

“There!”

Harry felt the ropes fall away and turned, rubbing hiswrists, to see Ron running around the cellar, lookingup at the low ceiling, searching for a trapdoor. Dean,his face bruised and bloody, said “Thanks” to Lunaand stood there, shivering, but Griphook sank ontothe cellar floor, looking groggy and disoriented, manywelts across his swarthy face.

Ron was now trying to Disapparate without a wand.

“There’s no way out, Ron,” said Luna, watching hisfruitless efforts. “The cellar is completely escape-proof. I tried, at first. Mr. Ollivander has been here fora long time, he’s tried everything.”

Hermione was screaming again: The sound wentthrough Harry like physical pain. Barely conscious ofthe fierce prickling of his scar, he too started to runaround the cellar, feeling the walls for he hardly knewwhat, knowing in his heart that it was useless.

“What else did you take, what else? ANSWER ME!CRUCIO\”

Hermione’s screams echoed off the walls upstairs,

Ron was half sobbing as he pounded the walls withhis fists, and Harry in utter desperation seizedHagrid’s pouch from around his neck and gropedinside it: He pulled out Dumbledore’s Snitch andPage | 526 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

shook it, hoping for he did not know what — nothinghappened — he waved the broken halves of thephoenix wand, but they were lifeless — the mirrorfragment fell sparkling to the floor, and he saw agleam of brightest blue —

Dumbledore’s eye was gazing at him out of the mirror.

“Help us!” he yelled at it in mad desperation. “We’re inthe cellar of Malfoy Manor, help us!”

The eye blinked and was gone.

Harry was not even sure that it had really been there.He tilted the shard of mirror this way and that, andsaw nothing reflected there but the walls and ceilingof their prison, and upstairs Hermione was screamingworse than ever, and next to him Ron was bellowing,“HERMIONE! HERMIONE!”

“How did you get into my vault?” they heard Bellatrixscream. “Did that dirty little goblin in the cellar helpyou?”

“We only met him tonight!” Hermione sobbed. “We’venever been inside your vault. ... It isn’t the real sword!It’s a copy, just a copy!

“A copy?” screeched Bellatrix. “Oh, a likely story!”

“But we can find out easily!” came Lucius’s voice.“Draco, fetch the goblin, he can tell us whether thesword is real or not!”

Harry dashed across the cellar to where Griphook washuddled on the floor.

Page | 527 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Griphook,” he whispered into the goblin’s pointedear, “you must tell them that sword’s a fake, theymustn’t know it’s the real one, Griphook, please —”

He could hear someone scuttling down the cellarsteps; next moment, Draco’s shaking voice spokefrom behind the door.

“Stand back. Line up against the back wall. Don’t tryanything, or I’ll kill you!”

They did as they were bidden; as the lock turned, Ronclicked the Deluminator and the lights whisked backinto his pocket, restoring the cellar’s darkness. Thedoor flew open; Malfoy marched inside, wand held outin front of him, pale and determined. He seized thelittle goblin by the arm and backed out again,dragging Griphook with him. The door slammed shutand at the same moment a loud crack echoed insidethe cellar.

Ron clicked the Deluminator. Three balls of light flewback into the air from his pocket, revealing Dobby thehouse-elf, who had just Apparated into their midst.

“DOB — !”

Harry hit Ron on the arm to stop him shouting, andRon looked terrified at his mistake. Footsteps crossedthe ceiling overhead: Draco marching Griphook toBellatrix.

Dobby’s enormous, tennis-ball-shaped eyes werewide; he was trembling from his feet to the tips of hisears. He was back in the home of his old masters, andit was clear that he was petrified.

“Harry Potter,” he squeaked in the tiniest quiver of avoice, “Dobby has come to rescue you.”

Page | 528 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But how did you — ?”

An awful scream drowned Harry’s words: Hermionewas being tortured again. He cut to the essentials.

“You can Disapparate out of this cellar?” he askedDobby, who nodded, his ears flapping.

“And you can take humans with you?”

Dobby nodded again.

“Right. Dobby, I want you to grab Luna, Dean, andMr. Ollivander, and take them — take them to —”

“Bill and Fleur’s,” said Ron. “Shell Cottage on theoutskirts of Tinworth!”

The elf nodded for a third time.

“And then come back,” said Harry. “Can you do that,Dobby?”

“Of course, Harry Potter,” whispered the little elf. Hehurried over to Mr. Ollivander, who appeared to bebarely conscious. He took one of the wandmaker’shands in his own, then held out the other to Lunaand Dean, neither of whom moved.

“Harry, we want to help you!” Luna whispered.

“We can’t leave you here,” said Dean.

“Go, both of you! We’ll see you at Bill and Fleur’s.”

As Harry spoke, his scar burned worse than ever, andfor a few seconds he looked down, not upon thewandmaker, but on another man who was just as old,just as thin, but laughing scornfully.

Page | 529 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Kill me, then, Voldemort, I welcome death! But mydeath will not bring you what you seek. ... There is somuch you do not understand. ...”

He felt Voldemort’s fury, but as Hermione screamedagain he shut it out, returning to the cellar and thehorror of his own present.

“Go!” Harry beseeched Luna and Dean. “Go! Wellfollow, just go!”

They caught hold of the elf’s outstretched fingers.There was another loud crack, and Dobby, Luna,Dean, and Ollivander vanished.

“What was that?” shouted Lucius Malfoy from overtheir heads. “Did you hear that? What was that noisein the cellar?”

Harry and Ron stared at each other.

“Draco — no, call Wormtail! Make him go and check!”

Footsteps crossed the room overhead, then there wassilence. Harry knew that the people in the drawingroom were listening for more noises from the cellar.

“We’re going to have to try and tackle him,” hewhispered to Ron. They had no choice: The momentanyone entered the room and saw the absence ofthree prisoners, they were lost. “Leave the lights on,”Harry added, and as they heard someone descendingthe steps outside the door, they backed against thewall on either side of it.

“Stand back,” came Wormtail’s voice. “Stand awayfrom the door. I am coming in.”

Page | 530 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The door flew open. For a split second Wormtail gazedinto the apparently empty cellar, ablaze with lightfrom the three miniature suns floating in midair.

Then Harry and Ron launched themselves upon him.Ron seized Wormtail’s wand arm and forced itupward; Harry slapped a hand to his mouth, mufflinghis voice. Silently they struggled: Wormtail’s wandemitted sparks; his silver hand closed around Harry’sthroat.

“What is it, Wormtail?” called Lucius Malfoy fromabove.

“Nothing!” Ron called back, in a passable imitation ofWormtail’s wheezy voice. “All fine!”

Harry could barely breathe.

“You’re going to kill me?” Harry choked, attempting toprise off the metal fingers. “After I saved your life?

You owe me, Wormtail!”

The silver fingers slackened. Harry had not expectedit: He wrenched himself free, astonished, keeping hishand over Wormtail’s mouth. He saw the ratlikeman’s small watery eyes widen with fear and surprise:He seemed just as shocked as Harry at what his handhad done, at the tiny, merciful impulse it hadbetrayed, and he continued to struggle morepowerfully, as though to undo that moment ofweakness.

“And well have that,” whispered Ron, tuggingWormtail’s wand from his other hand.

Wandless, helpless, Pettigrew’s pupils dilated interror. His eyes had slid from Harry’s face tosomething else. His own silver fingers were movinginexorably toward his own throat.

Page | 531 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No —”

Without pausing to think, Harry tried to drag backthe hand, but there was no stopping it. The silver toolthat Voldemort had given his most cowardly servanthad turned upon its disarmed and useless owner;Pettigrew was reaping his reward for his hesitation,his moment of pity; he was being strangled beforetheir eyes.

“No!”

Ron had released Wormtail too, and together he andHarry tried to pull the crushing metal fingers fromaround Wormtail’s throat, but it was no use.

Pettigrew was turning blue.

“Relashiol” said Ron, pointing the wand at the silverhand, but nothing happened; Pettigrew dropped to hisknees, and at the same moment, Hermione gave adreadful scream from overhead. Wormtail’s eyes rolledupward in his purple face; he gave a last twitch, andwas still.

Harry and Ron looked at each other, then leavingWormtail’s body on the floor behind them, ran up thestairs and back into the shadowy passageway leadingto the drawing room. Cautiously they crept along ituntil they reached the drawing room door, which wasajar. Now they had a clear view of Bellatrix lookingdown at Griphook, who was holding Gryffindor’ssword in his long-fingered hands. Hermione was lyingat Bellatrix’s feet. She was barely stirring.

“Well?” Bellatrix said to Griphook. “Is it the truesword?”

Harry waited, holding his breath, fighting against theprickling of his scar.

Page | 532 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Griphook. “It is a fake.”

“Are you sure?” panted Bellatrix. “Quite sure?”

“Yes,” said the goblin.

Relief broke across her face, all tension drained fromit.

“Good,” she said, and with a casual flick of her wandshe slashed another deep cut into the goblin’s face,and he dropped with a yell at her feet. She kicked himaside. “And now,” she said in a voice that burst withtriumph, “we call the Dark Lord!”

And she pushed back her sleeve and touched herforefinger to the Dark Mark.

At once, Harry’s scar felt as though it had split openagain. His true surroundings vanished: He wasVoldemort, and the skeletal wizard before him waslaughing toothlessly at him; he was enraged at thesummons he felt — he had warned them, he had toldthem to summon him for nothing less than Potter. Ifthey were mistaken ...

“Kill me, then!” demanded the old man. “You will notwin, you cannot win! That wand will never, ever beyours —”

And Voldemort’s fury broke: A burst of green lightfilled the prison room and the frail old body was liftedfrom its hard bed and then fell back, lifeless, andVoldemort returned to the window, his wrath barelycontrollable. ... They would suffer his retribution ifthey had no good reason for calling him back. ...

“And I think,” said Bellatrix’s voice, “we can dispose ofthe Mudblood. Greyback, take her if you want her.”

Page | 533 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“NOOOOOOOOOOOO!”

Ron had burst into the drawing room; Bellatrix lookedaround, shocked; she turned her wand to face Roninstead —

“ExpelliarmusV’ he roared, pointing Wormtail’s wandat Bellatrix, and hers flew into the air and was caughtby Harry, who had sprinted after Ron. Lucius,Narcissa, Draco, and Greyback wheeled about; Harryyelled, “Stupefy\” and Lucius Malfoy collapsed ontothe hearth. Jets of light flew from Draco’s, Narcissa’s,and Greyback’s wands; Harry threw himself to thefloor, rolling behind a sofa to avoid them.

“STOP OR SHE DIES!”

Panting, Harry peered around the edge of the sofa.Bellatrix was supporting Hermione, who seemed to beunconscious, and was holding her short silver knifeto Hermione’s throat.

“Drop your wands,” she whispered. “Drop them, orwe’ll see exactly how filthy her blood is!”

Ron stood rigid, clutching Wormtail’s wand. Harrystraightened up, still holding Bellatrix’s.

“I said, drop them!” she screeched, pressing the bladeinto Hermione’s throat: Harry saw beads of bloodappear there.

“All right!” he shouted, and he dropped Bellatrix’swand onto the floor at his feet. Ron did the same withWormtail’s. Both raised their hands to shoulderheight.

“Good!” she leered. “Draco, pick them up! The DarkLord is coming, Harry Potter! Your death approaches!”

Page | 534 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry knew it; his scar was bursting with the pain ofit, and he could feel Voldemort flying through the skyfrom far away, over a dark and stormy sea, and soonhe would be close enough to Apparate to them, andHarry could see no way out.

“Now,” said Bellatrix softly, as Draco hurried back toher with the wands, “Cissy, I think we ought to tiethese little heroes up again, while Greyback takescare of Miss Mudblood. I am sure the Dark Lord willnot begrudge you the girl, Greyback, after what youhave done tonight.”

At the last word there was a peculiar grinding noisefrom above. All of them looked upward in time to seethe crystal chandelier tremble; then, with a creak andan ominous jingling, it began to fall. Bellatrix wasdirectly beneath it; dropping Hermione, she threwherself aside with a scream. The chandelier crashedto the floor in an explosion of crystal and chains,falling on top of Hermione and the goblin, who stillclutched the sword of Gryffindor. Glittering shards ofcrystal flew in all directions: Draco doubled over, hishands covering his bloody face.

As Ron ran to pull Hermione out of the wreckage,Harry took his chance: He leapt over an armchair andwrested the three wands from Draco’s grip, pointed allof them at Greyback, and yelled, “Stupefyl” Thewerewolf was lifted off his feet by the triple spell, flewup to the ceiling, and then smashed to the ground.

As Narcissa dragged Draco out of the way of furtherharm, Bellatrix sprang to her feet, her hair flying asshe brandished the silver knife; but Narcissa haddirected her wand at the doorway.

“Dobby!” she screamed, and even Bellatrix froze.

“You! You dropped the chandelier — ?”

Page | 535 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The tiny elf trotted into the room, his shaking fingerpointing at his old mistress.

“You must not hurt Harry Potter,” he squeaked.

“Kill him, Cissy!” shrieked Bellatrix, but there wasanother loud crack, and Narcissa’s wand too flew intothe air and landed on the other side of the room.

“You dirty little monkey!” bawled Bellatrix. “How dareyou take a witch’s wand, how dare you defy yourmasters?”

“Dobby has no master!” squealed the elf. “Dobby is afree elf, and Dobby has come to save Harry Potter andhis friends!”

Harry’s scar was blinding him with pain. Dimly heknew that they had moments, seconds beforeVoldemort was with them.

“Ron, catch — and GO!” he yelled, throwing one of thewands to him; then he bent down to tug Griphook outfrom under the chandelier. Hoisting the groaninggoblin, who still clung to the sword, over oneshoulder, Harry seized Dobby’s hand and spun on thespot to Disapparate.

As he turned into darkness he caught one last view ofthe drawing room: of the pale, frozen figures ofNarcissa and Draco, of the streak of red that wasRon’s hair, and a blur of flying silver, as Bellatrix’sknife flew across the room at the place where he wasvanishing —

Bill and Fleur’s ... Shell Cottage ... Bill and Fleur’s ...

He had disappeared into the unknown; all he coulddo was repeat the name of the destination and hope

Page | 536 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

that it would suffice to take him there. The pain in hisforehead pierced him, and the weight of the goblinbore down upon him; he could feel the blade ofGryffindor’s sword bumping against his back; Dobby’shand jerked in his; he wondered whether the elf wastrying to take charge, to pull them in the rightdirection, and tried, by squeezing the fingers, toindicate that that was fine with him. ...

And then they hit solid earth and smelled salty air.Harry fell to his knees, relinquished Dobby’s hand,and attempted to lower Griphook gently to theground.

“Are you all right?” he said as the goblin stirred, butGriphook merely whimpered.

Harry squinted around through the darkness. Thereseemed to be a cottage a short way away under thewide starry sky, and he thought he saw movementoutside it.

“Dobby, is this Shell Cottage?” he whispered,clutching the two wands he had brought from theMalfoys’, ready to fight if he needed to. “Have we cometo the right place? Dobby?”

He looked around. The little elf stood feet from him.“DOBBY!”

The elf swayed slightly, stars reflected in his wide,shining eyes. Together, he and Harry looked down atthe silver hilt of the knife protruding from the elf’sheaving chest.

“Dobby — no — HELP!” Harry bellowed toward thecottage, toward the people moving there. “HELP!”

Page | 537 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He did not know or care whether they were wizards orMuggles, friends or foes; all he cared about was that adark stain was spreading across Dobby’s front, andthat he had stretched out his thin arms to Harry witha look of supplication. Harry caught him and laid himsideways on the cool grass.

“Dobby, no, don’t die, don’t die —”

The elf’s eyes found him, and his lips trembled withthe effort to form words.

“Harry ... Potter ...”

And then with a little shudder the elf became quitestill, and his eyes were nothing more than greatglassy orbs, sprinkled with light from the stars theycould not see.

Page | 538 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



THE WANDMAKER

It was like sinking into an old nightmare; for aninstant Harry knelt again beside Dumbledore’s bodyat the foot of the tallest tower at Hogwarts, but inreality he was staring at a tiny body curled upon thegrass, pierced by Bellatrix’s silver knife. Harry’s voicewas still saying, “Dobby ... Dobby ...” even though heknew that the elf had gone where he could not callhim back.

After a minute or so he realized that they had, afterall, come to the right place, for here were Bill andFleur, Dean and Luna, gathering around him as heknelt over the elf.

“Hermione?” he said suddenly. “Where is she?”

“Ron’s taken her inside,” said Bill. “She’ll be all right.”

Harry looked back down at Dobby. He stretched out ahand and pulled the sharp blade from the elf’s body,then dragged off his own jacket and covered Dobby init like a blanket.

Page | 539 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The sea was rushing against rock somewhere nearby;Harry listened to it while the others talked, discussingmatters in which he could take no interest, makingdecisions. Dean carried the injured Griphook into thehouse, Fleur hurrying with them; now Bill wasmaking suggestions about burying the elf. Harryagreed without really knowing what he was saying. Ashe did so, he gazed down at the tiny body, and hisscar prickled and burned, and in one part of hismind, viewed as if from the wrong end of a longtelescope, he saw Voldemort punishing those theyhad left behind at Malfoy Manor. His rage wasdreadful and yet Harry’s grief for Dobby seemed todiminish it, so that it became a distant storm thatreached Harry from across a vast, silent ocean.

“I want to do it properly,” were the first words ofwhich Harry was fully conscious of speaking. “Not bymagic. Have you got a spade?”

And shortly afterward he had set to work, alone,digging the grave in the place that Bill had shown himat the end of the garden, between bushes. He dugwith a kind of fury, relishing the manual work,glorying in the non-magic of it, for every drop of hissweat and every blister felt like a gift to the elf whohad saved their lives.

His scar burned, but he was master of the pain; hefelt it, yet was apart from it. He had learned control atlast, learned to shut his mind to Voldemort, the verything Dumbledore had wanted him to learn fromSnape. Just as Voldemort had not been able topossess Harry while Harry was consumed with grieffor Sirius, so his thoughts could not penetrate Harrynow, while he mourned Dobby. Grief, it seemed, droveVoldemort out ... though Dumbledore, of course,would have said that it was love. ...

Page | 540 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

On Harry dug, deeper and deeper into the hard, coldearth, subsuming his grief in sweat, denying the painin his scar. In the darkness, with nothing but thesound of his own breath and the rushing sea to keephim company, the things that had happened at theMalfoys’ returned to him, the things he had heardcame back to him, and understanding blossomed inthe darkness. ...

The steady rhythm of his arms beat time with histhoughts. Hallows ... Horcruxes ... Hallows ...Horcruxes ... Yet he no longer burned with that weird,obsessive longing. Loss and fear had snuffed it out:

He felt as though he had been slapped awake again.

Deeper and deeper Harry sank into the grave, and heknew where Voldemort had been tonight, and whomhe had killed in the topmost cell of Nurmengard, andwhy. ...

And he thought of Wormtail, dead because of onesmall unconscious impulse of mercy. ... Dumbledorehad foreseen that. ... How much more had he known?

Harry lost track of time. He knew only that thedarkness had lightened a few degrees when he wasrejoined by Ron and Dean.

“How’s Hermione?”

“Better,” said Ron. “Fleur’s looking after her.”

Harry had his retort ready for when they asked himwhy he had not simply created a perfect grave withhis wand, but he did not need it. They jumped downinto the hole he had made with spades of their own,and together they worked in silence until the holeseemed deep enough.

Page | 541 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry wrapped the elf more snugly in his jacket. Ronsat on the edge of the grave and stripped off his shoesand socks, which he placed upon the elf’s bare feet.Dean produced a woolen hat, which Harry placedcarefully upon Dobby’s head, muffling his batlikeears.

“We should close his eyes.”

Harry had not heard the others coming through thedarkness. Bill was wearing a traveling cloak, Fleur alarge white apron, from the pocket of which protrudeda bottle of what Harry recognized to be Skele-Gro.Hermione was wrapped in a borrowed dressing gown,pale and unsteady on her feet; Ron put an armaround her when she reached him. Luna, who washuddled in one of Fleur’s coats, crouched down andplaced her fingers tenderly upon each of the elf’seyelids, sliding them over his glassy stare.

“There,” she said softly. “Now he could be sleeping.”

Harry placed the elf into the grave, arranged his tinylimbs so that he might have been resting, thenclimbed out and gazed for the last time upon the littlebody. He forced himself not to break down as heremembered Dumbledore’s funeral, and the rows androws of golden chairs, and the Minister of Magic inthe front row, the recitation of Dumbledore’sachievements, the stateliness of the white marbletomb. He felt that Dobby deserved just as grand afuneral, and yet here the elf lay between bushes in aroughly dug hole.

“I think we ought to say something,” piped up Luna.“I’ll go first, shall I?”

And as everybody looked at her, she addressed thedead elf at the bottom of the grave.

Page | 542 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Thank you so much, Dobby, for rescuing me fromthat cellar. It’s so unfair that you had to die, whenyou were so good and brave. I’ll always rememberwhat you did for us. I hope you’re happy now.”

She turned and looked expectantly at Ron, whocleared his throat and said in a thick voice, “Yeah ...thanks, Dobby.”

“Thanks,” muttered Dean.

Harry swallowed.

“Good-bye, Dobby,” he said. It was all he couldmanage, but Luna had said it all for him. Bill raisedhis wand, and the pile of earth beside the grave roseup into the air and fell neatly upon it, a small,reddish mound.

“D’you mind if I stay here a moment?” he asked theothers.

They murmured words he did not catch; he felt gentlepats upon his back, and then they all traipsed backtoward the cottage, leaving Harry alone beside the elf.

He looked around: There were a number of largewhite stones, smoothed by the sea, marking the edgeof the flower beds. He picked up one of the largestand laid it, pillowlike, over the place where Dobby’shead now rested. He then felt in his pocket for awand.

There were two in there. He had forgotten, lost track;he could not now remember whose wands these were;he seemed to remember wrenching them out ofsomeone’s hand. He selected the shorter of the two,which felt friendlier in his hand, and pointed it at therock.

Page | 543 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Slowly, under his murmured instruction, deep cutsappeared upon the rock’s surface. He knew thatHermione could have done it more neatly, andprobably more quickly, but he wanted to mark thespot as he had wanted to dig the grave. When Harrystood up again, the stone read:

HERE LIES DOBBY, A FREE ELF.

He looked down at his handiwork for a few moreseconds, then walked away, his scar still prickling alittle, and his mind full of those things that had cometo him in the grave, ideas that had taken shape in thedarkness, ideas both fascinating and terrible.

They were all sitting in the living room when heentered the little hall, their attention focused uponBill, who was talking. The room was light-colored,pretty, with a small fire of driftwood burning brightlyin the fireplace. Harry did not want to drop mud uponthe carpet, so he stood in the doorway, listening.

"... lucky that Ginny’s on holiday. If she’d been atHogwarts, they could have taken her before wereached her. Now we know she’s safe too.”

He looked around and saw Harry standing there.

“I’ve been getting them all out of the Burrow,” heexplained. “Moved them to Muriel’s. The Death Eatersknow Ron’s with you now, they’re bound to target thefamily — don’t apologize,” he added at the sight ofHarry’s expression. “It was always a matter of time,Dad’s been saying so for months. We’re the biggestblood-traitor family there is.”

“How are they protected?” asked Harry.

Page | 544 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Fidelius Charm. Dad’s Secret-Keeper. And we’vedone it on this cottage too; I’m Secret-Keeper here.None of us can go to work, but that’s hardly the mostimportant thing now. Once Ollivander and Griphookare well enough, we’ll move them to Muriel’s too.There isn’t much room here, but she’s got plenty.Griphook’s legs are on the mend, Fleur’s given himSkele-Gro; we could probably move them in an hour

or —

“No,” Harry said, and Bill looked startled. “I need bothof them here. I need to talk to them. It’s important.”

He heard the authority in his own voice, theconviction, the sense of purpose that had come to himas he dug Dobby’s grave. All of their faces wereturned toward him, looking puzzled.

“I’m going to wash,” Harry told Bill, looking down athis hands, still covered in mud and Dobby’s blood.“Then 111 need to see them, straightaway.”

He walked into the little kitchen, to the basin beneatha window overlooking the sea. Dawn was breakingover the horizon, shell pink and faintly gold, as hewashed, again following the train of thought that hadcome to him in the dark garden. ...

Dobby would never be able to tell them who had senthim to the cellar, but Harry knew what he had seen.

A piercing blue eye had looked out of the mirrorfragment, and then help had come. Help will alwaysbe given at Hog warts to those who ask for it

Harry dried his hands, impervious to the beauty ofthe scene outside the window and to the murmuringof the others in the sitting room. He looked out overthe ocean and felt closer, this dawn, than ever before,closer to the heart of it all.

Page | 545 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

And still his scar prickled, and he knew thatVoldemort was getting there too. Harry understoodand yet did not understand. His instinct was tellinghim one thing, his brain quite another. TheDumbledore in Harry’s head smiled, surveying Harryover the tips of his fingers, pressed together as if inprayer.

You gave Ron the Deluminator. You understood him. ...You gave him a way back. ...

And you understood Wormtail too. ... You knew therewas a bit of regret there, somewhere. ...

And if you knew them ... What did you know aboutme, Dumbledore?

Am I meant to know, but not to seek? Did you knowhow hard I’d find that? Is that why you made it thisdifficult? So I’d have time to work that out?

Harry stood quite still, eyes glazed, watching the placewhere a bright gold rim of dazzling sun was risingover the horizon. Then he looked down at his cleanhands and was momentarily surprised to see thecloth he was holding in them. He set it down andreturned to the hall, and as he did so, he felt his scarpulse angrily, and there flashed across his mind, swiftas the reflection of a dragonfly over water, the outlineof a building he knew extremely well.

Bill and Fleur were standing at the foot of the stairs.

“I need to speak to Griphook and Ollivander,” Harrysaid.

“No,” said Fleur. “You will ’ave to wait, ’Arry. Zey areboth ill, tired —”

Page | 546 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I’m sorry,” he said without heat, “but it can’t wait. Ineed to talk to them now. Privately — and separately.It’s urgent.”

“Harry, what the hell’s going on?” asked Bill. “Youturn up here with a dead house-elf and a half-conscious goblin, Hermione looks as though she’sbeen tortured, and Ron’s just refused to tell meanything —”

“We can’t tell you what we’re doing,” said Harry flatly.“You’re in the Order, Bill, you know Dumbledore leftus a mission. We’re not supposed to talk about it toanyone else.”

Fleur made an impatient noise, but Bill did not lookat her; he was staring at Harry. His deeply scarredface was hard to read. Finally Bill said, “All right. Whodo you want to talk to first?”

Harry hesitated. He knew what hung on his decision.There was hardly any time left; now was the momentto decide: Horcruxes or Hallows?

“Griphook,” Harry said. “I’ll speak to Griphook first.”

His heart was racing as if he had been sprinting andhad just cleared an enormous obstacle.

“Up here, then,” said Bill, leading the way.

Harry had walked up several steps before stoppingand looking back.

“I need you two as well!” he called to Ron andHermione, who had been skulking, half concealed, inthe doorway of the sitting room.

They both moved into the light, looking oddly relieved.

Page | 547 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“How are you?” Harry asked Hermione. “You wereamazing — coming up with that story when she washurting you like that —”

Hermione gave a weak smile as Ron gave her a one-armed squeeze.

“What are we doing now, Harry?” he asked.

“You’ll see. Come on.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed Bill up the steepstairs onto a small landing. Three doors led off it.

“In here,” said Bill, opening the door into his andFleur’s room. It too had a view of the sea, now fleckedwith gold in the sunrise. Harry moved to the window,turned his back on the spectacular view, and waited,his arms folded, his scar prickling. Hermione took thechair beside the dressing table; Ron sat on the arm.

Bill reappeared, carrying the little goblin, whom heset down carefully upon the bed. Griphook gruntedthanks, and Bill left, closing the door upon them all.

“I’m sorry to take you out of bed,” said Harry. “Howare your legs?”

“Painful,” replied the goblin. “But mending.”

He was still clutching the sword of Gryffindor, andwore a strange look: half truculent, half intrigued.Harry noted the goblin’s sallow skin, his long thinfingers, his black eyes. Fleur had removed his shoes:His long feet were dirty. He was larger than a house-elf, but not by much. His domed head was muchbigger than a human’s.

“You probably don’t remember —” Harry began.

Page | 548 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“— that I was the goblin who showed you to yourvault, the first time you ever visited Gringotts?” saidGriphook. “I remember, Harry Potter. Even amongstgoblins, you are very famous.”

Harry and the goblin looked at each other, sizing eachother up. Harry’s scar was still prickling. He wantedto get through this interview with Griphook quickly,and at the same time was afraid of making a falsemove. While he tried to decide on the best way toapproach his request, the goblin broke the silence.

“You buried the elf,” he said, sounding unexpectedlyrancorous. “I watched you from the window of thebedroom next door.”

“Yes,” said Harry.

Griphook looked at him out of the corners of hisslanting black eyes.

“You are an unusual wizard, Harry Potter.”

“In what way?” asked Harry, rubbing his scarabsently.

“You dug the grave.”

“So?”

Griphook did not answer. Harry rather thought hewas being sneered at for acting like a Muggle, but itdid not much matter to him whether Griphookapproved of Dobby’s grave or not. He gathered himselffor the attack.

“Griphook, I need to ask —”

“You also rescued a goblin.”

Page | 549 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“What?”

“You brought me here. Saved me.”

“Well, I take it you’re not sorry?” said Harry a littleimpatiently.

“No, Harry Potter,” said Griphook, and with one fingerhe twisted the thin black beard upon his chin, “butyou are a very odd wizard.”

“Right,” said Harry. “Well, I need some help,

Griphook, and you can give it to me.”

The goblin made no sign of encouragement, butcontinued to frown at Harry as though he had neverseen anything like him.

“I need to break into a Gringotts vault.”

Harry had not meant to say it so baldly; the wordswere forced from him as pain shot through hislightning scar and he saw, again, the outline ofHogwarts. He closed his mind firmly. He needed todeal with Griphook first. Ron and Hermione werestaring at Harry as though he had gone mad.

“Harry —” said Hermione, but she was cut off byGriphook.

“Break into a Gringotts vault?” repeated the goblin,wincing a little as he shifted his position upon thebed. “It is impossible.”

“No, it isn’t,” Ron contradicted him. “It’s been done.”

“Yeah,” said Harry. “The same day I first met you,Griphook. My birthday, seven years ago.”

Page | 550 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“The vault in question was empty at the time,”snapped the goblin, and Harry understood that eventhough Griphook had left Gringotts, he was offendedat the idea of its defenses being breached. “Itsprotection was minimal.”

“Well, the vault we need to get into isn’t empty, andI’m guessing its protection will be pretty powerful,”said Harry. “It belongs to the Lestranges.”

He saw Hermione and Ron look at each other,astonished, but there would be time enough toexplain after Griphook had given his answer.

“You have no chance,” said Griphook flatly. “Nochance at all. If you seek beneath our floors, atreasure that was never yours —”

“Thief you have been warned, beware — yeah, Iknow, I remember,” said Harry. “But I’m not trying toget myself any treasure, I’m not trying to takeanything for personal gain. Can you believe that?”

The goblin looked slantwise at Harry, and thelightning scar on Harry’s forehead prickled, but heignored it, refusing to acknowledge its pain or itsinvitation.

“If there was a wizard of whom I would believe thatthey did not seek personal gain,” said Griphookfinally, “it would be you, Harry Potter. Goblins andelves are not used to the protection or the respectthat you have shown this night. Not from wand-carriers.”

“Wand-carriers,” repeated Harry: The phrase fell oddlyupon his ears as his scar prickled, as Voldemortturned his thoughts northward, and as Harry burnedto question Ollivander next door.

Page | 551 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“The right to carry a wand,” said the goblin quietly,“has long been contested between wizards andgoblins.”

“Well, goblins can do magic without wands,” saidRon.

“That is immaterial! Wizards refuse to share thesecrets of wand-lore with other magical beings, theydeny us the possibility of extending our powers!”

“Well, goblins won’t share any of their magic either,”said Ron. “You won’t tell us how to make swords andarmor the way you do. Goblins know how to workmetal in a way wizards have never —”

“It doesn’t matter,” said Harry, noting Griphook’srising color. “This isn’t about wizards versus goblinsor any other sort of magical creature —”

Griphook gave a nasty laugh.

“But it is, it is about precisely that! As the Dark Lordbecomes ever more powerful, your race is set stillmore firmly above mine! Gringotts falls underWizarding rule, house-elves are slaughtered, and whoamongst the wand-carriers protests?”

“We do!” said Hermione. She had sat up straight, hereyes bright. “We protest! And I’m hunted quite asmuch as any goblin or elf, Griphook! I’m a Mudblood!”

“Don’t call yourself —” Ron muttered.

“Why shouldn’t I?” said Hermione. “Mudblood, andproud of it! I’ve got no higher position under this neworder than you have, Griphook! It was me they choseto torture, back at the Malfoys’!”

Page | 552 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

As she spoke, she pulled aside the neck of thedressing gown to reveal the thin cut Bellatrix hadmade, scarlet against her throat.

“Did you know that it was Harry who set Dobby free?”she asked. “Did you know that we’ve wanted elves tobe freed for years?” (Ron fidgeted uncomfortably onthe arm of Hermione’s chair.) “You can’t want You-Know-Who defeated more than we do, Griphook!”

The goblin gazed at Hermione with the same curiosityhe had shown Harry.

“What do you seek within the Lestranges’ vault?” heasked abruptly. “The sword that lies inside it is afake. This is the real one.” He looked from one to theother of them. “I think that you already know this.

You asked me to lie for you back there.”

“But the fake sword isn’t the only thing in that vault,is it?” asked Harry. “Perhaps you’ve seen the otherthings in there?”

His heart was pounding harder than ever. Heredoubled his efforts to ignore the pulsing of his scar.

The goblin twisted his beard around his finger again.

“It is against our code to speak of the secrets ofGringotts. We are the guardians of fabuloustreasures. We have a duty to the objects placed in ourcare, which were, so often, wrought by our fingers.”

The goblin stroked the sword, and his black eyesroved from Harry to Hermione to Ron and then backagain.

“So young,” he said finally, “to be fighting so many.”

Page | 553 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Will you help us?” said Harry. “We haven’t got a hopeof breaking in without a goblin’s help. You’re our onechance.”

“I shall ... think about it,” said Griphookmaddeningly.

“But —” Ron started angrily; Hermione nudged him inthe ribs.

“Thank you,” said Harry.

The goblin bowed his great domed head inacknowledgement, then flexed his short legs.

“I think,” he said, settling himself ostentatiously uponBill and Fleur’s bed, “that the Skele-Gro has finishedits work. I may be able to sleep at last. Forgive me. ...”

“Yeah, of course,” said Harry, but before leaving theroom he leaned forward and took the sword ofGryffindor from beside the goblin. Griphook did notprotest, but Harry thought he saw resentment in thegoblin’s eyes as he closed the door upon him.

“Little git,” whispered Ron. “He’s enjoying keeping ushanging.”

“Harry,” whispered Hermione, pulling them both awayfrom the door, into the middle of the still-darklanding, “are you saying what I think you’re saying?Are you saying there’s a Horcrux in the Lestranges’vault?”

“Yes,” said Harry. “Bellatrix was terrified when shethought we’d been in there, she was beside herself.Why? What did she think we’d seen, what else did shethink we might have taken? Something she waspetrified You-Know-Who would find out about.”

Page | 554 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But I thought we were looking for places You-Know-Who’s been, places he’s done something important?”said Ron, looking baffled. “Was he ever inside theLestranges’ vault?”

“I don’t know whether he was ever inside Gringotts,”said Harry. “He never had gold there when he wasyounger, because nobody left him anything. He wouldhave seen the bank from the outside, though, the firsttime he ever went to Diagon Alley.”

Harry’s scar throbbed, but he ignored it; he wantedRon and Hermione to understand about Gringottsbefore they spoke to Ollivander.

“I think he would have envied anyone who had a keyto a Gringotts vault. I think he’d have seen it as a realsymbol of belonging to the Wizarding world. And don’tforget, he trusted Bellatrix and her husband. Theywere his most devoted servants before he fell, andthey went looking for him after he vanished. He said itthe night he came back, I heard him.”

Harry rubbed his scar.

“I don’t think he’d have told Bellatrix it was aHorcrux, though. He never told Lucius Malfoy thetruth about the diary. He probably told her it was atreasured possession and asked her to place it in hervault. The safest place in the world for anything youwant to hide, Hagrid told me ... except for Hogwarts.”

When Harry had finished speaking, Ron shook hishead.

“You really understand him.”

Page | 555 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Bits of him,” said Harry. “Bits ... I just wish I’dunderstood Dumbledore as much. But well see.

Come on — Ollivander now.”

Ron and Hermione looked bewildered but impressedas they followed him across the little landing andknocked upon the door opposite Bill and Fleur’s. Aweak “Come in!” answered them.

The wandmaker was lying on the twin bed farthestfrom the window. He had been held in the cellar formore than a year, and tortured, Harry knew, on atleast one occasion. He was emaciated, the bones ofhis face sticking out sharply against the yellowishskin. His great silver eyes seemed vast in theirsunken sockets. The hands that lay upon the blanketcould have belonged to a skeleton. Harry sat down onthe empty bed, beside Ron and Hermione. The risingsun was not visible here. The room faced the cliff-topgarden and the freshly dug grave.

“Mr. Ollivander, I’m sorry to disturb you,” Harry said.

“My dear boy.” Ollivander’s voice was feeble. “Yourescued us. I thought we would die in that place. Ican never thank you ... never thank you ... enough.”

“We were glad to do it.”

Harry’s scar throbbed. He knew, he was certain, thatthere was hardly any time left in which to beatVoldemort to his goal, or else to attempt to thwarthim. He felt a flutter of panic ... yet he had made hisdecision when he chose to speak to Griphook first.Feigning a calm he did not feel, he groped in thepouch around his neck and took out the two halves ofhis broken wand.

“Mr. Ollivander, I need some help.”

Page | 556 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Anything. Anything,” said the wandmaker weakly.

“Can you mend this? Is it possible?”

Ollivander held out a trembling hand, and Harryplaced the two barely connected halves into his palm.

“Holly and phoenix feather,” said Ollivander in atremulous voice. “Eleven inches. Nice and supple.”

“Yes,” said Harry. “Can you — ?”

“No,” whispered Ollivander. “I am sorry, very sorry,but a wand that has suffered this degree of damagecannot be repaired by any means that I know of.”

Harry had been braced to hear it, but it was a blownevertheless. He took the wand halves back andreplaced them in the pouch around his neck.Ollivander stared at the place where the shatteredwand had vanished, and did not look away untilHarry had taken from his pocket the two wands hehad brought from the Malfoys’.

“Can you identify these?” Harry asked.

The wandmaker took the first of the wands and heldit close to his faded eyes, rolling it between hisknobble-knuckled fingers, flexing it slightly.

“Walnut and dragon heartstring,” he said. “Twelve-and-three-quarter inches. Unyielding. This wandbelonged to Bellatrix Lestrange.”

“And this one?”

Ollivander performed the same examination.

Page | 557 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Hawthorn and unicorn hair. Ten inches precisely.Reasonably springy. This was the wand of DracoMalfoy.”

“Was?” repeated Harry. “Isn’t it still his?”“Perhaps not. If you took it —”

“— I did —”

“— then it may be yours. Of course, the manner oftaking matters. Much also depends upon the wanditself. In general, however, where a wand has beenwon, its allegiance will change.”

There was silence in the room, except for the distantrushing of the sea.

“You talk about wands like they’ve got feelings,” saidHarry, “like they can think for themselves.”

“The wand chooses the wizard,” said Ollivander. “Thatmuch has always been clear to those of us who havestudied wandlore.”

“A person can still use a wand that hasn’t chosenthem, though?” asked Harry.

“Oh yes, if you are any wizard at all you will be able tochannel your magic through almost any instrument.The best results, however, must always come wherethere is the strongest affinity between wizard andwand. These connections are complex. An initialattraction, and then a mutual quest for experience,the wand learning from the wizard, the wizard fromthe wand.”

The sea gushed forward and backward; it was amournful sound.

Page | 558 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I took this wand from Draco Malfoy by force,” saidHarry. “Can I use it safely?”

“I think so. Subtle laws govern wand ownership, butthe conquered wand will usually bend its will to itsnew master.”

“So I should use this one?” said Ron, pullingWormtail’s wand out of his pocket and handing it toOllivander.

“Chestnut and dragon heartstring. Nine-and-a-quarter inches. Brittle. I was forced to make thisshortly after my kidnapping, for Peter Pettigrew. Yes,if you won it, it is more likely to do your bidding, anddo it well, than another wand.”

“And this holds true for all wands, does it?” askedHarry.

“I think so,” replied Ollivander, his protuberant eyesupon Harry’s face. “You ask deep questions, Mr.

Potter. Wandlore is a complex and mysterious branchof magic.”

“So, it isn’t necessary to kill the previous owner totake true possession of a wand?” asked Harry.

Ollivander swallowed.

“Necessary? No, I should not say that it is necessaryto kill.”

“There are legends, though,” said Harry, and as hisheart rate quickened, the pain in his scar becamemore intense; he was sure that Voldemort haddecided to put his idea into action. “Legends about awand — or wands — that have passed from hand tohand by murder.”

Page | 559 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ollivander turned pale. Against the snowy pillow hewas light gray, and his eyes were enormous,bloodshot, and bulging with what looked like fear.

“Only one wand, I think,” he whispered.

“And You-Know-Who is interested in it, isn’t he?”asked Harry.

“I — how?” croaked Ollivander, and he lookedappealingly at Ron and Hermione for help. “How doyou know this?”

“He wanted you to tell him how to overcome theconnection between our wands,” said Harry.

Ollivander looked terrified.

“He tortured me, you must understand that! TheCruciatus Curse, I — I had no choice but to tell himwhat I knew, what I guessed!”

“I understand,” said Harry. “You told him about thetwin cores? You said he just had to borrow anotherwizard’s wand?”

Ollivander looked horrified, transfixed, by the amountthat Harry knew. He nodded slowly.

“But it didn’t work,” Harry went on. “Mine still beatthe borrowed wand. Do you know why that is?”

Ollivander shook his head as slowly as he had justnodded.

“I had ... never heard of such a thing. Your wandperformed something unique that night. Theconnection of the twin cores is incredibly rare, yet

Page | 560 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

why your wand should have snapped the borrowedwand, I do not know. ...”

“We were talking about the other wand, the wand thatchanges hands by murder. When You-Know-Whorealized my wand had done something strange, hecame back and asked about that other wand, didn’the?”

“How do you know this?”

Harry did not answer.

“Yes, he asked,” whispered Ollivander. “He wanted toknow everything I could tell him about the wandvariously known as the Deathstick, the Wand ofDestiny, or the Elder Wand.”

Harry glanced sideways at Hermione. She lookedflabbergasted.

“The Dark Lord,” said Ollivander in hushed andfrightened tones, “had always been happy with thewand I made him — yew and phoenix feather,thirteen-and-a-half inches — until he discovered theconnection of the twin cores. Now he seeks another,more powerful wand, as the only way to conqueryours.”

“But he’ll know soon, if he doesn’t already, thatmine’s broken beyond repair,” said Harry quietly.

“No!” said Hermione, sounding frightened. “He can’tknow that, Harry, how could he — ?”

“Priori Incantatem,” said Harry. “We left your wandand the blackthorn wand at the Malfoys’, Hermione. Ifthey examine them properly, make them re-create thespells they’ve cast lately, they’ll see that yours broke

Page | 561 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

mine, they’ll see that you tried and failed to mend it,and they’ll realize that I’ve been using the blackthornone ever since.”

The little color she had regained since their arrivalhad drained from her face. Ron gave Harry areproachful look, and said, “Let’s not worry aboutthat now —”

But Mr. Ollivander intervened.

“The Dark Lord no longer seeks the Elder Wand onlyfor your destruction, Mr. Potter. He is determined topossess it because he believes it will make him trulyinvulnerable.”

“And will it?”

“The owner of the Elder Wand must always fearattack,” said Ollivander, “but the idea of the DarkLord in possession of the Deathstick is, I must admit... formidable.”

Harry was suddenly reminded of how he had beenunsure, when they first met, of how much he likedOllivander. Even now, having been tortured andimprisoned by Voldemort, the idea of the Dark wizardin possession of this wand seemed to enthrall him asmuch as it repulsed him.

“You — you really think this wand exists, then, Mr.Ollivander?” asked Hermione.

“Oh yes,” said Ollivander. “Yes, it is perfectly possibleto trace the wand’s course through history. There aregaps, of course, and long ones, where it vanishes fromview, temporarily lost or hidden; but always itresurfaces. It has certain identifying characteristicsthat those who are learned in wandlore recognize.Page | 562 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There are written accounts, some of them obscure,that I and other wandmakers have made it ourbusiness to study. They have the ring of authenticity.”

“So you — you don’t think it can be a fairy tale or amyth?” Hermione asked hopefully.

“No,” said Ollivander. “Whether it needs to pass bymurder, I do not know. Its history is bloody, but thatmay be simply due to the fact that it is such adesirable object, and arouses such passions inwizards. Immensely powerful, dangerous in the wronghands, and an object of incredible fascination to all ofus who study the power of wands.”

“Mr. Ollivander,” said Harry, “you told You-Know-Whothat Gregorovitch had the Elder Wand, didn’t you?”

Ollivander turned, if possible, even paler. He lookedghostly as he gulped.

“But how — how do you — ?”

“Never mind how I know it,” said Harry, closing hiseyes momentarily as his scar burned and he saw, formere seconds, a vision of the main street inHogsmeade, still dark, because it was so muchfarther north. “You told You-Know-Who thatGregorovitch had the wand?”

“It was a rumor,” whispered Ollivander. “A rumor,years and years ago, long before you were born! Ibelieve Gregorovitch himself started it. You can seehow good it would be for business: that he wasstudying and duplicating the qualities of the ElderWand!”

“Yes, I can see that,” said Harry. He stood up. “Mr.Ollivander, one last thing, and then we’ll let you get

Page | 563 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

some rest. What do you know about the DeathlyHallows?”

“The — the what?” asked the wandmaker, lookingutterly bewildered.

“The Deathly Hallows.”

“I’m afraid I don’t know what you’re talking about. Isthis still something to do with wands?”

Harry looked into the sunken face and believed thatOllivander was not acting. He did not know about theHallows.

“Thank you,” said Harry. “Thank you very much. We’llleave you to get some rest now.”

Ollivander looked stricken.

“He was torturing me!” he gasped. “The CruciatusCurse ... you have no idea. ...”

“I do,” said Harry. “I really do. Please get some rest.Thank you for telling me all of this.”

He led Ron and Hermione down the staircase. Harrycaught a glimpse of Bill, Fleur, Luna, and Deansitting at the table in the kitchen, cups of tea in frontof them. They all looked up at Harry as he appearedin the doorway, but he merely nodded to them andcontinued into the garden, Ron and Hermione behindhim. The reddish mound of earth that covered Dobbylay ahead, and Harry walked back to it, as the pain inhis head built more and more powerfully. It was ahuge effort now to close down the visions that wereforcing themselves upon him, but he knew that hewould have to resist only a little longer. He wouldyield very soon, because he needed to know that hisPage | 564 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

theory was right. He must make only one more shorteffort, so that he could explain to Ron and Hermione.

“Gregorovitch had the Elder Wand a long time ago,”he said. “I saw You-Know-Who trying to find him.When he tracked him down, he found thatGregorovitch didn’t have it anymore: It was stolenfrom him by Grindelwald. How Grindelwald found outthat Gregorovitch had it, I don’t know — but ifGregorovitch was stupid enough to spread the rumor,it can’t have been that difficult.”

Voldemort was at the gates of Hogwarts; Harry couldsee him standing there, and see too the lamp bobbingin the pre-dawn, coming closer and closer.

“And Grindelwald used the Elder Wand to becomepowerful. And at the height of his power, whenDumbledore knew he was the only one who couldstop him, he dueled Grindelwald and beat him, andhe took the Elder Wand.”

“Dumbledore had the Elder Wand?” said Ron. “Butthen — where is it now?”

“At Hogwarts,” said Harry, fighting to remain withthem in the cliff-top garden.

“But then, let’s go!” said Ron urgently. “Harry, let’s goand get it before he does!”

“It’s too late for that,” said Harry. He could not helphimself, but clutched his head, trying to help it resist.“He knows where it is. He’s there now.”

“Harry!” Ron said furiously. “How long have youknown this — why have we been wasting time? Whydid you talk to Griphook first? We could have gone —we could still go —”

Page | 565 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry, and he sank to his knees in thegrass. “Hermione’s right. Dumbledore didn’t want meto have it. He didn’t want me to take it. He wanted meto get the Horcruxes.”

“The unbeatable wand, Harry!” moaned Ron.

“I’m not supposed to ... I’m supposed to get theHorcruxes. ...”

And now everything was cool and dark: The sun wasbarely visible over the horizon as he glided alongsideSnape, up through the grounds toward the lake.

“I shall join you in the castle shortly,” he said in hishigh, cold voice. “Leave me now.”

Snape bowed and set off back up the path, his blackcloak billowing behind him. Harry walked slowly,waiting for Snape’s figure to disappear. It would notdo for Snape, or indeed anyone else, to see where hewas going. But there were no lights in the castlewindows, and he could conceal himself ... and in asecond he had cast upon himself a DisillusionmentCharm that hid him even from his own eyes.

And he walked on, around the edge of the lake, takingin the outlines of the beloved castle, his first kingdom,his birthright. ...

And here it was, beside the lake, reflected in the darkwaters. The white marble tomb, an unnecessary bloton the familiar landscape. He felt again that rush ofcontrolled euphoria, that heady sense of purpose indestruction. He raised the old yew wand: How fittingthat this would be its last great act.

Page | 566 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The tomb split open from head to foot. The shroudedfigure was as long and thin as it had been in life. Heraised the wand again.

The wrappings fell open. The face was translucent,pale, sunken, yet almost perfectly preserved. Theyhad left his spectacles on the crooked nose: He feltamused derision. Dumbledore’s hands were foldedupon his chest, and there it lay, clutched beneaththem, buried with him.

Had the old fool imagined that marble or death wouldprotect the wand? Had he thought that the Dark Lordwould be scared to violate his tomb? The spiderlikehand swooped and pulled the wand fromDumbledore’s grasp, and as he took it, a shower ofsparks flew from its tip, sparkling over the corpse ofits last owner, ready to serve a new master at last.

Page | 567 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





SHELL COTTAGE

Bill and Fleur’s cottage stood alone on a cliffoverlooking the sea, its walls embedded with shellsand whitewashed. It was a lonely and beautiful place.Wherever Harry went inside the tiny cottage or itsgarden, he could hear the constant ebb and flow ofthe sea, like the breathing of some great, slumberingcreature. He spent much of the next few days makingexcuses to escape the crowded cottage, craving thecliff-top view of open sky and wide, empty sea, andthe feel of cold, salty wind on his face.

The enormity of his decision not to race Voldemort tothe wand still scared Harry. He could not remember,ever before, choosing not to act. He was full of doubts,doubts that Ron could not help voicing whenever theywere together.

“What if Dumbledore wanted us to work out thesymbol in time to get the wand?” “What if working outwhat the symbol meant made you ‘worthy’ to get theHallows?” “Harry, if that really is the Elder Wand,how the hell are we supposed to finish off You-Know-

P a g e | 568 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Who?” Harry had no answers: There were momentswhen he wondered whether it had been outrightmadness not to try to prevent Voldemort breakingopen the tomb. He could not even explainsatisfactorily why he had decided against it: Everytime he tried to reconstruct the internal argumentsthat had led to his decision, they sounded feebler tohim.

The odd thing was that Hermione’s support made himfeel just as confused as Ron’s doubts. Now forced toaccept that the Elder Wand was real, she maintainedthat it was an evil object, and that the way Voldemorthad taken possession of it was repellent, not to beconsidered.

“You could never have done that, Harry,” she saidagain and again. “You couldn’t have broken intoDumbledore’s grave.”

But the idea of Dumbledore’s corpse frightened Harrymuch less than the possibility that he might havemisunderstood the living Dumbledore’s intentions. Hefelt that he was still groping in the dark; he hadchosen his path but kept looking back, wonderingwhether he had misread the signs, whether he shouldnot have taken the other way. From time to time,anger at Dumbledore crashed over him again,powerful as the waves slamming themselves againstthe cliff beneath the cottage, anger that Dumbledorehad not explained before he died.

“But is he dead?” said Ron, three days after they hadarrived at the cottage. Harry had been staring outover the wall that separated the cottage garden fromthe cliff when Ron and Hermione had found him; hewished they had not, having no wish to join in withtheir argument.

Page | 569 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, he is, Ron, please don’t start that again!”

“Look at the facts, Hermione,” said Ron, speakingacross Harry, who continued to gaze at the horizon.“The silver doe. The sword. The eye Harry saw in themirror —”

“Harry admits he could have imagined the eye! Don’tyou, Harry?”

“I could have,” said Harry without looking at her.

“But you don’t think you did, do you?” asked Ron.

“No, I don’t,” said Harry.

“There you go!” said Ron quickly, before Hermionecould carry on. “If it wasn’t Dumbledore, explain howDobby knew we were in the cellar, Hermione?”

“I can’t — but can you explain how Dumbledore senthim to us if he’s lying in a tomb at Hogwarts?”

“I dunno, it could’ve been his ghost!”

“Dumbledore wouldn’t come back as a ghost,” saidHarry. There was little about Dumbledore he was sureof now, but he knew that much. “He would have goneon.”

“What d’you mean, ‘gone on’?” asked Ron, but beforeHarry could say any more, a voice behind them said, “’Arry?”

Fleur had come out of the cottage, her long silver hairflying in the breeze.

Page | 570 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“ ’Arry, Grip’ook would like to speak to you. ’E eez inze smallest bedroom, ’e says ’e does not want to beover’eard.”

Her dislike of the goblin sending her to delivermessages was clear; she looked irritable as shewalked back around the house.

Griphook was waiting for them, as Fleur had said, inthe tiniest of the cottage’s three bedrooms, in whichHermione and Luna slept by night. He had drawn thered cotton curtains against the bright, cloudy sky,which gave the room a fiery glow at odds with the restof the airy, light cottage.

“I have reached my decision, Harry Potter,” said thegoblin, who was sitting cross-legged in a low chair,drumming its arms with his spindly fingers. “Thoughthe goblins of Gringotts will consider it basetreachery, I have decided to help you —”

“That’s great!” said Harry, relief surging through him.“Griphook, thank you, we’re really —”

“— in return,” said the goblin firmly, “for payment.”

Slightly taken aback, Harry hesitated.

“How much do you want? I’ve got gold.”

“Not gold,” said Griphook. “I have gold.”

His black eyes glittered; there were no whites to hiseyes.

“I want the sword. The sword of Godric Gryffindor.”Harry’s spirits plummeted.

Page | 571 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You can’t have that,” he said. “I’m sorry.”

“Then,” said the goblin softly, “we have a problem.”

“We can give you something else,” said Ron eagerly.“I’ll bet the Lestranges have got loads of stuff, you cantake your pick once we get into the vault.”

He had said the wrong thing. Griphook flushedangrily.

“I am not a thief, boy! I am not trying to procuretreasures to which I have no right!”

“The sword’s ours —”

“It is not,” said the goblin.

“We’re Gryffindors, and it was Godric Gryffindor’s —”

“And before it was Gryffindor’s, whose was it?”demanded the goblin, sitting up straight.

“No one’s,” said Ron. “It was made for him, wasn’t it?”

“No!” cried the goblin, bristling with anger as hepointed a long finger at Ron. “Wizarding arroganceagain! That sword was Ragnuk the First’s, taken fromhim by Godric Gryffindor! It is a lost treasure, amasterpiece of goblinwork! It belongs with thegoblins! The sword is the price of my hire, take it orleave it!”

Griphook glared at them. Harry glanced at the othertwo, then said, “We need to discuss this, Griphook, ifthat’s all right. Could you give us a few minutes?”

The goblin nodded, looking sour.

Page | 572 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Downstairs in the empty sitting room, Harry walkedto the fireplace, brow furrowed, trying to think whatto do. Behind him, Ron said, “He’s having a laugh. Wecan’t let him have that sword.”

“It is true?” Harry asked Hermione. “Was the swordstolen by Gryffindor?”

“I don’t know,” she said hopelessly. “Wizarding historyoften skates over what the wizards have done to othermagical races, but there’s no account that I know ofthat says Gryffindor stole the sword.”

“It’ll be one of those goblin stories,” said Ron, “abouthow the wizards are always trying to get one over onthem. I suppose we should think ourselves lucky hehasn’t asked for one of our wands.”

“Goblins have got good reason to dislike wizards,

Ron,” said Hermione. “They’ve been treated brutally inthe past.”

“Goblins aren’t exactly fluffy little bunnies, though,are they?” said Ron. “They’ve killed plenty of us.They’ve fought dirty too.”

“But arguing with Griphook about whose race is mostunderhanded and violent isn’t going to make himmore likely to help us, is it?”

There was a pause while they tried to think of a wayaround the problem. Harry looked out of the windowat Dobby’s grave. Luna was arranging sea lavender ina jam jar beside the headstone.

“Okay,” said Ron, and Harry turned back to face him,“how’s this? We tell Griphook we need the sword untilwe get inside the vault, and then he can have it.

Page | 573 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There’s a fake in there, isn’t there? We switch them,and give him the fake.”

“Ron, he’d know the difference better than we would!”said Hermione. “He’s the only one who realized therehad been a swap!”

“Yeah, but we could scarper before he realizes —”

He quailed beneath the look Hermione was givinghim.

“That,” she said quietly, “is despicable. Ask for hishelp, then double-cross him? And you wonder whygoblins don’t like wizards, Ron?”

Ron’s ears had turned red.

“All right, all right! It was the only thing I could thinkof! What’s your solution, then?”

“We need to offer him something else, something justas valuable.”

“Brilliant. I’ll go and get one of our other ancientgoblin-made swords and you can gift wrap it.”

Silence fell between them again. Harry was sure thatthe goblin would accept nothing but the sword, evenif they had something as valuable to offer him. Yet thesword was their one, indispensable weapon againstthe Horcruxes.

He closed his eyes for a moment or two and listenedto the rush of the sea. The idea that Gryffindor mighthave stolen the sword was unpleasant to him: He hadalways been proud to be a Gryffindor; Gryffindor hadbeen the champion of Muggle-borns, the wizard whohad clashed with the pureblood-loving Slytherin. ...Page | 574 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Maybe he’s lying,” Harry said, opening his eyesagain. “Griphook. Maybe Gryffindor didn’t take thesword. How do we know the goblin version of history’sright?”

“Does it make a difference?” asked Hermione.“Changes how I feel about it,” said Harry.

He took a deep breath.

“Well tell him he can have the sword after he’s helpedus get into that vault — but we’ll be careful to avoidtelling him exactly when he can have it.”

A grin spread slowly across Ron’s face. Hermione,however, looked alarmed.

“Harry, we can’t —”

“He can have it,” Harry went on, “after we’ve used iton all of the Horcruxes. I’ll make sure he gets it then.I’ll keep my word.”

“But that could be years!” said Hermione.

“I know that, but he needn’t. I won’t be lying ...really.”

Harry met her eyes with a mixture of defiance andshame. He remembered the words that had beenengraved over the gateway to Nurmengard: FOR THEGREATER GOOD. He pushed the idea away. Whatchoice did they have?

“I don’t like it,” said Hermione.

“Nor do I, much,” Harry admitted.

Page | 575 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Well, I think it’s genius,” said Ron, standing upagain. “Let’s go and tell him.”

Back in the smallest bedroom, Harry made the offer,careful to phrase it so as not to give any definite timefor the handover of the sword. Hermione frowned atthe floor while he was speaking; he felt irritated ather, afraid that she might give the game away.However, Griphook had eyes for nobody but Harry.

“I have your word, Harry Potter, that you will give methe sword of Gryffindor if I help you?”

“Yes,” said Harry.

“Then shake,” said the goblin, holding out his hand.

Harry took it and shook. He wondered whether thoseblack eyes saw any misgivings in his own. ThenGriphook relinquished him, clapped his handstogether, and said, “So. We begin!”

It was like planning to break into the Ministry all overagain. They settled to work in the smallest bedroom,which was kept, according to Griphook’s preference,in semidarkness.

“I have visited the Lestranges’ vault only once,”Griphook told them, “on the occasion I was told toplace inside it the false sword. It is one of the mostancient chambers. The oldest Wizarding families storetheir treasures at the deepest level, where the vaultsare largest and best protected. ...”

They remained shut in the cupboardlike room forhours at a time. Slowly the days stretched into weeks.There was problem after problem to overcome, notleast of which was that their store of Polyjuice Potionwas greatly depleted.

Page | 576 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“There’s really only enough left for one of us,” saidHermione, tilting the thick mudlike potion against thelamplight.

“That’ll be enough,” said Harry, who was examiningGriphook’s hand-drawn map of the deepestpassageways.

The other inhabitants of Shell Cottage could hardlyfail to notice that something was going on now thatHarry, Ron, and Hermione only emerged formealtimes. Nobody asked questions, although Harryoften felt Bill’s eyes on the three of them at the table,thoughtful, concerned.

The longer they spent together, the more Harryrealized that he did not much like the goblin.Griphook was unexpectedly bloodthirsty, laughed atthe idea of pain in lesser creatures, and seemed torelish the possibility that they might have to hurtother wizards to reach the Lestranges’ vault. Harrycould tell that his distaste was shared by the othertwo, but they did not discuss it: They neededGriphook.

The goblin ate only grudgingly with the rest of them.Even after his legs had mended, he continued torequest trays of food in his room, like the still-frailOllivander, until Bill (following an angry outburstfrom Fleur) went upstairs to tell him that thearrangement could not continue. Thereafter Griphookjoined them at the overcrowded table, although herefused to eat the same food, insisting, instead, onlumps of raw meat, roots, and various fungi.

Harry felt responsible: It was, after all, he who hadinsisted that the goblin remain at Shell Cottage sothat he could question him; his fault that the whole

Page | 577 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Weasley family had been driven into hiding, that Bill,Fred, George, and Mr. Weasley could no longer work.

“I’m sorry,” he told Fleur, one blustery April eveningas he helped her prepare dinner. “I never meant youto have to deal with all of this.”

She had just set some knives to work, chopping upsteaks for Griphook and Bill, who had preferred hismeat bloody ever since he had been attacked byGreyback. While the knives sliced away behind her,her somewhat irritable expression softened.

“ ’Arry, you saved my sister’s life, I do not forget.”

This was not, strictly speaking, true, but Harrydecided against reminding her that Gabrielle hadnever been in real danger.

“Anyway,” Fleur went on, pointing her wand at a potof sauce on the stove, which began to bubble at once,“Mr. Ollivander leaves for Muriel’s zis evening. Zat willmake zings easier. Ze goblin,” she scowled a little atthe mention of him, “can move downstairs, and you,Ron, and Dean can take zat room.”

“We don’t mind sleeping in the living room,” saidHarry, who knew that Griphook would think poorly ofhaving to sleep on the sofa; keeping Griphook happywas essential to their plans. “Don’t worry about us.”And when she tried to protest he went on, “We’ll be offyour hands soon too, Ron, Hermione, and I. We won’tneed to be here much longer.”

“But what do you mean?” she said, frowning at him,her wand pointing at the casserole dish nowsuspended in midair. “Of course you must not leave,you are safe ’ere!”

Page | 578 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

She looked rather like Mrs. Weasley as she said it,and he was glad that the back door opened at thatmoment. Luna and Dean entered, their hair dampfrom the rain outside and their arms full of driftwood.

"... and tiny little ears,” Luna was saying, “a bit like ahippo’s, Daddy says, only purple and hairy. And ifyou want to call them, you have to hum; they prefer awaltz, nothing too fast. ...”

Looking uncomfortable, Dean shrugged at Harry ashe passed, following Luna into the combined diningand sitting room where Ron and Hermione werelaying the dinner table. Seizing the chance to escapeFleur’s questions, Harry grabbed two jugs of pumpkinjuice and followed them.

"... and if you ever come to our house I’ll be able toshow you the horn, Daddy wrote to me about it but Ihaven’t seen it yet, because the Death Eaters took mefrom the Hogwarts Express and I never got home forChristmas,” Luna was saying, as she and Dean relaidthe fire.

“Luna, we told you,” Hermione called over to her.“That horn exploded. It came from an Erumpent, nota Crumple-Horned Snorkack —”

“No, it was definitely a Snorkack horn,” said Lunaserenely. “Daddy told me. It will probably have re-formed by now, they mend themselves, you know.”

Hermione shook her head and continued laying downforks as Bill appeared, leading Mr. Ollivander downthe stairs. The wandmaker still looked exceptionallyfrail, and he clung to Bill’s arm as the lattersupported him, carrying a large suitcase.

Page | 579 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm going to miss you, Mr. Ollivander,” said Luna,approaching the old man.

“And I you, my dear,” said Ollivander, patting her onthe shoulder. “You were an inexpressible comfort tome in that terrible place.”

“So, au revoir, Mr. Ollivander,” said Fleur, kissing himon both cheeks. “And I wonder whezzer you couldoblige me by delivering a package to Bill’s AuntieMuriel? I never returned ’er tiara.”

“It will be an honor,” said Ollivander with a little bow,“the very least I can do in return for your generoushospitality.”

Fleur drew out a worn velvet case, which she openedto show the wandmaker. The tiara sat glittering andtwinkling in the light from the low-hanging lamp.

“Moonstones and diamonds,” said Griphook, who hadsidled into the room without Harry noticing. “Made bygoblins, I think?”

“And paid for by wizards,” said Bill quietly, and thegoblin shot him a look that was both furtive andchallenging.

A strong wind gusted against the cottage windows asBill and Ollivander set off into the night. The rest ofthem squeezed in around the table; elbow to elbowand with barely enough room to move, they started toeat. The fire crackled and popped in the grate besidethem. Fleur, Harry noticed, was merely playing withher food; she glanced at the window every fewminutes; however, Bill returned before they hadfinished their first course, his long hair tangled by thewind.

Page | 580 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Everything’s fine,” he told Fleur. “Ollivander settledin, Mum and Dad say hello. Ginny sends you all herlove. Fred and George are driving Muriel up the wall,they’re still operating an Owl-Order business out ofher back room. It cheered her up to have her tiaraback, though. She said she thought we’d stolen it.”

“Ah, she eez charmante, your aunt,” said Fleurcrossly, waving her wand and causing the dirty platesto rise and form a stack in midair. She caught themand marched out of the room.

“Daddy’s made a tiara,” piped up Luna. “Well, more ofa crown, really.”

Ron caught Harry’s eye and grinned; Harry knew thathe was remembering the ludicrous headdress theyhad seen on their visit to Xenophilius.

“Yes, he’s trying to re-create the lost diadem ofRavenclaw. He thinks he’s identified most of the mainelements now. Adding the billywig wings really madea difference —”

There was a bang on the front door. Everyone’s headturned toward it. Fleur came running out of thekitchen, looking frightened; Bill jumped to his feet,his wand pointing at the door; Harry, Ron, andHermione did the same. Silently Griphook slippedbeneath the table, out of sight.

“Who is it?” Bill called.

“It is I, Remus John Lupin!” called a voice over thehowling wind. Harry experienced a thrill of fear; whathad happened? “I am a werewolf, married toNymphadora Tonks, and you, the Secret-Keeper ofShell Cottage, told me the address and bade me comein an emergency!”

Page | 581 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Lupin,” muttered Bill, and he ran to the door andwrenched it open.

Lupin fell over the threshold. He was white-faced,wrapped in a traveling cloak, his graying hairwindswept. He straightened up, looked around theroom, making sure of who was there, then criedaloud, “It’s a boy! We’ve named him Ted, after Dora’sfather!”

Hermione shrieked.

“Wha — ? Tonks — Tonks has had the baby?”

“Yes, yes, she’s had the baby!” shouted Lupin. Allaround the table came cries of delight, sighs of relief:Hermione and Fleur both squealed,

“Congratulations!” and Ron said, “Blimey, a baby!” asif he had never heard of such a thing before.

“Yes — yes — a boy,” said Lupin again, who seemeddazed by his own happiness. He strode around thetable and hugged Harry; the scene in the basement ofGrimmauld Place might never have happened.

“You’ll be godfather?” he said as he released Harry.

“M-me?” stammered Harry

“You, yes, of course — Dora quite agrees, no onebetter —”

“I — yeah — blimey —”

Harry felt overwhelmed, astonished, delighted; nowBill was hurrying to fetch wine, and Fleur waspersuading Lupin to join them for a drink.

Page | 582 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I can’t stay long, I must get back,” said Lupin,beaming around at them all: He looked years youngerthan Harry had ever seen him. “Thank you, thankyou, Bill.”

Bill had soon filled all of their goblets, they stood andraised them high in a toast.

“To Teddy Remus Lupin,” said Lupin, “a great wizardin the making!”

“ ’Oo does ’e look like?” Fleur inquired.

“I think he looks like Dora, but she thinks he is likeme. Not much hair. It looked black when he wasborn, but I swear it’s turned ginger in the hour since.Probably be blond by the time I get back. Andromedasays Tonks’s hair started changing color the day thatshe was born.” He drained his goblet. “Oh, go onthen, just one more,” he added, beaming, as Bill madeto fill it again.

The wind buffeted the little cottage and the fire leaptand crackled, and Bill was soon opening anotherbottle of wine. Lupin’s news seemed to have takenthem out of themselves, removed them for a whilefrom their state of siege: Tidings of new life wereexhilarating. Only the goblin seemed untouched bythe suddenly festive atmosphere, and after a while heslunk back to the bedroom he now occupied alone.Harry thought he was the only one who had noticedthis, until he saw Bill’s eyes following the goblin upthe stairs.

“No ... no ... I really must get back,” said Lupin atlast, declining yet another goblet of wine. He got to hisfeet and pulled his traveling cloak back aroundhimself.

Page | 583 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Good-bye, good-bye — I’ll try and bring somepictures in a few days’ time — they’ll all be so glad toknow that I’ve seen you —”

He fastened his cloak and made his farewells,hugging the women and grasping hands with themen, then, still beaming, returned into the wild night.

“Godfather, Harry!” said Bill as they walked into thekitchen together, helping clear the table. “A realhonor! Congratulations!”

As Harry set down the empty goblets he was carrying,Bill pulled the door behind him closed, shutting outthe still-voluble voices of the others, who werecontinuing to celebrate even in Lupin’s absence.

“I wanted a private word, actually, Harry. It hasn’tbeen easy to get an opportunity with the cottage thisfull of people.”

Bill hesitated.

“Harry, you’re planning something with Griphook.”

It was a statement, not a question, and Harry did notbother to deny it. He merely looked at Bill, waiting.

“I know goblins,” said Bill. “I’ve worked for Gringottsever since I left Hogwarts. As far as there can befriendship between wizards and goblins, I have goblinfriends — or, at least, goblins I know well, and like.”Again, Bill hesitated.

“Harry, what do you want from Griphook, and whathave you promised him in return?”

“I can’t tell you that,” said Harry. “Sorry, Bill.”

Page | 584 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The kitchen door opened behind them; Fleur wastrying to bring through more empty goblets.

“Wait,” Bill told her. “Just a moment.”

She backed out and he closed the door again.

“Then I have to say this,” Bill went on. “If you havestruck any kind of bargain with Griphook, and mostparticularly if that bargain involves treasure, youmust be exceptionally careful. Goblin notions ofownership, payment, and repayment are not the sameas human ones.”

Harry felt a slight squirm of discomfort, as though asmall snake had stirred inside him.

“What do you mean?” he asked.

“We are talking about a different breed of being,” saidBill. “Dealings between wizards and goblins have beenfraught for centuries — but you’ll know all that fromHistory of Magic. There has been fault on both sides, Iwould never claim that wizards have been innocent.However, there is a belief among some goblins, andthose at Gringotts are perhaps most prone to it, thatwizards cannot be trusted in matters of gold andtreasure, that they have no respect for goblinownership.”

“I respect —” Harry began, but Bill shook his head.

“You don’t understand, Harry, nobody couldunderstand unless they have lived with goblins. To agoblin, the rightful and true master of any object isthe maker, not the purchaser. All goblin-made objectsare, in goblin eyes, rightfully theirs.”

“But if it was bought —”

Page | 585 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“— then they would consider it rented by the one whohad paid the money. They have, however, greatdifficulty with the idea of goblin-made objects passingfrom wizard to wizard. You saw Griphook’s face whenthe tiara passed under his eyes. He disapproves. Ibelieve he thinks, as do the fiercest of his kind, that itought to have been returned to the goblins once theoriginal purchaser died. They consider our habit ofkeeping goblin-made objects, passing them fromwizard to wizard without further payment, little morethan theft.”

Harry had an ominous feeling now; he wonderedwhether Bill guessed more than he was letting on.

“All I am saying,” said Bill, setting his hand on thedoor back into the sitting room, “is to be very carefulwhat you promise goblins, Harry. It would be lessdangerous to break into Gringotts than to renege on apromise to a goblin.”

“Right,” said Harry as Bill opened the door, “yeah.Thanks. I’ll bear that in mind.”

As he followed Bill back to the others a wry thoughtcame to him, born no doubt of the wine he haddrunk. He seemed set on course to become just asreckless a godfather to Teddy Lupin as Sirius Blackhad been to him.

Page | 586 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





GRINGOTTS

Their plans were made, their preparations complete;in the smallest bedroom a single long, coarse blackhair (plucked from the sweater Hermione had beenwearing at Malfoy Manor) lay curled in a small glassphial on the mantelpiece.

“And you’ll be using her actual wand,” said Harry,nodding toward the walnut wand, “so I reckon you’llbe pretty convincing.”

Hermione looked frightened that the wand might stingor bite her as she picked it up.

“I hate this thing,” she said in a low voice. “I reallyhate it. It feels all wrong, it doesn’t work properly forme. ... It’s like a bit of her.”

Harry could not help but remember how Hermionehad dismissed his loathing of the blackthorn wand,insisting that he was imagining things when it did notwork as well as his own, telling him to simplypractice. He chose not to repeat her own advice back

Page | 587 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

to her, however; the eve of their attempted assault onGringotts felt like the wrong moment to antagonizeher.

“It’ll probably help you get in character, though,” saidRon. “Think what that wand’s done!”

“But that’s my point!” said Hermione. “This is thewand that tortured Neville’s mum and dad, and whoknows how many other people? This is the wand thatkilled Sirius!”

Harry had not thought of that: He looked down at thewand and was visited by a brutal urge to snap it, toslice it in half with Gryffindor’s sword, which waspropped against the wall beside him.

“I miss my wand,” Hermione said miserably. “I wishMr. Ollivander could have made me another one too.”

Mr. Ollivander had sent Luna a new wand thatmorning. She was out on the back lawn at thatmoment, testing its capabilities in the late afternoonsun. Dean, who had lost his wand to the Snatchers,was watching rather gloomily.

Harry looked down at the hawthorn wand that hadonce belonged to Draco Malfoy. He had beensurprised, but pleased, to discover that it worked forhim at least as well as Hermione’s had done.Remembering what Ollivander had told them of thesecret workings of wands, Harry thought he knewwhat Hermione’s problem was: She had not won thewalnut wand’s allegiance by taking it personally fromBellatrix.

The door of the bedroom opened and Griphookentered. Harry reached instinctively for the hilt of thesword and drew it close to him, but regretted his

Page | 588 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

action at once: He could tell that the goblin hadnoticed. Seeking to gloss over the sticky moment, hesaid, “We’ve just been checking the last-minute stuff,Griphook. We’ve told Bill and Fleur we’re leavingtomorrow, and we’ve told them not to get up to see usoff.”

They had been firm on this point, because Hermionewould need to transform into Bellatrix before they left,and the less that Bill and Fleur knew or suspectedabout what they were about to do, the better. Theyhad also explained that they would not be returning.As they had lost Perkins’s old tent on the night thatthe Snatchers caught them, Bill had lent themanother one. It was now packed inside the beadedbag, which, Harry was impressed to learn, Hermionehad protected from the Snatchers by the simpleexpedient of stuffing it down her sock.

Though he would miss Bill, Fleur, Luna, and Dean,not to mention the home comforts they had enjoyedover the last few weeks, Harry was looking forward toescaping the confinement of Shell Cottage. He wastired of trying to make sure that they were notoverheard, tired of being shut in the tiny, darkbedroom. Most of all, he longed to be rid of Griphook.However, precisely how and when they were to partfrom the goblin without handing over Gryffindor’ssword remained a question to which Harry had noanswer. It had been impossible to decide how theywere going to do it, because the goblin rarely leftHarry, Ron, and Hermione alone together for morethan five minutes at a time: “He could give my motherlessons,” growled Ron, as the goblin’s long fingerskept appearing around the edges of doors. With Bill’swarning in mind, Harry could not help suspectingthat Griphook was on the watch for possibleskulduggery. Hermione disapproved so heartily of theplanned double-cross that Harry had given upPage | 589 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

attempting to pick her brains on how best to do it;Ron, on the rare occasions that they had been able tosnatch a few Griphook-free moments, had come upwith nothing better than “Well just have to wing it,mate.”

Harry slept badly that night. Lying awake in the earlyhours, he thought back to the way he had felt thenight before they had infiltrated the Ministry of Magicand remembered a determination, almost anexcitement. Now he was experiencing jolts of anxiety,nagging doubts: He could not shake off the fear that itwas all going to go wrong. He kept telling himself thattheir plan was good, that Griphook knew what theywere facing, that they were well-prepared for all thedifficulties they were likely to encounter, yet still hefelt uneasy. Once or twice he heard Ron stir and wassure that he too was awake, but they were sharingthe sitting room with Dean, so Harry did not speak.

It was a relief when six o’clock arrived and they couldslip out of their sleeping bags, dress in thesemidarkness, then creep out into the garden, wherethey were to meet Hermione and Griphook. The dawnwas chilly, but there was little wind now that it wasMay. Harry looked up at the stars still glimmeringpalely in the dark sky and listened to the sea washingbackward and forward against the cliff: He was goingto miss the sound.

Small green shoots were forcing their way up throughthe red earth of Dobby’s grave now; in a year’s timethe mound would be covered in flowers. The whitestone that bore the elf’s name had already acquired aweathered look. He realized now that they couldhardly have laid Dobby to rest in a more beautifulplace, but Harry ached with sadness to think ofleaving him behind. Looking down on the grave, hewondered yet again how the elf had known where toPage | 590 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

come to rescue them. His fingers movedabsentmindedly to the little pouch still strung aroundhis neck, through which he could feel the jaggedmirror fragment in which he had been sure he hadseen Dumbledore’s eye. Then the sound of a dooropening made him look around.

Bellatrix Lestrange was striding across the lawntoward them, accompanied by Griphook. As shewalked, she was tucking the small, beaded bag intothe inside pocket of another set of the old robes theyhad taken from Grimmauld Place. Though Harryknew perfectly well that it was really Hermione, hecould not suppress a shiver of loathing. She was tallerthan he was, her long black hair rippling down herback, her heavily lidded eyes disdainful as they restedupon him; but then she spoke, and he heardHermione through Bellatrix’s low voice.

“She tasted disgusting, worse than Gurdyroots! Okay,Ron, come here so I can do you. ...”

“Right, but remember, I don’t like the beard too long

“Oh, for heaven’s sake, this isn’t about lookinghandsome —” “It’s not that, it gets in the way! But Iliked my nose a bit shorter, try and do it the way youdid last time.”

Hermione sighed and set to work, muttering underher breath as she transformed various aspects ofRon’s appearance. He was to be given a completelyfake identity, and they were trusting to the malevolentaura cast by Bellatrix to protect him. MeanwhileHarry and Griphook were to be concealed under theInvisibility Cloak.

“There,” said Hermione, “how does he look, Harry?”

Page | 591 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

It was just possible to discern Ron under his disguise,but only, Harry thought, because he knew him sowell. Ron’s hair was now long and wavy; he had athick brown beard and mustache, no freckles, ashort, broad nose, and heavy eyebrows.

“Well, he’s not my type, but he’ll do,” said Harry.

“Shall we go, then?”

All three of them glanced back at Shell Cottage, lyingdark and silent under the fading stars, then turnedand began to walk toward the point, just beyond theboundary wall, where the Fidelius Charm stoppedworking and they would be able to Disapparate. Oncepast the gate, Griphook spoke.

“I should climb up now, Harry Potter, I think?”

Harry bent down and the goblin clambered onto hisback, his hands linked in front of Harry’s throat. Hewas not heavy, but Harry disliked the feeling of thegoblin and the surprising strength with which heclung on. Hermione pulled the Invisibility Cloak out ofthe beaded bag and threw it over them both.

“Perfect,” she said, bending down to check Harry’sfeet. “I can’t see a thing. Let’s go.”

Harry turned on the spot, with Griphook on hisshoulders, concentrating with all his might on theLeaky Cauldron, the inn that was the entrance toDiagon Alley. The goblin clung even tighter as theymoved into the compressing darkness, and secondslater Harry’s feet found pavement and he opened hiseyes on Charing Cross Road. Muggles bustled pastwearing the hangdog expressions of early morning,quite unconscious of the little inn’s existence.

Page | 592 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The bar of the Leaky Cauldron was nearly deserted.Tom, the stooped and toothless landlord, waspolishing glasses behind the bar counter; a couple ofwarlocks having a muttered conversation in the farcorner glanced at Hermione and drew back into theshadows.

“Madam Lestrange,” murmured Tom, and asHermione passed he inclined his head subserviently.

“Good morning,” said Hermione, and as Harry creptpast, still carrying Griphook piggyback under theCloak, he saw Tom look surprised.

“Too polite,” Harry whispered in Hermione’s ear asthey passed out of the inn into the tiny backyard.“You need to treat people like they’re scum!”

“Okay, okay!”

Hermione drew out Bellatrix’s wand and tapped abrick in the nondescript wall in front of them. At oncethe bricks began to whirl and spin: A hole appearedin the middle of them, which grew wider and wider,finally forming an archway onto the narrow cobbledstreet that was Diagon Alley.

It was quiet, barely time for the shops to open, andthere were hardly any shoppers abroad. The crooked,cobbled street was much altered now from thebustling place Harry had visited before his first termat Hogwarts so many years before. More shops thanever were boarded up, though several newestablishments dedicated to the Dark Arts had beencreated since his last visit. Harry’s own face glareddown at him from posters plastered over manywindows, always captioned with the wordsUNDESIRABLE NUMBER ONE.

Page | 593 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

A number of ragged people sat huddled in doorways.He heard them moaning to the few passersby,pleading for gold, insisting that they were reallywizards. One man had a bloody bandage over his eye.

As they set off along the street, the beggars glimpsedHermione. They seemed to melt away before her,drawing hoods over their faces and fleeing as fast asthey could. Hermione looked after them curiously,until the man with the bloodied bandage camestaggering right across her path.

“My children!” he bellowed, pointing at her. His voicewas cracked, high-pitched; he sounded distraught.“Where are my children? What has he done withthem? You know, you know\”

“I — I really —” stammered Hermione.

The man lunged at her, reaching for her throat: Then,with a bang and a burst of red light he was thrownbackward onto the ground, unconscious. Ron stoodthere, his wand still outstretched and a look of shockvisible behind his beard. Faces appeared at thewindows on either side of the street, while a little knotof prosperous-looking passersby gathered their robesabout them and broke into gentle trots, keen tovacate the scene.

Their entrance into Diagon Alley could hardly havebeen more conspicuous; for a moment Harrywondered whether it might not be better to leave nowand try to think of a different plan. Before they couldmove or consult one another, however, they heard acry from behind them.

“Why, Madam Lestrange!”

Page | 594 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry whirled around and Griphook tightened hishold around Harry’s neck: A tall, thin wizard with acrown of bushy gray hair and a long, sharp nose wasstriding toward them.

“It’s Travers,” hissed the goblin into Harry’s ear, butat that moment Harry could not think who Traverswas. Hermione had drawn herself up to her fullestheight and said with as much contempt as she couldmuster:

“And what do you want?”

Travers stopped in his tracks, clearly affronted.

“He’s another Death Eater\” breathed Griphook, andHarry sidled sideways to repeat the information intoHermione’s ear.

“I merely sought to greet you,” said Travers coolly,“but if my presence is not welcome ...”

Harry recognized his voice now; Travers was one ofthe Death Eaters who had been summoned toXenophilius’s house.

“No, no, not at all, Travers,” said Hermione quickly,trying to cover up her mistake. “How are you?”

“Well, I confess I am surprised to see you out andabout, Bellatrix.”

“Really? Why?” asked Hermione.

“Well,” Travers coughed, “I heard that the inhabitantsof Malfoy Manor were confined to the house, after the... ah ... escape.”

Page | 595 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry willed Hermione to keep her head. If this wastrue, and Bellatrix was not supposed to be out inpublic —

“The Dark Lord forgives those who have served himmost faithfully in the past,” said Hermione in amagnificent imitation of Bellatrix’s mostcontemptuous manner. “Perhaps your credit is not asgood with him as mine is, Travers.”

Though the Death Eater looked offended, he alsoseemed less suspicious. He glanced down at the manRon had just Stunned.

“How did it offend you?”

“It does not matter, it will not do so again,” saidHermione coolly.

“Some of these wandless can be troublesome,” saidTravers. “While they do nothing but beg I have noobjection, but one of them actually asked me to pleadher case at the Ministry last week. ‘I’m a witch, sir, I’ma witch, let me prove it to youV ” he said in a squeakyimpersonation. “As if I was going to give her my wand— but whose wand,” said Travers curiously, “are youusing at the moment, Bellatrix? I heard that your ownwas —”

“I have my wand here,” said Hermione coldly, holdingup Bellatrix’s wand. “I don’t know what rumors youhave been listening to, Travers, but you seem sadlymisinformed.”

Travers seemed a little taken aback at that, and heturned instead to Ron.

“Who is your friend? I do not recognize him.”

Page | 596 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“This is Dragomir Despard,” said Hermione; they haddecided that a fictional foreigner was the safest coverfor Ron to assume. “He speaks very little English, buthe is in sympathy with the Dark Lord’s aims. He hastraveled here from Transylvania to see our newregime.”

“Indeed? How do you do, Dragomir?”

“ ’Ow you?” said Ron, holding out his hand.

Travers extended two fingers and shook Ron’s handas though frightened of dirtying himself.

“So what brings you and your — ah — sympatheticfriend to Diagon Alley this early?” asked Travers.

“I need to visit Gringotts,” said Hermione.

“Alas, I also,” said Travers. “Gold, filthy gold! Wecannot live without it, yet I confess I deplore thenecessity of consorting with our long-fingeredfriends.”

Harry felt Griphook’s clasped hands tightenmomentarily around his neck.

“Shall we?” said Travers, gesturing Hermione forward.

Hermione had no choice but to fall into step besidehim and head along the crooked, cobbled streettoward the place where the snowy-white Gringottsstood towering over the other little shops. Ron slopedalong beside them, and Harry and Griphook followed.

A watchful Death Eater was the very last thing theyneeded, and the worst of it was, with Traversmarching at what he believed to be Bellatrix’s side,there was no means for Harry to communicate with

Page | 597 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hermione or Ron. All too soon they arrived at the footof the marble steps leading up to the great bronzedoors. As Griphook had already warned them, theliveried goblins who usually flanked the entrance hadbeen replaced by two wizards, both of whom wereclutching long thin golden rods.

“Ah, Probity Probes,” sighed Travers theatrically, “socrude — but effective!”

And he set off up the steps, nodding left and right tothe wizards, who raised the golden rods and passedthem up and down his body. The Probes, Harry knew,detected spells of concealment and hidden magicalobjects. Knowing that he had only seconds; Harrypointed Draco’s wand at each of the guards in turnand murmured, “Confundo” twice. Unnoticed byTravers, who was looking through the bronze doors atthe inner hall, each of the guards gave a little start asthe spells hit them.

Hermione’s long black hair rippled behind her as sheclimbed the steps.

“One moment, madam,” said the guard, raising hisProbe.

“But you’ve just done that!” said Hermione inBellatrix’s commanding, arrogant voice. Traverslooked around, eyebrows raised. The guard wasconfused. He stared down at the thin golden Probeand then at his companion, who said in a slightlydazed voice,

“Yeah, you’ve just checked them, Marius.”

Hermione swept forward, Ron by her side, Harry andGriphook trotting invisibly behind them. Harry

Page | 598 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

glanced back as they crossed the threshold: Thewizards were both scratching their heads.

Two goblins stood before the inner doors, which weremade of silver and which carried the poem warning ofdire retribution to potential thieves. Harry looked upat it, and all of a sudden a knife-sharp memory cameto him: standing on this very spot on the day that hehad turned eleven, the most wonderful birthday of hislife, and Hagrid standing beside him saying, “Like Isaid, yeh’d be mad ter try an’ rob it.” Gringotts hadseemed a place of wonder that day, the enchantedrepository of a trove of gold he had never known hepossessed, and never for an instant could he havedreamed that he would return to steal. ... But withinseconds they were standing in the vast marble hall ofthe bank.

The long counter was manned by goblins sitting onhigh stools, serving the first customers of the day.Hermione, Ron, and Travers headed toward an oldgoblin who was examining a thick gold coin throughan eyeglass. Hermione allowed Travers to step aheadof her on the pretext of explaining features of the hallto Ron.

The goblin tossed the coin he was holding aside, saidto nobody in particular, “Leprechaun,” and thengreeted Travers, who passed over a tiny golden key,which was examined and given back to him.

Hermione stepped forward.

“Madam Lestrange!” said the goblin, evidentlystartled. “Dear me! How — how may I help youtoday?”

“I wish to enter my vault,” said Hermione.

Page | 599 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The old goblin seemed to recoil a little. Harry glancedaround. Not only was Travers hanging back,watching, but several other goblins had looked upfrom their work to stare at Hermione.

“You have ... identification?” asked the goblin.

“Identification? I — I have never been asked foridentification before!” said Hermione.

“They know\” whispered Griphook in Harry’s ear.“They must have been warned there might be animpostor!”

“Your wand will do, madam,” said the goblin. He heldout a slightly trembling hand, and in a dreadful blastof realization Harry knew that the goblins of Gringottswere aware that Bellatrix’s wand had been stolen.

“Act now, act now,” whispered Griphook in Harry’sear, “the Imperius Cursel”

Harry raised the hawthorn wand beneath the cloak,pointed it at the old goblin, and whispered, for thefirst time in his life, “Imperiol”

A curious sensation shot down Harry’s arm, a feelingof tingling warmth that seemed to flow from his mind,down the sinews and veins connecting him to thewand and the curse it had just cast. The goblin tookBellatrix’s wand, examined it closely, and then said,“Ah, you have had a new wand made, MadamLestrange!”

“What?” said Hermione. “No, no, that’s mine —”

“A new wand?” said Travers, approaching the counteragain; still the goblins all around were watching. “But

Page | 600 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

how could you have done, which wandmaker did youuse?”

Harry acted without thinking: Pointing his wand atTravers, he muttered, “Imperiol” once more.

“Oh yes, I see,” said Travers, looking down atBellatrix’s wand, “yes, very handsome. And is itworking well? I always think wands require a littlebreaking in, don’t you?”

Hermione looked utterly bewildered, but to Harry’senormous relief she accepted the bizarre turn ofevents without comment.

The old goblin behind the counter clapped his handsand a younger goblin approached.

“I shall need the Clankers,” he told the goblin, whodashed away and returned a moment later with aleather bag that seemed to be full of jangling metal,which he handed to his senior. “Good, good! So, if youwill follow me, Madam Lestrange,” said the old goblin,hopping down off his stool and vanishing from sight,

“I shall take you to your vault.”

He appeared around the end of the counter, jogginghappily toward them, the contents of the leather bagstill jingling. Travers was now standing quite still withhis mouth hanging wide open. Ron was drawingattention to this odd phenomenon by regardingTravers with confusion.

“Wait — Bogrod!”

Another goblin came scurrying around the counter.

Page | 601 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We have instructions,” he said with a bow toHermione. “Forgive me, Madam, but there have beenspecial orders regarding the vault of Lestrange.”

He whispered urgently in Bogrod’s ear, but theImperiused goblin shook him off.

“I am aware of the instructions. Madam Lestrangewishes to visit her vault. ... Very old family ... oldclients ... This way, please ...”

And, still clanking, he hurried toward one of the manydoors leading off the hall. Harry looked back atTravers, who was still rooted to the spot lookingabnormally vacant, and made his decision: With aflick of his wand he made Travers come with them,walking meekly in their wake as they reached thedoor and passed into the rough stone passagewaybeyond, which was lit with flaming torches.

“We’re in trouble; they suspect,” said Harry as thedoor slammed behind them and he pulled off theInvisibility Cloak. Griphook jumped down from hisshoulders; neither Travers nor Bogrod showed theslightest surprise at the sudden appearance of HarryPotter in their midst. “They’re Imperiused,” he added,in response to Hermione and Ron’s confused queriesabout Travers and Bogrod, who were both nowstanding there looking blank. “I don’t think I did itstrongly enough, I don’t know. ...”

And another memory darted through his mind, of thereal Bellatrix Lestrange shrieking at him when he hadfirst tried to use an Unforgivable Curse: “You need tomean them, Potter!”

“What do we do?” asked Ron. “Shall we get out now,while we can?”

Page | 602 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“If we can,” said Hermione, looking back toward thedoor into the main hall, beyond which who knewwhat was happening.

“We’ve got this far, I say we go on,” said Harry.

“Good!” said Griphook. “So, we need Bogrod to controlthe cart; I no longer have the authority. But there willnot be room for the wizard.”

Harry pointed his wand at Travers.

“Imperio\”

The wizard turned and set off along the dark track ata smart pace.

“What are you making him do?”

“Hide,” said Harry as he pointed his wand at Bogrod,who whistled to summon a little cart that cametrundling along the tracks toward them out of thedarkness. Harry was sure he could hear shoutingbehind them in the main hall as they all clamberedinto it, Bogrod in front with Griphook, Harry, Ron,and Hermione crammed together in the back.

With a jerk the cart moved off, gathering speed: Theyhurtled past Travers, who was wriggling into a crackin the wall, then the cart began twisting and turningthrough the labyrinthine passages, sloping downwardall the time. Harry could not hear anything over therattling of the cart on the tracks: His hair flew behindhim as they swerved between stalactites, flying everdeeper into the earth, but he kept glancing back.

They might as well have left enormous footprintsbehind them; the more he thought about it, the morefoolish it seemed to have disguised Hermione as

Page | 603 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Bellatrix, to have brought along Bellatrix’s wand,when the Death Eaters knew who had stolen it —

They were deeper than Harry had ever penetratedwithin Gringotts; they took a hairpin bend at speedand saw ahead of them, with seconds to spare, awaterfall pounding over the track. Harry heardGriphook shout, “No!” but there was no braking: Theyzoomed through it. Water filled Harry’s eyes andmouth: He could not see or breathe: Then, with anawful lurch, the cart flipped over and they were allthrown out of it. Harry heard the cart smash intopieces against the passage wall, heard Hermioneshriek something, and felt himself glide back towardthe ground as though weightless, landing painlesslyon the rocky passage floor.

“C-Cushioning Charm,” Hermione spluttered, as Ronpulled her to her feet, but to Harry’s horror he sawthat she was no longer Bellatrix; instead she stoodthere in overlarge robes, sopping wet and completelyherself; Ron was red-haired and beardless again.

They were realizing it as they looked at each other,feeling their own faces.

“The Thief’s Downfall!” said Griphook, clambering tohis feet and looking back at the deluge onto thetracks, which, Harry knew now, had been more thanwater. “It washes away all enchantment, all magicalconcealment! They know there are impostors inGringotts, they have set off defenses against us!”

Harry saw Hermione checking that she still had thebeaded bag, and hurriedly thrust his own hand underhis jacket to make sure he had not lost the InvisibilityCloak. Then he turned to see Bogrod shaking hishead in bewilderment: The Thief’s Downfall seemed tohave lifted the Imperius Curse.

Page | 604 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We need him,” said Griphook, “we cannot enter thevault without a Gringotts goblin. And we need theClankers!”

“Imperiol” Harry said again; his voice echoed throughthe stone passage as he felt again the sense of headycontrol that flowed from brain to wand. Bogrodsubmitted once more to his will, his befuddledexpression changing to one of polite indifference, asRon hurried to pick up the leather bag of metal tools.

“Harry, I think I can hear people coming!” saidHermione, and she pointed Bellatrix’s wand at thewaterfall and cried, “Protego\” They saw the ShieldCharm break the flow of enchanted water as it flew upthe passageway.

“Good thinking,” said Harry. “Lead the way,

Griphook!”

“How are we going to get out again?” Ron asked asthey hurried on foot into the darkness after thegoblin, Bogrod panting in their wake like an old dog.

“Let’s worry about that when we have to,” said Harry.He was trying to listen: He thought he could hearsomething clanking and moving around nearby.“Griphook, how much farther?”

“Not far, Harry Potter, not far ...”

And they turned a corner and saw the thing for whichHarry had been prepared, but which still brought allof them to a halt.

A gigantic dragon was tethered to the ground in frontof them, barring access to four or five of the deepestvaults in the place. The beast’s scales had turned paleand flaky during its long incarceration under the

Page | 605 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

ground; its eyes were milkily pink; both rear legs boreheavy cuffs from which chains led to enormous pegsdriven deep into the rocky floor. Its great spikedwings, folded close to its body, would have filled thechamber if it spread them, and when it turned itsugly head toward them, it roared with a noise thatmade the rock tremble, opened its mouth, and spat ajet of fire that sent them running back up thepassageway.

“It is partially blind,” panted Griphook, “but evenmore savage for that. However, we have the means tocontrol it. It has learned what to expect when theClankers come. Give them to me.”

Ron passed the bag to Griphook, and the goblinpulled out a number of small metal instruments thatwhen shaken made a loud, ringing noise likeminiature hammers on anvils. Griphook handed themout: Bogrod accepted his meekly.

“You know what to do,” Griphook told Harry, Ron,and Hermione. “It will expect pain when it hears thenoise: It will retreat, and Bogrod must place his palmupon the door of the vault.”

They advanced around the corner again, shaking theClankers, and the noise echoed off the rocky walls,grossly magnified, so that the inside of Harry’s skullseemed to vibrate with the din. The dragon let outanother hoarse roar, then retreated. Harry could seeit trembling, and as they drew nearer he saw thescars made by vicious slashes across its face, andguessed that it had been taught to fear hot swordswhen it heard the sound of the Clankers.

“Make him press his hand to the door!” Griphookurged Harry, who turned his wand again uponBogrod. The old goblin obeyed, pressing his palm to

Page | 606 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the wood, and the door of the vault melted away toreveal a cavelike opening crammed from floor toceiling with golden coins and goblets, silver armor,the skins of strange creatures — some with longspines, others with drooping wings — potions injeweled flasks, and a skull still wearing a crown.

“Search, fast!” said Harry as they all hurried insidethe vault.

He had described Hufflepuff’s cup to Ron andHermione, but if it was the other, unknown Horcruxthat resided in this vault, he did not know what itlooked like. He barely had time to glance around,however, before there was a muffled clunk frombehind them: The door had reappeared, sealing theminside the vault, and they were plunged into totaldarkness.

“No matter, Bogrod will be able to release us!” saidGriphook as Ron gave a shout of surprise. “Light yourwands, can’t you? And hurry, we have very littletime!”

“Lumosl”

Harry shone his lit wand around the vault: Its beamfell upon glittering jewels; he saw the fake sword ofGryffindor lying on a high shelf amongst a jumble ofchains. Ron and Hermione had lit their wands too,and were now examining the piles of objectssurrounding them.

“Harry, could this be — ? Aargh!”

Hermione screamed in pain, and Harry turned hiswand on her in time to see a jeweled goblet tumblingfrom her grip. But as it fell, it split, became a showerof goblets, so that a second later, with a great clatter,

Page | 607 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the floor was covered in identical cups rolling in everydirection, the original impossible to discern amongstthem.

“It burned me!” moaned Hermione, sucking herblistered fingers.

“They have added Gemino and Flagrante Curses!”said Griphook. “Everything you touch will burn andmultiply, but the copies are worthless — and if youcontinue to handle the treasure, you will eventuallybe crushed to death by the weight of expanding gold!”

“Okay, don’t touch anything!” said Harry desperately,but even as he said it, Ron accidentally nudged one ofthe fallen goblets with his foot, and twenty moreexploded into being while Ron hopped on the spot,part of his shoe burned away by contact with the hotmetal.

“Stand still, don’t move!” said Hermione, clutching atRon.

“Just look around!” said Harry. “Remember, the cup’ssmall and gold, it’s got a badger engraved on it, twohandles — otherwise see if you can spot Ravenclaw’ssymbol anywhere, the eagle —”

They directed their wands into every nook andcrevice, turning cautiously on the spot. It wasimpossible not to brush up against anything; Harrysent a great cascade of fake Galleons onto the groundwhere they joined the goblets, and now there wasscarcely room to place their feet, and the glowing goldblazed with heat, so that the vault felt like a furnace.Harry’s wandlight passed over shields and goblin-made helmets set on shelves rising to the ceiling;higher and higher he raised the beam, until suddenly

Page | 608 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

it found an object that made his heart skip and hishand tremble.

“It’s there, it’s up there\”

Ron and Hermione pointed their wands at it too, sothat the little golden cup sparkled in a three-wayspotlight: the cup that had belonged to HelgaHufflepuff, which had passed into the possession ofHepzibah Smith, from whom it had been stolen byTom Riddle.

“And how the hell are we going to get up therewithout touching anything?” asked Ron.

“Accio Cup\” cried Hermione, who had evidentlyforgotten in her desperation what Griphook had toldthem during their planning sessions.

“No use, no use!” snarled the goblin.

“Then what do we do?” said Harry, glaring at thegoblin. “If you want the sword, Griphook, then you’llhave to help us more than — wait! Can I touch stuffwith the sword? Hermione, give it here!”

Hermione fumbled inside her robes, drew out thebeaded bag, rummaged for a few seconds, thenremoved the shining sword. Harry seized it by itsrubied hilt and touched the tip of the blade to a silverflagon nearby, which did not multiply.

“If I can just poke the sword through a handle — buthow am I going to get up there?”

The shelf on which the cup reposed was out of reachfor any of them, even Ron, who was tallest. The heatfrom the enchanted treasure rose in waves, and sweatran down Harry’s face and back as he struggled to

Page | 609 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

think of a way up to the cup; and then he heard thedragon roar on the other side of the vault door, andthe sound of clanking growing louder and louder.

They were truly trapped now: There was no way outexcept through the door, and a horde of goblinsseemed to be approaching on the other side. Harrylooked at Ron and Hermione and saw terror in theirfaces.

“Hermione,” said Harry as the clanking grew louder,“I’ve got to get up there, we’ve got to get rid of it —”

She raised her wand, pointed it at Harry, andwhispered, “Levicorpus.”

Hoisted into the air by his ankle, Harry hit a suit ofarmor and replicas burst out of it like white-hotbodies, filling the cramped space. With screams ofpain Ron, Hermione, and the two goblins wereknocked aside into other objects, which also began toreplicate. Half buried in a rising tide of red-hottreasure, they struggled and yelled as Harry thrustthe sword through the handle of Hufflepuff’s cup,hooking it onto the blade.

“Impervius\” screeched Hermione in an attempt toprotect herself, Ron, and the goblins from the burningmetal.

Then the worst scream yet made Harry look down:

Ron and Hermione were waist-deep in treasure,struggling to keep Bogrod from slipping beneath therising tide, but Griphook had sunk out of sight andnothing but the tips of a few long fingers were left inview.

Harry seized Griphook’s fingers and pulled. Theblistered goblin emerged by degrees, howling.

Page | 610 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Liberacorpus\” yelled Harry, and with a crash he andGriphook landed on the surface of the swellingtreasure, and the sword flew out of Harry’s hand.

“Get it!” Harry yelled, fighting the pain of the hotmetal on his skin, as Griphook clambered onto hisshoulders again, determined to avoid the swellingmass of red-hot objects. “Where’s the sword? It hadthe cup on it!”

The clanking on the other side of the door wasgrowing deafening — it was too late —

“There!”

It was Griphook who had seen it and Griphook wholunged, and in that instant Harry knew that thegoblin had never expected them to keep their word.One hand holding tightly to a fistful of Harry’s hair, tomake sure he did not fall into the heaving sea ofburning gold, Griphook seized the hilt of the swordand swung it high out of Harry’s reach.

The tiny golden cup, skewered by the handle on thesword’s blade, was flung into the air. The goblin stillastride him, Harry dived and caught it, and althoughhe could feel it scalding his flesh he did not relinquishit, even while countless Hufflepuff cups burst fromhis fist, raining down upon him as the entrance of thevault opened up again and he found himself slidinguncontrollably on an expanding avalanche of fierygold and silver that bore him, Ron, and Hermione intothe outer chamber.

Hardly aware of the pain from the burns covering hisbody, and still borne along on the swell of replicatingtreasure, Harry shoved the cup into his pocket andreached up to retrieve the sword, but Griphook wasgone. Sliding from Harry’s shoulders the moment hePage | 611 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

could, he had sprinted for cover amongst thesurrounding goblins, brandishing the sword andcrying, “Thieves! Thieves! Help! Thieves!” He vanishedinto the midst of the advancing crowd, all of whomwere holding daggers and who accepted him withoutquestion.

Slipping on the hot metal, Harry struggled to his feetand knew that the only way out was through.

“Stupefyl” he bellowed, and Ron and Hermione joinedin: Jets of red light flew into the crowd of goblins, andsome toppled over, but others advanced, and Harrysaw several wizard guards running around thecorner.

The tethered dragon let out a roar, and a gush offlame flew over the goblins: The wizards fled, doubled-up, back the way they had come, and inspiration, ormadness, came to Harry. Pointing his wand at thethick cuffs chaining the beast to the floor, he yelled,“Relashiol”

The cuffs broke open with loud bangs.

“This way!” Harry yelled, and still shooting StunningSpells at the advancing goblins, he sprinted towardthe blind dragon.

“Harry — Harry — what are you doing?” criedHermione.

“Get up, climb up, come on —”

The dragon had not realized that it was free: Harry’sfoot found the crook of its hind leg and he pulledhimself up onto its back. The scales were hard assteel; it did not even seem to feel him. He stretchedout an arm; Hermione hoisted herself up; RonPage | 612 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

climbed on behind them, and a second later thedragon became aware that it was untethered.

With a roar it reared: Harry dug in his knees,clutching as tightly as he could to the jagged scalesas the wings opened, knocking the shrieking goblinsaside like skittles, and it soared into the air. Harry,Ron, and Hermione, flat on its back, scraped againstthe ceiling as it dived toward the passage opening,while the pursuing goblins hurled daggers thatglanced off its flanks.

“Well never get out, it’s too big!” Hermione screamed,but the dragon opened its mouth and belched flameagain, blasting the tunnel, whose floors and ceilingcracked and crumbled. By sheer force the dragonclawed and fought its way through. Harry’s eyes wereshut tight against the heat and dust: Deafened by thecrashing of rock and the dragon’s roars, he could onlycling to its back, expecting to be shaken off at anymoment; then he heard Hermione yelling, “Defodiol”

She was helping the dragon enlarge the passageway,carving out the ceiling as it struggled upward towardthe fresher air, away from the shrieking and clankinggoblins: Harry and Ron copied her, blasting theceiling apart with more gouging spells. They passedthe underground lake, and the great crawling,snarling beast seemed to sense freedom and spaceahead of it, and behind them the passage was full ofthe dragon’s thrashing, spiked tail, of great lumps ofrock, gigantic fractured stalactites, and the clankingof the goblins seemed to be growing more muffled,while ahead, the dragon’s fire kept their progressclear —

And then at last, by the combined force of their spellsand the dragon’s brute strength, they had blastedtheir way out of the passage into the marble hallway.

Page | 613 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Goblins and wizards shrieked and ran for cover, andfinally the dragon had room to stretch its wings:Turning its horned head toward the cool outside air itcould smell beyond the entrance, it took off, and withHarry, Ron, and Hermione still clinging to its back, itforced its way through the metal doors, leaving thembuckled and hanging from their hinges, as itstaggered into Diagon Alley and launched itself intothe sky.

Page | 614 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



THE FINAL HIDING PLACE

There was no means of steering; the dragon could notsee where it was going, and Harry knew that if itturned sharply or rolled in midair they would find itimpossible to cling onto its broad back. Nevertheless,as they climbed higher and higher, London unfurlingbelow them like a gray-and-green map, Harry’soverwhelming feeling was of gratitude for an escapethat had seemed impossible. Crouching low over thebeast’s neck, he clung tight to the metallic scales, andthe cool breeze was soothing on his burned andblistered skin, the dragon’s wings beating the air likethe sails of a windmill. Behind him, whether fromdelight or fear he could not tell, Ron kept swearing atthe top of his voice, and Hermione seemed to besobbing.

After five minutes or so, Harry lost some of hisimmediate dread that the dragon was going to throwthem off, for it seemed intent on nothing but gettingas far away from its underground prison as possible;but the question of how and when they were todismount remained rather frightening. He had no idea

Page | 615 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

how long dragons could fly without landing, nor howthis particular dragon, which could barely see, wouldlocate a good place to put down. He glanced aroundconstantly, imagining that he could feel his scarprickling. ...

How long would it be before Voldemort knew that theyhad broken into the Lestranges’ vault? How soonwould the goblins of Gringotts notify Bellatrix? Howquickly would they realize what had been taken? Andthen, when they discovered that the golden cup wasmissing? Voldemort would know, at last, that theywere hunting Horcruxes. ...

The dragon seemed to crave cooler and fresher air: Itclimbed steadily until they were flying through wispsof chilly cloud, and Harry could no longer make outthe little colored dots which were cars pouring in andout of the capital. On and on they flew, overcountryside parceled out in patches of green andbrown, over roads and rivers winding through thelandscape like strips of matte and glossy ribbon.

“What do you reckon it’s looking for?” Ron yelled asthey flew farther and farther north.

“No idea,” Harry bellowed back. His hands were numbwith cold but he did not dare attempt to shift his grip.He had been wondering for some time what theywould do if they saw the coast sail beneath them, ifthe dragon headed for open sea; he was cold andnumb, not to mention desperately hungry and thirsty.When, he wondered, had the beast itself last eaten?Surely it would need sustenance before long? Andwhat if, at that point, it realized it had three highlyedible humans sitting on its back?

The sun slipped lower in the sky, which was turningindigo; and still the dragon flew, cities and towns

Page | 616 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

gliding out of sight beneath them, its enormousshadow sliding over the earth like a great dark cloud.Every part of Harry ached with the effort of holding onto the dragon’s back.

“Is it my imagination,” shouted Ron after aconsiderable stretch of silence, “or are we losingheight?”

Harry looked down and saw deep green mountainsand lakes, coppery in the sunset. The landscapeseemed to grow larger and more detailed as hesquinted over the side of the dragon, and hewondered whether it had divined the presence of freshwater by the flashes of reflected sunlight.

Lower and lower the dragon flew, in great spiralingcircles, honing in, it seemed, upon one of the smallerlakes.

“I say we jump when it gets low enough!” Harry calledback to the others. “Straight into the water before itrealizes we’re here!”

They agreed, Hermione a little faintly, and now Harrycould see the dragon’s wide yellow underbelly ripplingin the surface of the water.

“NOW!”

He slithered over the side of the dragon andplummeted feetfirst toward the surface of the lake;the drop was greater than he had estimated and hehit the water hard, plunging like a stone into afreezing, green, reed-filled world. He kicked towardthe surface and emerged, panting, to see enormousripples emanating in circles from the places whereRon and Hermione had fallen. The dragon did notseem to have noticed anything: It was already fiftyPage | 617 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

feet away, swooping low over the lake to scoop upwater in its scarred snout. As Ron and Hermioneemerged, spluttering and gasping, from the depths ofthe lake, the dragon flew on, its wings beating hard,and landed at last on a distant bank.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione struck out for the oppositeshore. The lake did not seem to be deep: Soon it wasmore a question of fighting their way through reedsand mud than swimming, and at last they flopped,sodden, panting, and exhausted, onto slippery grass.

Hermione collapsed, coughing and shuddering.Though Harry could have happily lain down andslept, he staggered to his feet, drew out his wand, andstarted casting the usual protective spells aroundthem.

When he had finished, he joined the others. It was thefirst time that he had seen them properly sinceescaping from the vault. Both had angry red burns allover their faces and arms, and their clothing wassinged away in places. They were wincing as theydabbed essence of dittany onto their many injuries.Hermione handed Harry the bottle, then pulled outthree bottles of pumpkin juice she had brought fromShell Cottage and clean, dry robes for all of them.

They changed and then gulped down the juice.

“Well, on the upside,” said Ron finally, who wassitting watching the skin on his hands regrow, “we gotthe Horcrux. On the downside —”

“— no sword,” said Harry through gritted teeth, as hedripped dittany through the singed hole in his jeansonto the angry burn beneath.

“No sword,” repeated Ron. “That double-crossing littlescab ...”

Page | 618 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry pulled the Horcrux from the pocket of the wetjacket he had just taken off and set it down on thegrass in front of them. Glinting in the sun, it drewtheir eyes as they swigged their bottles of juice.

“At least we can’t wear it this time, that’d look a bitweird hanging round our necks,” said Ron, wiping hismouth on the back of his hand.

Hermione looked across the lake to the far bank,where the dragon was still drinking.

“What’ll happen to it, do you think?” she asked. “Willit be all right?”

“You sound like Hagrid,” said Ron. “It’s a dragon,Hermione, it can look after itself. It’s us we need toworry about.”

“What do you mean?”

“Well, I don’t know how to break this to you,” saidRon, “but I think they might have noticed we brokeinto Gringotts.”

All three of them started to laugh, and once started, itwas difficult to stop. Harry’s ribs ached, he feltlightheaded with hunger, but he lay back on the grassbeneath the reddening sky and laughed until histhroat was raw.

“What are we going to do, though?” said Hermionefinally, hiccuping herself back to seriousness. “He’llknow, won’t he? You-Know-Who will know we knowabout his Horcruxes!”

“Maybe they’ll be too scared to tell him?” said Ronhopefully. “Maybe they’ll cover up —”

Page | 619 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The sky, the smell of lake water, the sound of Ron’svoice were extinguished: Pain cleaved Harry’s headlike a sword stroke. He was standing in a dimly litroom, and a semicircle of wizards faced him, and onthe floor at his feet knelt a small, quaking figure.

“What did you say to me?” His voice was high andcold, but fury and fear burned inside him. The onething he had dreaded — but it could not be true, hecould not see how ...

The goblin was trembling, unable to meet the red eyeshigh above his.

“Say it again!” murmured Voldemort. “Say it again).”

“M-my Lord,” stammered the goblin, its black eyeswide with terror, “m-my Lord ... we t-tried t-to st-stopthem. ... Im-impostors, my Lord ... broke — brokeinto the — into the Lestranges’ v-vault. ...”

“Impostors? What impostors? I thought Gringotts hadways of revealing impostors? Who were they?”

“It was ... it was ... the P-Potter b-boy and t-twoaccomplices. ...”

“And they took?” he said, his voice rising, a terriblefear gripping him. “Tell me! What did they take?”

“A ... a s-small golden c-cup, m-my Lord ...”

The scream of rage, of denial left him as if it were astranger’s: He was crazed, frenzied, it could not betrue, it was impossible, nobody had ever known: Howwas it possible that the boy could have discovered hissecret?

Page | 620 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The Elder Wand slashed through the air and greenlight erupted through the room; the kneeling goblinrolled over, dead; the watching wizards scatteredbefore him, terrified: Bellatrix and Lucius Malfoythrew others behind them in their race for the door,and again and again his wand fell, and those whowere left were slain, all of them, for bringing him thisnews, for hearing about the golden cup —

Alone amongst the dead he stormed up and down,and they passed before him in vision: his treasures,his safeguards, his anchors to immortality — thediary was destroyed and the cup was stolen: What if,what if, the boy knew about the others? Could heknow, had he already acted, had he traced more ofthem? Was Dumbledore at the root of this?Dumbledore, who had always suspected him;Dumbledore, dead on his orders; Dumbledore, whosewand was his now, yet who reached out from theignominy of death through the boy, the boy —

But surely if the boy had destroyed any of hisHorcruxes, he, Lord Voldemort, would have known,would have felt it? He, the greatest wizard of them all;he, the most powerful; he, the killer of Dumbledoreand of how many other worthless, nameless men:How could Lord Voldemort not have known, if he,himself, most important and precious, had beenattacked, mutilated?

True, he had not felt it when the diary had beendestroyed, but he had thought that was because hehad no body to feel, being less than ghost. ... No,surely, the rest were safe. ... The other Horcruxesmust be intact. ...

But he must know, he must be sure. ... He paced theroom, kicking aside the goblin’s corpse as he passed,

Page | 621 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and the pictures blurred and burned in his boilingbrain: the lake, the shack, and Hogwarts —

A modicum of calm cooled his rage now: How couldthe boy know that he had hidden the ring in theGaunt shack? No one had ever known him to berelated to the Gaunts, he had hidden the connection,the killings had never been traced to him: The ring,surely, was safe.

And how could the boy, or anybody else, know aboutthe cave or penetrate its protection? The idea of thelocket being stolen was absurd. ...

As for the school: He alone knew where in Hogwartshe had stowed the Horcrux, because he alone hadplumbed the deepest secrets of that place. ...

And there was still Nagini, who must remain closenow, no longer sent to do his bidding, under hisprotection. ...

But to be sure, to be utterly sure, he must return toeach of his hiding places, he must redouble protectionaround each of his Horcruxes. ... A job, like the questfor the Elder Wand, that he must undertake alone ...

Which should he visit first, which was in mostdanger? An old unease flickered inside him.Dumbledore had known his middle name. ...Dumbledore might have made the connection withthe Gaunts. ... Their abandoned home was, perhaps,the least secure of his hiding places, it was there thathe would go first. ...

The lake, surely impossible ... though was there aslight possibility that Dumbledore might have knownsome of his past misdeeds, through the orphanage.

Page | 622 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

And Hogwarts ... but he knew that his Horcrux therewas safe; it would be impossible for Potter to enterHogsmeade without detection, let alone the school.Nevertheless, it would be prudent to alert Snape tothe fact that the boy might try to reenter the castle. ...To tell Snape why the boy might return would befoolish, of course; it had been a grave mistake to trustBellatrix and Malfoy: Didn’t their stupidity andcarelessness prove how unwise it was ever to trust?

He would visit the Gaunt shack first, then, and takeNagini with him: He would not be parted from thesnake anymore ... and he strode from the room,through the hall, and out into the dark garden wherethe fountain played; he called the snake inParseltongue and it slithered out to join him like along shadow. ...

Harry’s eyes flew open as he wrenched himself backto the present: He was lying on the bank of the lake inthe setting sun, and Ron and Hermione were lookingdown at him. Judging by their worried looks, and bythe continued pounding of his scar, his suddenexcursion into Voldemort’s mind had not passedunnoticed. He struggled up, shivering, vaguelysurprised that he was still wet to his skin, and sawthe cup lying innocently in the grass before him, andthe lake, deep blue shot with gold in the failing sun.

“He knows.” His own voice sounded strange and lowafter Voldemort’s high screams. “He knows, and he’sgoing to check where the others are, and the lastone,” he was already on his feet, “is at Hogwarts. Iknew it. I knew it.”

“What?”

Ron was gaping at him; Hermione sat up, lookingworried.

Page | 623 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But what did you see? How do you know?”

“I saw him find out about the cup, I — I was in hishead, he’s” — Harry remembered the killings — “he’sseriously angry, and scared too, he can’t understandhow we knew, and now he’s going to check the othersare safe, the ring first. He thinks the Hogwarts one issafest, because Snape’s there, because it’ll be so hardnot to be seen getting in, I think he’ll check that onelast, but he could still be there within hours —”

“Did you see where in Hogwarts it is?” asked Ron,now scrambling to his feet too.

“No, he was concentrating on warning Snape, hedidn’t think about exactly where it is —”

“Wait, wait\” cried Hermione as Ron caught up theHorcrux and Harry pulled out the Invisibility Cloakagain. “We can’t just go, we haven’t got a plan, weneed to —”

“We need to get going,” said Harry firmly. He hadbeen hoping to sleep, looking forward to getting intothe new tent, but that was impossible now. “Can youimagine what he’s going to do once he realizes thering and the locket are gone? What if he moves theHogwarts Horcrux, decides it isn’t safe enough?”

“But how are we going to get in?”

“Well go to Hogsmeade,” said Harry, “and try to worksomething out once we see what the protectionaround the school’s like. Get under the Cloak,Hermione, I want to stick together this time.”

“But we don’t really fit —”

“It’ll be dark, no one’s going to notice our feet.”

Page | 624 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The flapping of enormous wings echoed across theblack water: The dragon had drunk its fill and riseninto the air. They paused in their preparations towatch it climb higher and higher, now black againstthe rapidly darkening sky, until it vanished over anearby mountain. Then Hermione walked forwardand took her place between the other two. Harrypulled the Cloak down as far as it would go, andtogether they turned on the spot into the crushingdarkness.

Page | 625 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE MISSING MIRROR

Harry’s feet touched road. He saw the achinglyfamiliar Hogsmeade High Street: dark shop fronts,and the outline of black mountains beyond thevillage, and the curve in the road ahead that led offtoward Hogwarts, and light spilling from the windowsof the Three Broomsticks, and with a lurch of theheart he remembered, with piercing accuracy, how hehad landed here nearly a year before, supporting adesperately weak Dumbledore; all this in a second,upon landing — and then, even as he relaxed his gripupon Ron’s and Hermione’s arms, it happened.

The air was rent by a scream that sounded likeVoldemort’s when he had realized the cup had beenstolen: It tore at every nerve in Harry’s body, and heknew immediately that their appearance had causedit. Even as he looked at the other two beneath theCloak, the door of the Three Broomsticks burst openand a dozen cloaked and hooded Death Eatersdashed into the street, their wands aloft.

Page | 626 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry seized Ron’s wrist as he raised his wand; therewere too many of them to Stun: Even attempting itwould give away their position. One of the DeathEaters waved his wand and the scream stopped, stillechoing around the distant mountains.

“Accio Cloak).” roared one of the Death Eaters.

Harry seized its folds, but it made no attempt toescape: The Summoning Charm had not worked on it.

“Not under your wrapper, then, Potter?” yelled theDeath Eater who had tried the charm, and then to hisfellows, “Spread out. He’s here.”

Six of the Death Eaters ran toward them: Harry, Ron,and Hermione backed as quickly as possible down thenearest side street, and the Death Eaters missedthem by inches. They waited in the darkness,listening to the footsteps running up and down,beams of light flying along the street from the DeathEaters’ searching wands.

“Let’s just leave!” Hermione whispered. “Disapparatenow!”

“Great idea,” said Ron, but before Harry could reply aDeath Eater shouted,

“We know you’re here, Potter, and there’s no gettingaway! We’ll find you!”

“They were ready for us,” whispered Harry. “They setup that spell to tell them we’d come. I reckon they’vedone something to keep us here, trap us —”

“What about dementors?” called another Death Eater.“Let ’em have free rein, they’d find him quick enough!”

Page | 627 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“The Dark Lord wants Potter dead by no hand but his

“— an’ dementors won’t kill him! The Dark Lordwants Potter’s life, not his soul. He’ll be easier to kill ifhe’s been Kissed first!”

There were noises of agreement. Dread filled Harry:

To repel dementors they would have to producePatronuses, which would give them awayimmediately.

“We’re going to have to try to Disapparate, Harry!”Hermione whispered.

Even as she said it, he felt the unnatural cold begin tosteal over the street. Light was sucked from theenvironment right up to the stars, which vanished. Inthe pitch-blackness, he felt Hermione take hold of hisarm and together, they turned on the spot.

The air through which they needed to move seemed tohave become solid: They could not Disapparate; theDeath Eaters had cast their charms well. The coldwas biting deeper and deeper into Harry’s flesh. He,Ron, and Hermione retreated down the side street,groping their way along the wall, trying not to make asound. Then, around the corner, gliding noiselessly,came dementors, ten or more of them, visible becausethey were of a denser darkness than theirsurroundings, with their black cloaks and theirscabbed and rotting hands. Could they sense fear inthe vicinity? Harry was sure of it: They seemed to becoming more quickly now, taking those dragging,rattling breaths he detested, tasting despair on theair, closing in —

He raised his wand: He could not, would not, sufferthe Dementor’s Kiss, whatever happened afterward. It

Page | 628 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

was of Ron and Hermione that he thought as hewhispered, “Expecto Patronum).”

The silver stag burst from his wand and charged: Thedementors scattered and there was a triumphant yellfrom somewhere out of sight.

“It’s him, down there, down there, I saw his Patronus,it was a stag!

The dementors had retreated, the stars were poppingout again, and the footsteps of the Death Eaters werebecoming louder; but before Harry in his panic coulddecide what to do, there was a grinding of boltsnearby, a door opened on the left-hand side of thenarrow street, and a rough voice said, “Potter, in here,quick!”

He obeyed without hesitation: The three of themhurtled through the open doorway.

“Upstairs, keep the Cloak on, keep quiet!” muttered atall figure, passing them on his way into the streetand slamming the door behind him.

Harry had had no idea where they were, but now hesaw, by the stuttering light of a single candle, thegrubby, sawdust-strewn bar of the Hog’s Head Inn.They ran behind the counter and through a seconddoorway, which led to a rickety wooden staircase thatthey climbed as fast as they could. The stairs openedonto a sitting room with a threadbare carpet and asmall fireplace, above which hung a single large oilpainting of a blonde girl who gazed out at the roomwith a kind of vacant sweetness.

Shouts reached them from the street below. Stillwearing the Invisibility Cloak, they crept toward thegrimy window and looked down. Their savior, whom

Page | 629 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry now recognized as the Hog’s Head’s barman,was the only person not wearing a hood.

“So what?” he was bellowing into one of the hoodedfaces. “So what? You send dementors down my street,I’ll send a Patronus back at ’em! I’m not having ’emnear me, I’ve told you that, I’m not having it!”

“That wasn’t your Patronus!” said a Death Eater.

“That was a stag, it was Potter’s!”

“Stag!” roared the barman, and he pulled out a wand.“Stag! You idiot — Expecto Patronum.!”

Something huge and horned erupted from the wand:Head down, it charged toward the High Street and outof sight.

“That’s not what I saw —” said the Death Eater,though with less certainty.

“Curfew’s been broken, you heard the noise,” one ofhis companions told the barman. “Someone was outin the street against regulations —”

“If I want to put my cat out, I will, and be damned toyour curfew!”

“ You set off the Caterwauling Charm?”

“What if I did? Going to cart me off to Azkaban? Killme for sticking my nose out my own front door? Do it,then, if you want to! But I hope for your sakes youhaven’t pressed your little Dark Marks andsummoned him. He’s not going to like being calledhere for me and my old cat, is he, now?”

“Don’t you worry about us,” said one of the DeathEaters, “worry about yourself, breaking curfew!”

Page | 630 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“And where will you lot traffick potions and poisonswhen my pub’s closed down? What’ll happen to yourlittle sidelines then?”

“Are you threatening — ?”

“I keep my mouth shut, it’s why you come here, isn’tit?”

“I still say I saw a stag Patronus!” shouted the firstDeath Eater.

“Stag?” roared the barman. “It’s a goat, idiot!”

“All right, we made a mistake,” said the second DeathEater. “Break curfew again and we won’t be solenient!”

The Death Eaters strode back toward the High Street.Hermione moaned with relief, wove out from underthe Cloak, and sat down on a wobble-legged chair.Harry drew the curtains tight shut, then pulled theCloak off himself and Ron. They could hear thebarman down below, rebolting the door of the bar,then climbing the stairs.

Harry’s attention was caught by something on themantelpiece: a small, rectangular mirror propped ontop of it, right beneath the portrait of the girl.

The barman entered the room.

“You bloody fools,” he said gruffly, looking from one tothe other of them. “What were you thinking, cominghere?”

“Thank you,” said Harry. “We can’t thank youenough. You saved our lives.”

Page | 631 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The barman grunted. Harry approached him, lookingup into the face, trying to see past the long, stringy,wire-gray hair and beard. He wore spectacles. Behindthe dirty lenses, the eyes were a piercing, brilliantblue.

“It’s your eye I’ve been seeing in the mirror.”

There was silence in the room. Harry and the barmanlooked at each other.

“You sent Dobby.”

The barman nodded and looked around for the elf.

“Thought he’d be with you. WhereVe you left him?”

“He’s dead,” said Harry. “Bellatrix Lestrange killedhim.”

The barman’s face was impassive. After a fewmoments he said, “I’m sorry to hear it. I liked thatelf.”

He turned away, lighting lamps with prods of hiswand, not looking at any of them.

“You’re Aberforth,” said Harry to the man’s back.

He neither confirmed nor denied it, but bent to lightthe fire.

“How did you get this?” Harry asked, walking acrossto Sirius’s mirror, the twin of the one he had brokennearly two years before. “Bought it from Dung ’bout ayear ago,” said Aberforth. “Albus told me what it was.Been trying to keep an eye out for you.”

Ron gasped.

Page | 632 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“The silver doe!” he said excitedly. “Was that you too?”

“What are you talking about?” said Aberforth.

“Someone sent a doe Patronus to us!”

“Brains like that, you could be a Death Eater, son.Haven’t I just proved my Patronus is a goat?”

“Oh,” said Ron. “Yeah ... well, I’m hungry!” he addeddefensively as his stomach gave an enormous rumble.

“I got food,” said Aberforth, and he sloped out of theroom, reappearing moments later with a large loaf ofbread, some cheese, and a pewter jug of mead, whichhe set upon a small table in front of the fire.

Ravenous, they ate and drank, and for a while therewas silence but for the crackle of the fire, the clink ofgoblets, and the sound of chewing.

“Right then,” said Aberforth when they had eatentheir fill, and Harry and Ron sat slumped dozily intheir chairs. “We need to think of the best way to getyou out of here. Can’t be done by night, you heardwhat happens if anyone moves outdoors duringdarkness: Caterwauling Charm’s set off, they’ll beonto you like bow-truckles on doxy eggs. I don’treckon I’ll be able to pass off a stag as a goat a secondtime. Wait for daybreak when curfew lifts, then youcan put your Cloak back on and set out on foot. Getright out of Hogsmeade, up into the mountains, andyou’ll be able to Disapparate there. Might see Hagrid.He’s been hiding in a cave up there with Grawp eversince they tried to arrest him.”

“We’re not leaving,” said Harry. “We need to get intoHogwarts.”

“Don’t be stupid, boy,” said Aberforth.

Page | 633 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We’ve got to,” said Harry.

“What you’ve got to do,” said Aberforth, leaningforward, “is to get as far from here as you can.”

“You don’t understand. There isn’t much time. We’vegot to get into the castle. Dumbledore — I mean, yourbrother — wanted us —”

The firelight made the grimy lenses of Aberforth’sglasses momentarily opaque, a bright flat white, andHarry remembered the blind eyes of the giant spider,Aragog.

“My brother Albus wanted a lot of things,” saidAberforth, “and people had a habit of getting hurtwhile he was carrying out his grand plans. You getaway from this school, Potter, and out of the countryif you can. Forget my brother and his clever schemes.He’s gone where none of this can hurt him, and youdon’t owe him anything.”

“You don’t understand,” said Harry again.

“Oh, don’t I?” said Aberforth quietly. “You don’t thinkI understood my own brother? Think you knew Albusbetter than I did?”

“I didn’t mean that,” said Harry, whose brain feltsluggish with exhaustion and from the surfeit of foodand wine. “It’s ... he left me a job.”

“Did he now?” said Aberforth. “Nice job, I hope?Pleasant? Easy? Sort of thing you’d expect anunqualified wizard kid to be able to do withoutoverstretching themselves?”

Ron gave a rather grim laugh. Hermione was lookingstrained.

Page | 634 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I-it’s not easy, no,” said Harry. “But I’ve got to —”

“ ‘Got to’? Why ‘got to*? He’s dead, isn’t he?” saidAberforth roughly. “Let it go, boy, before you followhim! Save yourself!”

“I can’t.”

“Why not?”

“I —” Harry felt overwhelmed; he could not explain, sohe took the offensive instead. “But you’re fighting too,you’re in the Order of the Phoenix —”

“I was,” said Aberforth. “The Order of the Phoenix isfinished. You-Know-Who’s won, it’s over, and anyonewho’s pretending different’s kidding themselves. It’llnever be safe for you here, Potter, he wants you toobadly. So go abroad, go into hiding, save yourself.

Best take these two with you.” He jerked a thumb atRon and Hermione. “They’ll be in danger long as theylive now everyone knows they’ve been working withyou.”

“I can’t leave,” said Harry. “I’ve got a job —”

“Give it to someone else!”

“I can’t. It’s got to be me, Dumbledore explained it all

“Oh, did he now? And did he tell you everything, washe honest with you?”

Harry wanted with all his heart to say “Yes,” butsomehow the simple word would not rise to his lips.Aberforth seemed to know what he was thinking.

Page | 635 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I knew my brother, Potter. He learned secrecy at ourmother’s knee. Secrets and lies, that’s how we grewup, and Albus ... he was a natural.”

The old man’s eyes traveled to the painting of the girlover the mantelpiece. It was, now Harry lookedaround properly, the only picture in the room. Therewas no photograph of Albus Dumbledore, nor ofanyone else.

“Mr. Dumbledore?” said Hermione rather timidly. “Isthat your sister? Ariana?”

“Yes,” said Aberforth tersely. “Been reading RitaSkeeter, have you, missy?”

Even by the rosy light of the fire it was clear thatHermione had turned red.

“Elphias Doge mentioned her to us,” said Harry,trying to spare Hermione.

“That old berk,” muttered Aberforth, taking anotherswig of mead. “Thought the sun shone out of mybrother’s every orifice, he did. Well, so did plenty ofpeople, you three included, by the looks of it.”

Harry kept quiet. He did not want to express thedoubts and uncertainties about Dumbledore that hadriddled him for months now. He had made his choicewhile he dug Dobby’s grave, he had decided tocontinue along the winding, dangerous path indicatedfor him by Albus Dumbledore, to accept that he hadnot been told everything that he wanted to know, butsimply to trust. He had no desire to doubt again; hedid not want to hear anything that would deflect himfrom his purpose. He met Aberforth’s gaze, which wasso strikingly like his brother’s: The bright blue eyesgave the same impression that they were X-raying thePage | 636 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

object of their scrutiny, and Harry thought thatAberforth knew what he was thinking and despisedhim for it.

“Professor Dumbledore cared about Harry, verymuch,” said Hermione in a low voice.

“Did he now?” said Aberforth. “Funny thing, howmany of the people my brother cared about verymuch ended up in a worse state than if he’d left ’emwell alone.”

“What do you mean?” asked Hermione breathlessly.

“Never you mind,” said Aberforth.

“But that’s a really serious thing to say!” saidHermione. “Are you — are you talking about yoursister?”

Aberforth glared at her: His lips moved as if he werechewing the words he was holding back. Then heburst into speech.

“When my sister was six years old, she was attacked,set upon, by three Muggle boys. They’d seen herdoing magic, spying through the back garden hedge:She was a kid, she couldn’t control it, no witch orwizard can at that age. What they saw scared them, Iexpect. They forced their way through the hedge, andwhen she couldn’t show them the trick, they got a bitcarried away trying to stop the little freak doing it.”

Hermione’s eyes were huge in the firelight; Ron lookedslightly sick. Aberforth stood up, tall as Albus, andsuddenly terrible in his anger and the intensity of hispain.

Page | 637 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It destroyed her, what they did: She was never rightagain. She wouldn’t use magic, but she couldn’t getrid of it; it turned inward and drove her mad, itexploded out of her when she couldn’t control it, andat times she was strange and dangerous. But mostlyshe was sweet and scared and harmless.

“And my father went after the bastards that did it,”said Aberforth, “and attacked them. And they lockedhim up in Azkaban for it. He never said why he’ddone it, because if the Ministry had known whatAriana had become, she’d have been locked up in St.Mungo’s for good. They’d have seen her as a seriousthreat to the International Statute of Secrecy,unbalanced like she was, with magic exploding out ofher at moments when she couldn’t keep it in anylonger.

“We had to keep her safe and quiet. We moved house,put it about she was ill, and my mother looked afterher, and tried to keep her calm and happy.

“I was her favorite,” he said, and as he said it, agrubby schoolboy seemed to look out throughAberforth’s wrinkles and tangled beard. “Not Albus,he was always up in his bedroom when he was home,reading his books and counting his prizes, keeping upwith his correspondence with ‘the most notablemagical names of the day,’ ” Aberforth sneered. “Hedidn’t want to be bothered with her. She liked mebest. I could get her to eat when she wouldn’t do it formy mother, I could get her to calm down when shewas in one of her rages, and when she was quiet, sheused to help me feed the goats.

“Then, when she was fourteen ... See, I wasn’t there,”said Aberforth. “If I’d been there, I could have calmedher down. She had one of her rages, and my motherwasn’t as young as she was, and ... it was an

Page | 638 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

accident. Ariana couldn’t control it. But my motherwas killed.”

Harry felt a horrible mixture of pity and repulsion; hedid not want to hear any more, but Aberforth kepttalking, and Harry wondered how long it had beensince he had spoken about this; whether, in fact, hehad ever spoken about it.

“So that put paid to Albus’s trip round the world withlittle Doge. The pair of ’em came home for mymother’s funeral and then Doge went off on his own,and Albus settled down as head of the family. Ha!”

Aberforth spat into the fire.

“I’d have looked after her, I told him so, I didn’t careabout school, I’d have stayed home and done it. Hetold me I had to finish my education and he’d takeover from my mother. Bit of a comedown for Mr.Brilliant, there’s no prizes for looking after your half-mad sister, stopping her blowing up the house everyother day. But he did all right for a few weeks ... tillhe came.”

And now a positively dangerous look crept overAberforth’s face.

“Grindelwald. And at last, my brother had an equal totalk to, someone just as bright and talented as hewas. And looking after Ariana took a backseat then,while they were hatching all their plans for a newWizarding order, and looking for Hallows, andwhatever else it was they were so interested in. Grandplans for the benefit of all Wizardkind, and if oneyoung girl got neglected, what did that matter, whenAlbus was working for the greater good?

Page | 639 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But after a few weeks of it, I’d had enough, I had. Itwas nearly time for me to go back to Hogwarts, so Itold ’em, both of ’em, face-to-face, like I am to you,now,” and Aberforth looked down at Harry, and ittook little imagination to see him as a teenager, wiryand angry, confronting his elder brother. “I told him,you’d better give it up now. You can’t move her, she’sin no fit state, you can’t take her with you, wherever itis you’re planning to go, when you’re making yourclever speeches, trying to whip yourselves up afollowing. He didn’t like that,” said Aberforth, and hiseyes were briefly occluded by the firelight on thelenses of his glasses: They shone white and blindagain. “Grindelwald didn’t like that at all. He gotangry. He told me what a stupid little boy I was,trying to stand in the way of him and my brilliantbrother. ... Didn’t I understand, my poor sisterwouldn’t have to be hidden once they’d changed theworld, and led the wizards out of hiding, and taughtthe Muggles their place?

“And there was an argument ... and I pulled out mywand, and he pulled out his, and I had the CruciatusCurse used on me by my brother’s best friend — andAlbus was trying to stop him, and then all three of uswere dueling, and the flashing lights and the bangsset her off, she couldn’t stand it —”

The color was draining from Aberforth’s face asthough he had suffered a mortal wound.

“— and I think she wanted to help, but she didn’treally know what she was doing, and I don’t knowwhich of us did it, it could have been any of us — andshe was dead.”

His voice broke on the last word and he droppeddown into the nearest chair. Hermione’s face was wetwith tears, and Ron was almost as pale as Aberforth.

Page | 640 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry felt nothing but revulsion: He wished he hadnot heard it, wished he could wash his mind clean ofit.

“I’m so ... I’m so sorry,” Hermione whispered.

“Gone,” croaked Aberforth. “Gone forever.”

He wiped his nose on his cuff and cleared his throat.

“ ’Course, Grindelwald scarpered. He had a bit of atrack record already, back in his own country, and hedidn’t want Ariana set to his account too. And Albuswas free, wasn’t he? Free of the burden of his sister,free to become the greatest wizard of the —”

“He was never free,” said Harry.

“I beg your pardon?” said Aberforth.

“Never,” said Harry. “The night that your brother died,he drank a potion that drove him out of his mind. Hestarted screaming, pleading with someone who wasn’tthere. ‘Don’t hurt them, please ... hurt me instead.’ ”

Ron and Hermione were staring at Harry. He hadnever gone into details about what had happened onthe island on the lake: The events that had takenplace after he and Dumbledore had returned toHogwarts had eclipsed it so thoroughly.

“He thought he was back there with you andGrindelwald, I know he did,” said Harry, rememberingDumbledore whimpering, pleading. “He thought hewas watching Grindelwald hurting you and Ariana. ...It was torture to him, if you’d seen him then, youwouldn’t say he was free.”

Page | 641 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Aberforth seemed lost in contemplation of his ownknotted and veined hands. After a long pause he said,“How can you be sure, Potter, that my brother wasn’tmore interested in the greater good than in you? Howcan you be sure you aren’t dispensable, just like mylittle sister?”

A shard of ice seemed to pierce Harry’s heart.

“I don’t believe it. Dumbledore loved Harry,” saidHermione.

“Why didn’t he tell him to hide, then?” shot backAberforth. “Why didn’t he say to him, Take care ofyourself, here’s how to survive’?”

“Because,” said Harry before Hermione could answer,“sometimes you’ve got to think about more than yourown safety! Sometimes you’ve got to think about thegreater good! This is war!”

“You’re seventeen, boy!”

“I’m of age, and I’m going to keep fighting even ifyou’ve given up!”

“Who says I’ve given up?”

“ The Order of the Phoenix is finished,’ ” Harryrepeated. “ Tou-Know-Who’s won, it’s over, andanyone who’s pretending different’s kiddingthemselves.’ ”

“I don’t say I like it, but it’s the truth!”

“No, it isn’t,” said Harry. “Your brother knew how tofinish You-Know-Who and he passed the knowledgeon to me. I’m going to keep going until I succeed — or

Page | 642 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

I die. Don’t think I don’t know how this might end.I’ve known it for years.”

He waited for Aberforth to jeer or to argue, but he didnot. He merely scowled.

“We need to get into Hogwarts,” said Harry again. “Ifyou can’t help us, we’ll wait till daybreak, leave you inpeace, and try to find a way in ourselves. If you canhelp us — well, now would be a great time to mentionit.”

Aberforth remained fixed in his chair, gazing at Harrywith the eyes that were so extraordinarily like hisbrother’s. At last he cleared his throat, got to his feet,walked around the little table, and approached theportrait of Ariana.

“You know what to do,” he said.

She smiled, turned, and walked away, not as peoplein portraits usually did, out of the sides of theirframes, but along what seemed to be a long tunnelpainted behind her. They watched her slight figureretreating until finally she was swallowed by thedarkness.

“Er — what — ?” began Ron.

“There’s only one way in now,” said Aberforth. “Youmust know they’ve got all the old secret passagewayscovered at both ends, dementors all around theboundary walls, regular patrols inside the school fromwhat my sources tell me. The place has never been soheavily guarded. How you expect to do anything onceyou get inside it, with Snape in charge and theCarrows as his deputies ... well, that’s your lookout,isn’t it? You say you’re prepared to die.”

Page | 643 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But what ... ?” said Hermione, frowning at Ariana’spicture.

A tiny white dot had reappeared at the end of thepainted tunnel, and now Ariana was walking backtoward them, growing bigger and bigger as she came.But there was somebody else with her now, someonetaller than she was, who was limping along, lookingexcited. His hair was longer than Harry had ever seenit: He appeared to have suffered several gashes to hisface and his clothes were ripped and torn. Larger andlarger the two figures grew, until only their heads andshoulders filled the portrait. Then the whole thingswung forward on the wall like a little door, and theentrance to a real tunnel was revealed. And out of it,his hair overgrown, his face cut, his robes ripped,clambered the real Neville Longbottom, who gave aroar of delight, leapt down from the mantelpiece, andyelled, “I knew you’d come! I knew it, HarryY’

Page | 644 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE LOST DIADEM

“Neville — what the — how — ?”

But Neville had spotted Ron and Hermione, and withyells of delight was hugging them too. The longerHarry looked at Neville, the worse he appeared: Oneof his eyes was swollen yellow and purple, there weregouge marks on his face, and his general air ofunkemptness suggested that he had been livingrough. Nevertheless, his battered visage shone withhappiness as he let go of Hermione and said again, “Iknew you’d come! Kept telling Seamus it was a matterof time!”

“Neville, what’s happened to you?”

“What? This?” Neville dismissed his injuries with ashake of the head. “This is nothing. Seamus is worse.You’ll see. Shall we get going then? Oh,” he turned toAberforth, “Ab, there might be a couple more peopleon the way.”

Page | 645 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Couple more?” repeated Aberforth ominously. “Whatd’you mean, a couple more, Longbottom? There’s acurfew and a Caterwauling Charm on the wholevillage!”

“I know, that’s why they’ll be Apparating directly intothe bar,” said Neville. “Just send them down thepassage when they get here, will you? Thanks a lot.”

Neville held out his hand to Hermione and helped herto climb up onto the mantelpiece and into the tunnel;Ron followed, then Neville. Harry addressedAberforth.

“I don’t know how to thank you. You’ve saved ourlives twice.”

“Look after ’em, then,” said Aberforth gruffly. “I mightnot be able to save ’em a third time.”

Harry clambered up onto the mantelpiece andthrough the hole behind Ariana’s portrait. There weresmooth stone steps on the other side: It looked asthough the passageway had been there for years.Brass lamps hung from the walls and the earthy floorwas worn and smooth; as they walked, their shadowsrippled, fanlike, across the wall.

“How long’s this been here?” Ron asked as they setoff. “It isn’t on the Marauder’s Map, is it, Harry? Ithought there were only seven passages in and out ofschool?”

“They sealed off all of those before the start of theyear,” said Neville. “There’s no chance of gettingthrough any of them now, not with curses over theentrances and Death Eaters and dementors waiting atthe exits.” He started walking backward, beaming,drinking them in. “Never mind that stuff. ... Is it true?Page | 646 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Did you break into Gringotts? Did you escape on adragon? It’s everywhere, everyone’s talking about it,Terry Boot got beaten up by Carrow for yelling aboutit in the Great Hall at dinner!”

“Yeah, it’s true,” said Harry.

Neville laughed gleefully.

“What did you do with the dragon?”

“Released it into the wild,” said Ron. “Hermione wasall for keeping it as a pet —”

“Don’t exaggerate, Ron —”

“But what have you been doing? People have beensaying you’ve just been on the run, Harry, but I don’tthink so. I think you’ve been up to something.”

“You’re right,” said Harry, “but tell us aboutHogwarts, Neville, we haven’t heard anything.”

“It’s been ... well, it’s not really like Hogwartsanymore,” said Neville, the smile fading from his faceas he spoke. “Do you know about the Carrows?”

“Those two Death Eaters who teach here?”

“They do more than teach,” said Neville. “They’re incharge of all discipline. They like punishment, theCarrows.”

“Like Umbridge?”

“Nah, they make her look tame. The other teachersare all supposed to refer us to the Carrows if we doanything wrong. They don’t, though, if they can avoidit. You can tell they all hate them as much as we do.

Page | 647 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Amycus, the bloke, he teaches what used to beDefense Against the Dark Arts, except now it’s justthe Dark Arts. We’re supposed to practice theCruciatus Curse on people who’ve earned detentions

“What?”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione’s united voices echoed upand down the passage.

“Yeah,” said Neville. “That’s how I got this one,” hepointed at a particularly deep gash in his cheek, “Irefused to do it. Some people are into it, though;Crabbe and Goyle love it. First time they’ve ever beentop in anything, I expect.

“Alecto, Amycus’s sister, teaches Muggle Studies,which is compulsory for everyone. We’ve all got tolisten to her explain how Muggles are like animals,stupid and dirty, and how they drove wizards intohiding by being vicious toward them, and how thenatural order is being reestablished. I got this one,”he indicated another slash to his face, “for asking herhow much Muggle blood she and her brother havegot.”

“Blimey, Neville,” said Ron, “there’s a time and a placefor getting a smart mouth.”

“You didn’t hear her,” said Neville. “You wouldn’t havestood it either. The thing is, it helps when peoplestand up to them, it gives everyone hope. I used tonotice that when you did it, Harry.”

“But they’ve used you as a knife sharpener,” saidRon, wincing slightly as they passed a lamp andNeville’s injuries were thrown into even greater relief.

Page | 648 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Neville shrugged.

“Doesn’t matter. They don’t want to spill too muchpure blood, so they’ll torture us a bit if we’re mouthybut they won’t actually kill us.”

Harry did not know what was worse, the things thatNeville was saying or the matter-of-fact tone in whichhe said them.

“The only people in real danger are the ones whosefriends and relatives on the outside are giving trouble.They get taken hostage. Old Xeno Lovegood wasgetting a bit too outspoken in The Quihhler, so theydragged Luna off the train on the way back forChristmas.”

“Neville, she’s all right, we’ve seen her —”

“Yeah, I know, she managed to get a message to me.”

From his pocket he pulled a golden coin, and Harryrecognized it as one of the fake Galleons thatDumbledore’s Army had used to send one anothermessages.

“These have been great,” said Neville, beaming atHermione. “The Carrows never rumbled how we werecommunicating, it drove them mad. We used to sneakout at night and put graffiti on the walls:

Dumbledore’s Army, Still Recruiting, stuff like that.Snape hated it.”

“You used to?” said Harry, who had noticed the pasttense.

“Well, it got more difficult as time went on,” saidNeville. “We lost Luna at Christmas, and Ginny nevercame back after Easter, and the three of us were sort

Page | 649 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

of the leaders. The Carrows seemed to know I wasbehind a lot of it, so they started coming down on mehard, and then Michael Corner went and got caughtreleasing a first-year they’d chained up, and theytortured him pretty badly. That scared people off.”

“No kidding,” muttered Ron, as the passage began toslope upward.

“Yeah, well, I couldn’t ask people to go through whatMichael did, so we dropped those kinds of stunts. Butwe were still fighting, doing underground stuff, rightup until a couple of weeks ago. That’s when theydecided there was only one way to stop me, I suppose,and they went for Gran.”

“They what?” said Harry, Ron, and Hermionetogether.

“Yeah,” said Neville, panting a little now, because thepassage was climbing so steeply, “well, you can seetheir thinking. It had worked really well, kidnappingkids to force their relatives to behave, I s’pose it wasonly a matter of time before they did it the other wayaround. Thing was,” he faced them, and Harry wasastonished to see that he was grinning, “they bit off abit more than they could chew with Gran. Little oldwitch living alone, they probably thought they didn’tneed to send anyone particularly powerful. Anyway,”Neville laughed, “Dawlish is still in St. Mungo’s andGran’s on the run. She sent me a letter,” he clapped ahand to the breast pocket of his robes, “telling me shewas proud of me, that I’m my parents’ son, and tokeep it up.”

“Cool,” said Ron.

“Yeah,” said Neville happily. “Only thing was, oncethey realized they had no hold over me, they decided

Page | 650 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Hogwarts could do without me after all. I don’t knowwhether they were planning to kill me or send me toAzkaban; either way, I knew it was time to disappear.”

“But,” said Ron, looking thoroughly confused, “aren’t— aren’t we heading straight back into Hogwarts?”

“ ’Course,” said Neville. “You’ll see. We’re here.”

They turned a corner and there ahead of them wasthe end of the passage. Another short flight of stepsled to a door just like the one hidden behind Ariana’sportrait. Neville pushed it open and climbed through.As Harry followed, he heard Neville call out to unseenpeople:

“Look who it is! Didn’t I tell you?”

As Harry emerged into the room beyond the passage,there were several screams and yells: “HARRY!” “It’sPotter, it’s POTTER!” “Ron!” “Hermionel”

He had a confused impression of colored hangings, oflamps and many faces. The next moment, he, Ron,and Hermione were engulfed, hugged, pounded on theback, their hair ruffled, their hands shaken, by whatseemed to be more than twenty people: They mightjust have won a Quidditch final.

“Okay, okay, calm down!” Neville called, and as thecrowd backed away, Harry was able to take in theirsurroundings.

He did not recognize the room at all. It was enormous,and looked rather like the interior of a particularlysumptuous tree house, or perhaps a gigantic ship’scabin. Multicolored hammocks were strung from theceiling and from a balcony that ran around the darkwood-paneled and windowless walls, which werePage | 651 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

covered in bright tapestry hangings: Harry saw thegold Gryffindor lion, emblazoned on scarlet; the blackbadger of Hufflepuff, set against yellow; and thebronze eagle of Ravenclaw, on blue. The silver andgreen of Slytherin alone were absent. There werebulging bookcases, a few broomsticks proppedagainst the walls, and in the corner, a large wooden-cased wireless.

“Where are we?”

“Room of Requirement, of course!” said Neville.“Surpassed itself, hasn’t it? The Carrows werechasing me, and I knew I had just one chance for ahideout: I managed to get through the door and thisis what I found! Well, it wasn’t exactly like this when Iarrived, it was a load smaller, there was only onehammock and just Gryffindor hangings. But it’sexpanded as more and more of the D.A. have arrived.”

“And the Carrows can’t get in?” asked Harry, lookingaround for the door.

“No,” said Seamus Finnigan, whom Harry had notrecognized until he spoke: Seamus’s face was bruisedand puffy. “It’s a proper hideout, as long as one of usstays in here, they can’t get at us, the door won’topen. It’s all down to Neville. He really gets this room.You’ve got to ask it for exactly what you need — like,

‘I don’t want any Carrow supporters to be able to getin’ — and it’ll do it for you! You’ve just got to makesure you close the loopholes! Neville’s the man!”

“It’s quite straightforward, really,” said Nevillemodestly. “I’d been in here about a day and a half,and getting really hungry, and wishing I could getsomething to eat, and that’s when the passage to theHog’s Head opened up. I went through it and metAberforth. He’s been providing us with food, becausePage | 652 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

for some reason, that’s the one thing the room doesn’treally do.”

“Yeah, well, food’s one of the five exceptions toGamp’s Law of Elemental Transfiguration,” said Ronto general astonishment.

“So we’ve been hiding out here for nearly two weeks,”said Seamus, “and it just makes more hammocksevery time we need them, and it even sprouted apretty good bathroom once girls started turning up —

“— and thought they’d quite like to wash, yes,”supplied Lavender Brown, whom Harry had notnoticed until that point. Now that he looked aroundproperly, he recognized many familiar faces. BothPatil twins were there, as were Terry Boot, ErnieMacmillan, Anthony Goldstein, and Michael Corner.

“Tell us what you’ve been up to, though,” said Ernie.“There’ve been so many rumors, we’ve been trying tokeep up with you on Potterwatch.” He pointed at thewireless. “You didn’t break into Gringotts?”

“They did!” said Neville. “And the dragon’s true too!”

There was a smattering of applause and a fewwhoops; Ron took a bow.

“What were you after?” asked Seamus eagerly.

Before any of them could parry the question with oneof their own, Harry felt a terrible, scorching pain inthe lightning scar. As he turned his back hastily onthe curious and delighted faces, the Room ofRequirement vanished, and he was standing inside aruined stone shack, and the rotting floorboards wereripped apart at his feet, a disinterred golden box layPage | 653 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

open and empty beside the hole, and Voldemort’sscream of fury vibrated inside his head.

With an enormous effort he pulled out of Voldemort’smind again, back to where he stood, swaying, in theRoom of Requirement, sweat pouring from his faceand Ron holding him up.

“Are you all right, Harry?” Neville was saying. “Wantto sit down? I expect you’re tired, aren’t — ?”

“No,” said Harry. He looked at Ron and Hermione,trying to tell them without words that Voldemort hadjust discovered the loss of one of the other Horcruxes.Time was running out fast: If Voldemort chose to visitHogwarts next, they would miss their chance.

“We need to get going,” he said, and their expressionstold him that they understood.

“What are we going to do, then, Harry?” askedSeamus. “What’s the plan?”

“Plan?” repeated Harry. He was exercising all hiswillpower to prevent himself succumbing again toVoldemort’s rage: His scar was still burning. “Well,there’s something we — Ron, Hermione, and I — needto do, and then we’ll get out of here.”

Nobody was laughing or whooping anymore. Nevillelooked confused.

“What d’you mean, ‘get out of here’?”

“We haven’t come back to stay,” said Harry, rubbinghis scar, trying to soothe the pain. “There’s somethingimportant we need to do —”

“What is it?”

Page | 654 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I — I can’t tell you.”

There was a ripple of muttering at this: Neville’sbrows contracted.

“Why can’t you tell us? It’s something to do withfighting You-Know-Who, right?”

“Well, yeah —”

“Then we’ll help you.”

The other members of Dumbledore’s Army werenodding, some enthusiastically, others solemnly. Acouple of them rose from their chairs to demonstratetheir willingness for immediate action.

“You don’t understand.” Harry seemed to have saidthat a lot in the last few hours. “We — we can’t tellyou. We’ve got to do it — alone.”

“Why?” asked Neville.

“Because ...” In his desperation to start looking forthe missing Horcrux, or at least to have a privatediscussion with Ron and Hermione about where theymight commence their search, Harry found it difficultto gather his thoughts. His scar was still searing.“Dumbledore left the three of us a job,” he saidcarefully, “and we weren’t supposed to tell — I mean,he wanted us to do it, just the three of us.”

“We’re his army,” said Neville. “Dumbledore’s Army.We were all in it together, we’ve been keeping it goingwhile you three have been off on your own —”

“It hasn’t exactly been a picnic, mate,” said Ron.

Page | 655 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I never said it had, but I don’t see why you can’ttrust us. Everyone in this room’s been fighting andthey’ve been driven in here because the Carrows werehunting them down. Everyone in here’s proven they’reloyal to Dumbledore — loyal to you.”

“Look,” Harry began, without knowing what he wasgoing to say, but it did not matter: The tunnel doorhad just opened behind him.

“We got your message, Neville! Hello you three, Ithought you must be here!”

It was Luna and Dean. Seamus gave a great roar ofdelight and ran to hug his best friend.

“Hi, everyone!” said Luna happily. “Oh, it’s great to beback!”

“Luna,” said Harry distractedly, “what are you doinghere? How did you — ?”

“I sent for her,” said Neville, holding up the fakeGalleon. “I promised her and Ginny that if you turnedup I’d let them know. We all thought that if you cameback, it would mean revolution. That we were going tooverthrow Snape and the Carrows.”

“Of course that’s what it means,” said Luna brightly.“Isn’t it, Harry? We’re going to fight them out ofHogwarts?”

“Listen,” said Harry with a rising sense of panic, “I’msorry, but that’s not what we came back for. There’ssomething we’ve got to do, and then —”

“You’re going to leave us in this mess?” demandedMichael Corner.

Page | 656 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No!” said Ron. “What we’re doing will benefiteveryone in the end, it’s all about trying to get rid ofYou-Know-Who —”

“Then let us help!” said Neville angrily. “We want to bea part of it!”

There was another noise behind them, and Harryturned. His heart seemed to fail: Ginny was nowclimbing through the hole in the wall, closely followedby Fred, George, and Lee Jordan. Ginny gave Harry aradiant smile: He had forgotten, or had never fullyappreciated, how beautiful she was, but he had neverbeen less pleased to see her.

“Aberforth’s getting a bit annoyed,” said Fred, raisinghis hand in answer to several cries of greeting. “Hewants a kip, and his bar’s turned into a railwaystation.”

Harry’s mouth fell open. Right behind Lee Jordancame Harry’s old girlfriend, Cho Chang. She smiled athim.

“I got the message,” she said, holding up her own fakeGalleon, and she walked over to sit beside MichaelCorner.

“So what’s the plan, Harry?” said George.

“There isn’t one,” said Harry, still disoriented by thesudden appearance of all these people, unable to takeeverything in while his scar was still burning sofiercely.

“Just going to make it up as we go along, are we? Myfavorite kind,” said Fred.

Page | 657 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’ve got to stop this!” Harry told Neville. “What didyou call them all back for? This is insane —”

“We’re fighting, aren’t we?” said Dean, taking out hisfake Galleon. “The message said Harry was back, andwe were going to fight! I’ll have to get a wand, though

“You haven’t got a wand — ?” began Seamus.

Ron turned suddenly to Harry.

“Why can’t they help?”

“What?”

“They can help.” He dropped his voice and said, sothat none of them could hear but Hermione, whostood between them, “We don’t know where it is.We’ve got to find it fast. We don’t have to tell them it’sa Horcrux.”

Harry looked from Ron to Hermione, who murmured,“I think Ron’s right. We don’t even know what we’relooking for, we need them.” And when Harry lookedunconvinced, “You don’t have to do everything alone,Harry.”

Harry thought fast, his scar still prickling, his headthreatening to split again. Dumbledore had warnedhim against telling anyone but Ron and Hermioneabout the Horcruxes. Secrets and lies, that’s how wegrew up, and Albus ...he was a natural. ... Was heturning into Dumbledore, keeping his secretsclutched to his chest, afraid to trust? ButDumbledore had trusted Snape, and where had thatled? To murder at the top of the highest tower ...

Page | 658 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“All right,” he said quietly to the other two. “Okay,” hecalled to the room at large, and all noise ceased: Fredand George, who had been cracking jokes for thebenefit of those nearest, fell silent, and all of themlooked alert, excited.

“There’s something we need to find,” Harry said.“Something — something that’ll help us overthrowYou-Know-Who. It’s here at Hogwarts, but we don’tknow where. It might have belonged to Ravenclaw.

Has anyone heard of an object like that? Has anyoneever come across something with her eagle on it, forinstance?”

He looked hopefully toward the little group ofRavenclaws, to Padma, Michael, Terry, and Cho, butit was Luna who answered, perched on the arm ofGinny’s chair.

“Well, there’s her lost diadem. I told you about it,remember, Harry? The lost diadem of Ravenclaw?Daddy’s trying to duplicate it.”

“Yeah, but the lost diadem,” said Michael Corner,rolling his eyes, “is lost, Luna. That’s sort of thepoint.”

“When was it lost?” asked Harry.

“Centuries ago, they say,” said Cho, and Harry’s heartsank. “Professor Flitwick says the diadem vanishedwith Ravenclaw herself. People have looked, but,” sheappealed to her fellow Ravenclaws, “nobody’s everfound a trace of it, have they?”

They all shook their heads.

“Sorry, but what is a diadem?” asked Ron.

Page | 659 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It’s a kind of crown,” said Terry Boot. “Ravenclaw’swas supposed to have magical properties, enhancethe wisdom of the wearer.”

“Yes, Daddy’s Wrackspurt siphons —”

But Harry cut across Luna.

“And none of you have ever seen anything that lookslike it?”

They all shook their heads again. Harry looked at Ronand Hermione and his own disappointment wasmirrored back at him. An object that had been lostthis long, and apparently without trace, did not seemlike a good candidate for the Horcrux hidden in thecastle. ... Before he could formulate a new question,however, Cho spoke again.

“If you’d like to see what the diadem’s supposed tolook like, I could take you up to our common roomand show you, Harry? Ravenclaw’s wearing it in herstatue.”

Harry’s scar scorched again: For a moment the Roomof Requirement swam before him, and he saw insteadthe dark earth soaring beneath him and felt the greatsnake wrapped around his shoulders. Voldemort wasflying again, whether to the underground lake or here,to the castle, he did not know: Either way, there washardly any time left.

“He’s on the move,” he said quietly to Ron andHermione. He glanced at Cho and then back at them.“Listen, I know it’s not much of a lead, but I’m goingto go and look at this statue, at least find out whatthe diadem looks like. Wait for me here and keep, youknow — the other one — safe.”

Page | 660 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Cho had got to her feet, but Ginny said ratherfiercely, “No, Luna will take Harry, won’t you, Luna?”

“Oooh, yes, I’d like to,” said Luna happily, and Chosat down again, looking disappointed.

“How do we get out?” Harry asked Neville.

“Over here.”

He led Harry and Luna to a corner, where a smallcupboard opened onto a steep staircase.

“It comes out somewhere different every day, sothey’ve never been able to find it,” he said. “Onlytrouble is, we never know exactly where we’re going toend up when we go out. Be careful, Harry, they’realways patrolling the corridors at night.”

“No problem,” said Harry. “See you in a bit.”

He and Luna hurried up the staircase, which waslong, lit by torches, and turned corners in unexpectedplaces. At last they reached what appeared to be solidwall.

“Get under here,” Harry told Luna, pulling out theInvisibility Cloak and throwing it over both of them.

He gave the wall a little push.

It melted away at his touch and they slipped outside:Harry glanced back and saw that it had resealed itselfat once. They were standing in a dark corridor: Harrypulled Luna back into the shadows, fumbled in thepouch around his neck, and took out the Marauder’sMap. Holding it close to his nose he searched, andlocated his and Luna’s dots at last.

Page | 661 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We’re up on the fifth floor,” he whispered, watchingFilch moving away from them, a corridor ahead.“Come on, this way.”

They crept off.

Harry had prowled the castle at night many timesbefore, but never had his heart hammered this fast,never had so much depended on his safe passagethrough the place. Through squares of moonlightupon the floor, past suits of armor whose helmetscreaked at the sound of their soft footsteps, aroundcorners beyond which who knew what lurked, Harryand Luna walked, checking the Marauder’s Mapwhenever light permitted, twice pausing to allow aghost to pass without drawing attention tothemselves. He expected to encounter an obstacle atany moment; his worst fear was Peeves, and hestrained his ears with every step to hear the first,telltale signs of the poltergeist’s approach.

“This way, Harry,” breathed Luna, plucking his sleeveand pulling him toward a spiral staircase.

They climbed in tight, dizzying circles; Harry hadnever been up here before. At last they reached adoor. There was no handle and no keyhole: nothingbut a plain expanse of aged wood, and a bronzeknocker in the shape of an eagle.

Luna reached out a pale hand, which looked eeriefloating in midair, unconnected to arm or body. Sheknocked once, and in the silence it sounded to Harrylike a cannon blast. At once the beak of the eagleopened, but instead of a bird’s call, a soft, musicalvoice said, “Which came first, the phoenix or theflame?”

Page | 662 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Hmm ... What do you think, Harry?” said Luna,looking thoughtful.

“What? Isn’t there just a password?”

“Oh no, you’ve got to answer a question,” said Luna.

“What if you get it wrong?”

“Well, you have to wait for somebody who gets itright,” said Luna. “That way you learn, you see?”

“Yeah ... Trouble is, we can’t really afford to wait foranyone else, Luna.”

“No, I see what you mean,” said Luna seriously. “Wellthen, I think the answer is that a circle has nobeginning.”

“Well reasoned,” said the voice, and the door swungopen.

The deserted Ravenclaw common room was a wide,circular room, airier than any Harry had ever seen atHogwarts. Graceful arched windows punctuated thewalls, which were hung with blue-and-bronze silks:

By day, the Ravenclaws would have a spectacularview of the surrounding mountains. The ceiling wasdomed and painted with stars, which were echoed inthe midnight-blue carpet. There were tables, chairs,and bookcases, and in a niche opposite the doorstood a tall statue of white marble.

Harry recognized Rowena Ravenclaw from the bust hehad seen at Luna’s house. The statue stood beside adoor that led, he guessed, to dormitories above. Hestrode right up to the marble woman, and she seemedto look back at him with a quizzical half smile on herface, beautiful yet slightly intimidating. A delicate-P a g e | 663 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

looking circlet had been reproduced in marble on topof her head. It was not unlike the tiara Fleur hadworn at her wedding. There were tiny words etchedinto it. Harry stepped out from under the Cloak andclimbed up onto Ravenclaw’s plinth to read them.

“ ‘Wit beyond measure is man’s greatest treasure.’ ”

“Which makes you pretty skint, witless,” said acackling voice.

Harry whirled around, slipped off the plinth, andlanded on the floor. The sloping-shouldered figure ofAlecto Carrow was standing before him, and even asHarry raised his wand, she pressed a stubbyforefinger to the skull and snake branded on herforearm.

Page | 664 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling



THE SACKING OF SEVERUS SNAPE

The moment her finger touched the Mark, Harry’sscar burned savagely, the starry room vanished fromsight, and he was standing upon an outcrop of rockbeneath a cliff, and the sea was washing around himand there was triumph in his heart — They have theboy.

A loud bang brought Harry back to where he stood:Disoriented, he raised his wand, but the witch beforehim was already falling forward; she hit the ground sohard that the glass in the bookcases tinkled.

“I’ve never Stunned anyone except in our D.A.lessons,” said Luna, sounding mildly interested. “Thatwas noisier than I thought it would be.”

And sure enough, the ceiling had begun to tremble.Scurrying, echoing footsteps were growing louderfrom behind the door leading to the dormitories:Luna’s spell had woken Ravenclaws sleeping above.

“Luna, where are you? I need to get under the Cloak!”

Page | 665 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Luna’s feet appeared out of nowhere; he hurried toher side and she let the Cloak fall back over them asthe door opened and a stream of Ravenclaws, all intheir nightclothes, flooded into the common room.There were gasps and cries of surprise as they sawAlecto lying there unconscious. Slowly they shuffledin around her, a savage beast that might wake at anymoment and attack them. Then one brave little first-year darted up to her and prodded her backside withhis big toe.

“I think she might be dead!” he shouted with delight.

“Oh, look,” whispered Luna happily, as theRavenclaws crowded in around Alecto. “They’repleased!”

“Yeah ... great ...”

Harry closed his eyes, and as his scar throbbed hechose to sink again into Voldemort’s mind. ... He wasmoving along the tunnel into the first cave. ... He hadchosen to make sure of the locket before coming ...but that would not take him long. ...

There was a rap on the common room door and everyRavenclaw froze. From the other side, Harry heard thesoft, musical voice that issued from the eagle doorknocker: “Where do Vanished objects go?”

“I dunno, do I? Shut it!” snarled an uncouth voicethat Harry knew was that of the Carrow brother,Amycus. “Alecto? Alecto? Are you there? Have you gothim? Open the door!”

The Ravenclaws were whispering amongstthemselves, terrified. Then, without warning, therecame a series of loud bangs, as though somebody wasfiring a gun into the door.

Page | 666 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“ALECTO\ If he comes, and we haven’t got Potter —d’you want to go the same way as the Malfoys?ANSWER ME!” Amyous bellowed, shaking the door forall he was worth, but still it did not open. TheRavenclaws were all backing away, and some of themost frightened began scampering back up thestaircase to their beds. Then, just as Harry waswondering whether he ought not to blast open thedoor and Stun Amycus before the Death Eater coulddo anything else, a second, most familiar voice rangout beyond the door.

“May I ask what you are doing, Professor Carrow?”

“Trying — to get — through this damned — door!”shouted Amycus. “Go and get Flitwick! Get him toopen it, now!”

“But isn’t your sister in there?” asked ProfessorMcGonagall. “Didn’t Professor Flitwick let her inearlier this evening, at your urgent request? Perhapsshe could open the door for you? Then you needn’twake up half the castle.”

“She ain’t answering, you old besom! You open it!Garn! Do it, now!

“Certainly, if you wish it,” said Professor McGonagall,with awful coldness. There was a genteel tap of theknocker and the musical voice asked again,

“Where do Vanished objects go?”

“Into nonbeing, which is to say, everything,” repliedProfessor McGonagall.

“Nicely phrased,” replied the eagle door knocker, andthe door swung open.

Page | 667 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The few Ravenclaws who had remained behindsprinted for the stairs as Amycus burst over thethreshold, brandishing his wand. Hunched like hissister, he had a pallid, doughy face and tiny eyes,which fell at once on Alecto, sprawled motionless onthe floor. He let out a yell of fury and fear.

“What’ve they done, the little whelps?” he screamed.“I’ll Cruciate the lot of ’em till they tell me who did it— and what’s the Dark Lord going to say?” heshrieked, standing over his sister and smackinghimself on the forehead with his fist. “We haven’t gothim, and they’ve gorn and killed her!”

“She’s only Stunned,” said Professor McGonagallimpatiently, who had stooped down to examineAlecto. “She’ll be perfectly all right.”

“No she bludgering well won’t!” bellowed Amycus. “Notafter the Dark Lord gets hold of her! She’s gorn andsent for him, I felt me Mark burn, and he thinks we’vegot Potter!”

“ ‘Got Potter’?” said Professor McGonagall sharply.“What do you mean, ‘got Potter’?”

“He told us Potter might try and get inside RavenclawTower, and to send for him if we caught him!”

“Why would Harry Potter try to get inside RavenclawTower? Potter belongs in my House!”

Beneath the disbelief and anger, Harry heard a littlestrain of pride in her voice, and affection for MinervaMcGonagall gushed up inside him.

“We was told he might come in here!” said Carrow. “Idunno why, do I?”

Page | 668 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Professor McGonagall stood up and her beady eyesswept the room. Twice they passed right over theplace where Harry and Luna stood.

“We can push it off on the kids,” said Amycus, hispiglike face suddenly crafty. “Yeah, that’s what we’lldo. Well say Alecto was ambushed by the kids, themkids up there” — he looked up at the starry ceilingtoward the dormitories — “and we’ll say they forcedher to press her Mark, and that’s why he got a falsealarm. ... He can punish them. Couple of kids more orless, what’s the difference?”

“Only the difference between truth and lies, courageand cowardice,” said Professor McGonagall, who hadturned pale, “a difference, in short, which you andyour sister seem unable to appreciate. But let memake one thing very clear. You are not going to passoff your many ineptitudes on the students ofHogwarts. I shall not permit it.”

“Excuse me?”

Amycus moved forward until he was offensively closeto Professor McGonagall, his face within inches ofhers. She refused to back away, but looked down athim as if he were something disgusting she had foundstuck to a lavatory seat.

“It’s not a case of what you’ll permit, MinervaMcGonagall. Your time’s over. It’s us what’s in chargehere now, and you’ll back me up or you’ll pay theprice.”

And he spat in her face.

Harry pulled the Cloak off himself, raised his wand,and said, “You shouldn’t have done that.”

Page | 669 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

As Amycus spun around, Harry shouted, “Crucio\”

The Death Eater was lifted off his feet. He writhedthrough the air like a drowning man, thrashing andhowling in pain, and then, with a crunch and ashattering of glass, he smashed into the front of abookcase and crumpled, insensible, to the floor.

“I see what Bellatrix meant,” said Harry, the bloodthundering through his brain, “you need to reallymean it.”

“Potter!” whispered Professor McGonagall, clutchingher heart. “Potter — you’re here! What — ? How — ?”She struggled to pull herself together. “Potter, thatwas foolish!”

“He spat at you,” said Harry.

“Potter, I — that was very — very gallant of you — butdon’t you realize — ?”

“Yeah, I do,” Harry assured her. Somehow her panicsteadied him. “Professor McGonagall, Voldemort’s onthe way.”

“Oh, are we allowed to say the name now?” askedLuna with an air of interest, pulling off the InvisibilityCloak. This appearance of a second outlaw seemed tooverwhelm Professor McGonagall, who staggeredbackward and fell into a nearby chair, clutching atthe neck of her old tartan dressing gown.

“I don’t think it makes any difference what we callhim,” Harry told Luna. “He already knows where Iam.”

In a distant part of Harry’s brain, that part connectedto the angry, burning scar, he could see Voldemort

Page | 670 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

sailing fast over the dark lake in the ghostly greenboat. ... He had nearly reached the island where thestone basin stood. ...

“You must flee,” whispered Professor McGonagall.“Now, Potter, as quickly as you can!”

“I can’t,” said Harry. “There’s something I need to do.Professor, do you know where the diadem ofRavenclaw is?”

“The d-diadem of Ravenclaw? Of course not — hasn’tit been lost for centuries?” She sat up a littlestraighter. “Potter, it was madness, utter madness,for you to enter this castle —”

“I had to,” said Harry. “Professor, there’s somethinghidden here that I’m supposed to find, and it could bethe diadem — if I could just speak to ProfessorFlitwick —”

There was a sound of movement, of clinking glass:Amycus was coming round. Before Harry or Lunacould act, Professor McGonagall rose to her feet,pointed her wand at the groggy Death Eater, andsaid, “Imperio.”

Amycus got up, walked over to his sister, picked upher wand, then shuffled obediently to ProfessorMcGonagall and handed it over along with his own.Then he lay down on the floor beside Alecto. ProfessorMcGonagall waved her wand again, and a length ofshimmering silver rope appeared out of thin air andsnaked around the Carrows, binding them tightlytogether.

“Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, turning to facehim again with superb indifference to the Carrows’

Page | 671 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

predicament, “if He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named doesindeed know that you are here —”

As she said it, a wrath that was like physical painblazed through Harry, setting his scar on fire, and fora second he looked down upon a basin whose potionhad turned clear, and saw that no golden locket laysafe beneath the surface —

“Potter, are you all right?” said a voice, and Harrycame back: He was clutching Luna’s shoulder tosteady himself.

“Time’s running out, Voldemort’s getting nearer.Professor, I’m acting on Dumbledore’s orders, I mustfind what he wanted me to find! But we’ve got to getthe students out while I’m searching the castle — it’sme Voldemort wants, but he won’t care about killing afew more or less, not now —” not now he knows I’mattacking Horcruxes, Harry finished the sentence inhis head.

“You’re acting on Dumbledore’s orders?” she repeatedwith a look of dawning wonder. Then she drew herselfup to her fullest height.

“We shall secure the school against He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named while you search for this — thisobject.”

“Is that possible?”

“I think so,” said Professor McGonagall dryly, “weteachers are rather good at magic, you know. I amsure we will be able to hold him off for a while if we allput our best efforts into it. Of course, something willhave to be done about Professor Snape —”

“Let me —”

Page | 672 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“— and if Hogwarts is about to enter a state of siege,with the Dark Lord at the gates, it would indeed beadvisable to take as many innocent people out of theway as possible. With the Floo Network underobservation, and Apparition impossible within thegrounds —”

“There’s a way,” said Harry quickly, and he explainedabout the passageway leading into the Hog’s Head.

“Potter, we’re talking about hundreds of students —”

“I know, Professor, but if Voldemort and the DeathEaters are concentrating on the school boundariesthey won’t be interested in anyone who’sDisapparating out of the Hog’s Head.”

“There’s something in that,” she agreed. She pointedher wand at the Carrows, and a silver net fell upontheir bound bodies, tied itself around them, andhoisted them into the air, where they dangled beneaththe blue-and-gold ceiling like two large, ugly seacreatures. “Come. We must alert the other Heads ofHouse. You’d better put that Cloak back on.”

She marched toward the door, and as she did so sheraised her wand. From the tip burst three silver catswith spectacle markings around their eyes. ThePatronuses ran sleekly ahead, filling the spiralstaircase with silvery light, as Professor McGonagall,Harry, and Luna hurried back down.

Along the corridors they raced, and one by one thePatronuses left them; Professor McGonagall’s tartandressing gown rustled over the floor, and Harry andLuna jogged behind her under the Cloak.

They had descended two more floors when anotherset of quiet footsteps joined theirs. Harry, whose scar

Page | 673 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

was still prickling, heard them first: He felt in thepouch around his neck for the Marauder’s Map, butbefore he could take it out, McGonagall too seemed tobecome aware of their company. She halted, raisedher wand ready to duel, and said, “Who’s there?”

“It is I,” said a low voice.

From behind a suit of armor stepped Severus Snape.

Hatred boiled up in Harry at the sight of him: He hadforgotten the details of Snape’s appearance in themagnitude of his crimes, forgotten how his greasyblack hair hung in curtains around his thin face, howhis black eyes had a dead, cold look. He was notwearing nightclothes, but was dressed in his usualblack cloak, and he too was holding his wand readyfor a fight.

“Where are the Carrows?” he asked quietly.

“Wherever you told them to be, I expect, Severus,”said Professor McGonagall.

Snape stepped nearer, and his eyes flitted overProfessor McGonagall into the air around her, as if heknew that Harry was there. Harry held his wand uptoo, ready to attack.

“I was under the impression,” said Snape, “that Alectohad apprehended an intruder.”

“Really?” said Professor McGonagall. “And what gaveyou that impression?”

Snape made a slight flexing movement of his left arm,where the Dark Mark was branded into his skin.

Page | 674 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, but naturally,” said Professor McGonagall. “YouDeath Eaters have your own private means ofcommunication, I forgot.”

Snape pretended not to have heard her. His eyes werestill probing the air all about her, and he was movinggradually closer, with an air of hardly noticing whathe was doing.

“I did not know that it was your night to patrol thecorridors, Minerva.”

“You have some objection?”

“I wonder what could have brought you out of yourbed at this late hour?”

“I thought I heard a disturbance,” said ProfessorMcGonagall.

“Really? But all seems calm.”

Snape looked into her eyes.

“Have you seen Harry Potter, Minerva? Because if youhave, I must insist —”

Professor McGonagall moved faster than Harry couldhave believed: Her wand slashed through the air andfor a split second Harry thought that Snape mustcrumple, unconscious, but the swiftness of his ShieldCharm was such that McGonagall was thrown offbalance. She brandished her wand at a torch on thewall and it flew out of its bracket: Harry, about tocurse Snape, was forced to pull Luna out of the wayof the descending flames, which became a ring of firethat filled the corridor and flew like a lasso at Snape

Page | 675 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Then it was no longer fire, but a great black serpentthat McGonagall blasted to smoke, which re-formedand solidified in seconds to become a swarm ofpursuing daggers: Snape avoided them only byforcing the suit of armor in front of him, and withechoing clangs the daggers sank, one after another,into its breast —

“Minerva!” said a squeaky voice, and looking behindhim, still shielding Luna from flying spells, Harry sawProfessors Flitwick and Sprout sprinting up thecorridor toward them in their nightclothes, with theenormous Professor Slughorn panting along at therear.

“No!” squealed Flitwick, raising his wand. “You’ll dono more murder at Hogwarts!”

Flitwick’s spell hit the suit of armor behind whichSnape had taken shelter: With a clatter it came to life.Snape struggled free of the crushing arms and sent itflying back toward his attackers: Harry and Luna hadto dive sideways to avoid it as it smashed into the walland shattered. When Harry looked up again, Snapewas in full flight, McGonagall, Flitwick, and Sprout allthundering after him: He hurtled through a classroomdoor and, moments later, he heard McGonagall cry,“Coward! COWARD!”

“What’s happened, what’s happened?” asked Luna.

Harry dragged her to her feet and they raced alongthe corridor, trailing the Invisibility Cloak behindthem, into the deserted classroom where ProfessorsMcGonagall, Flitwick, and Sprout were standing at asmashed window.

“He jumped,” said Professor McGonagall as Harry andLuna ran into the room.

Page | 676 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You mean he’s dead?” Harry sprinted to the window,ignoring Flitwick’s and Sprout’s yells of shock at hissudden appearance.

“No, he’s not dead,” said McGonagall bitterly. “UnlikeDumbledore, he was still carrying a wand ... and heseems to have learned a few tricks from his master.”

With a tingle of horror, Harry saw in the distance ahuge, batlike shape flying through the darknesstoward the perimeter wall.

There were heavy footfalls behind them, and a greatdeal of puffing: Slughorn had just caught up.

“Harry!” he panted, massaging his immense chestbeneath his emerald-green silk pajamas. “My dearboy ... what a surprise ... Minerva, do please explain.... Severus ... what ... ?”

“Our headmaster is taking a short break,” saidProfessor McGonagall, pointing at the Snape-shapedhole in the window.

“Professor!” Harry shouted, his hands at his forehead.He could see the Inferi-filled lake sliding beneath him,and he felt the ghostly green boat bump into theunderground shore, and Voldemort leapt from it withmurder in his heart —

“Professor, we’ve got to barricade the school, he’scoming now!”

“Very well. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is coming,”she told the other teachers. Sprout and Flitwickgasped; Slughorn let out a low groan. “Potter haswork to do in the castle on Dumbledore’s orders. Weneed to put in place every protection of which we arecapable while Potter does what he needs to do.”

Page | 677 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You realize, of course, that nothing we do will be ableto keep out You-Know-Who indefinitely?” squeakedFlitwick.

“But we can hold him up,” said Professor Sprout.

“Thank you, Pomona,” said Professor McGonagall,and between the two witches there passed a look ofgrim understanding. “I suggest we establish basicprotection around the place, then gather our studentsand meet in the Great Hall. Most must be evacuated,though if any of those who are over age wish to stayand fight, I think they ought to be given the chance.”

“Agreed,” said Professor Sprout, already hurryingtoward the door. “I shall meet you in the Great Hall intwenty minutes with my House.”

And as she jogged out of sight, they could hear hermuttering, “Tentacula. Devil’s Snare. And Snargaluffpods ... yes, I’d like to see the Death Eaters fightingthose.”

“I can act from here,” said Flitwick, and although hecould barely see out of it, he pointed his wandthrough the smashed window and started mutteringincantations of great complexity. Harry heard a weirdrushing noise, as though Flitwick had unleashed thepower of the wind into the grounds.

“Professor,” Harry said, approaching the little Charmsmaster, “Professor, I’m sorry to interrupt, but this isimportant. Have you got any idea where the diadem ofRavenclaw is?”

“— Protego Horribilis — the diadem of Ravenclaw?”squeaked Flitwick. “A little extra wisdom never goesamiss, Potter, but I hardly think it would be muchuse in this situation!”

Page | 678 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I only meant — do you know where it is? Have youever seen it?”

“Seen it? Nobody has seen it in living memory! Longsince lost, boy!”

Harry felt a mixture of desperate disappointment andpanic. What, then, was the Horcrux?

“We shall meet you and your Ravenclaws in the GreatHall, Filius!” said Professor McGonagall, beckoning toHarry and Luna to follow her.

They had just reached the door when Slughornrumbled into speech.

“My word,” he puffed, pale and sweaty, his walrusmustache aquiver. “What a to-do! I’m not at all surewhether this is wise, Minerva. He is bound to find away in, you know, and anyone who has tried to delayhim will be in most grievous peril —”

“I shall expect you and the Slytherins in the GreatHall in twenty minutes, also,” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “If you wish to leave with your students,we shall not stop you. But if any of you attempt tosabotage our resistance or take up arms against uswithin this castle, then, Horace, we duel to kill.”

“Minerva!” he said, aghast.

“The time has come for Slytherin House to decideupon its loyalties,” interrupted Professor McGonagall.“Go and wake your students, Horace.”

Harry did not stay to watch Slughorn splutter: He andLuna ran after Professor McGonagall, who had takenup a position in the middle of the corridor and raisedher wand.

Page | 679 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Piertotum— oh, for heaven’s sake, Filch, not now—”

The aged caretaker had just come hobbling into view,shouting, “Students out of bed! Students in thecorridors!”

“They’re supposed to be, you blithering idiot!” shoutedMcGonagall. “Now go and do something constructive!Find Peeves!”

“P-Peeves?” stammered Filch as though he had neverheard the name before.

“Yes, Peeves, you fool, Peevesl Haven’t you beencomplaining about him for a quarter of a century? Goand fetch him, at once!”

Filch evidently thought Professor McGonagall hadtaken leave of her senses, but hobbled away, hunch-shouldered, muttering under his breath.

“And now — Piertotum Locomotori” cried ProfessorMcGonagall.

And all along the corridor the statues and suits ofarmor jumped down from their plinths, and from theechoing crashes from the floors above and below,Harry knew that their fellows throughout the castlehad done the same.

“Hogwarts is threatened!” shouted ProfessorMcGonagall. “Man the boundaries, protect us, doyour duty to our school!”

Clattering and yelling, the horde of moving statuesstampeded past Harry: some of them smaller, otherslarger, than life. There were animals too, and theclanking suits of armor brandished swords andspiked balls on chains.

Page | 680 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Now, Potter,” said McGonagall, “you and MissLovegood had better return to your friends and bringthem to the Great Hall — I shall rouse the otherGryffindors.”

They parted at the top of the next staircase, Harryand Luna running back toward the concealedentrance to the Room of Requirement. As they ran,they met crowds of students, most wearing travelingcloaks over their pajamas, being shepherded down tothe Great Hall by teachers and prefects.

“That was Potter!”

“Harry Potted”

“It was him, I swear, I just saw him!”

But Harry did not look back, and at last they reachedthe entrance to the Room of Requirement. Harryleaned against the enchanted wall, which opened toadmit them, and he and Luna sped back down thesteep staircase.

“Wh — ?”

As the room came into view, Harry slipped down a fewstairs in shock. It was packed, far more crowded thanwhen he had last been in there. Kingsley and Lupinwere looking up at him, as were Oliver Wood, KatieBell, Angelina Johnson and Alicia Spinnet, Bill andFleur, and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley.

“Harry, what’s happening?” said Lupin, meeting himat the foot of the stairs.

“Voldemort’s on his way, they’re barricading theschool — Snape’s run for it — What are you doinghere? How did you know?”

Page | 681 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We sent messages to the rest of Dumbledore’s Army,”Fred explained. “You couldn’t expect everyone to missthe fun, Harry, and the D.A. let the Order of thePhoenix know, and it all kind of snowballed.”

“What first, Harry?” called George. “What’s going on?”

“They’re evacuating the younger kids and everyone’smeeting in the Great Hall to get organized,” Harrysaid. “We’re fighting.”

There was a great roar and a surge toward the foot ofthe stairs; he was pressed back against the wall asthey ran past him, the mingled members of the Orderof the Phoenix, Dumbledore’s Army, and Harry’s oldQuidditch team, all with their wands drawn, headingup into the main castle.

“Come on, Luna,” Dean called as he passed, holdingout his free hand; she took it and followed him backup the stairs.

The crowd was thinning: Only a little knot of peopleremained below in the Room of Requirement, andHarry joined them. Mrs. Weasley was struggling withGinny. Around them stood Lupin, Fred, George, Bill,and Fleur.

“You’re underage!” Mrs. Weasley shouted at herdaughter as Harry approached. “I won’t permit it! Theboys, yes, but you, you’ve got to go home!”

“I won’t!”

Ginny’s hair flew as she pulled her arm out of hermother’s grip.

“I’m in Dumbledore’s Army —”

Page | 682 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“A teenagers’ gang!”

“A teenagers’ gang that’s about to take him on, whichno one else has dared to do!” said Fred.

“She’s sixteen!” shouted Mrs. Weasley. “She’s not oldenough! What you two were thinking, bringing herwith you —”

Fred and George looked slightly ashamed ofthemselves.

“Mum’s right, Ginny,” said Bill gently. “You can’t dothis. Everyone underage will have to leave, it’s onlyright.”

“I can’t go home!” Ginny shouted, angry tearssparkling in her eyes. “My whole family’s here, I can’tstand waiting there alone and not knowing and —”

Her eyes met Harry’s for the first time. She looked athim beseechingly, but he shook his head and sheturned away bitterly.

“Fine,” she said, staring at the entrance to the tunnelback to the Hog’s Head. “I’ll say good-bye now, then,and—”

There was a scuffling and a great thump: Someoneelse had clambered out of the tunnel, overbalancedslightly, and fallen. He pulled himself up on thenearest chair, looked around through lopsided horn-rimmed glasses, and said, “Am I too late? Has itstarted? I only just found out, so I — I —”

Percy spluttered into silence. Evidently he had notexpected to run into most of his family. There was along moment of astonishment, broken by Fleurturning to Lupin and saying, in a wildly transparent

Page | 683 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

attempt to break the tension, “So — ’ow eez leetleTeddy?”

Lupin blinked at her, startled. The silence betweenthe Weasleys seemed to be solidifying, like ice.

“I — oh yes — he’s fine!” Lupin said loudly. “Yes,Tonks is with him — at her mother’s —”

Percy and the other Weasleys were still staring at oneanother, frozen.

“Here, I’ve got a picture!” Lupin shouted, pulling aphotograph from inside his jacket and showing it toFleur and Harry, who saw a tiny baby with a tuft ofbright turquoise hair, waving fat fists at the camera.

“I was a fool!” Percy roared, so loudly that Lupinnearly dropped his photograph. “I was an idiot, I wasa pompous prat, I was a — a —”

“Ministry-loving, family-disowning, power-hungrymoron,” said Fred.

Percy swallowed.

“Yes, I was!”

“Well, you can’t say fairer than that,” said Fred,holding out his hand to Percy.

Mrs. Weasley burst into tears. She ran forward,pushed Fred aside, and pulled Percy into a stranglinghug, while he patted her on the back, his eyes on hisfather.

“I’m sorry, Dad,” Percy said.

Page | 684 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Mr. Weasley blinked rather rapidly, then he toohurried to hug his son.

“What made you see sense, Perce?” inquired George.

“It’s been coming on for a while,” said Percy, moppinghis eyes under his glasses with a corner of histraveling cloak. “But I had to find a way out and it’snot so easy at the Ministry, they’re imprisoningtraitors all the time. I managed to make contact withAberforth and he tipped me off ten minutes ago thatHogwarts was going to make a fight of it, so here Iam.”

“Well, we do look to our prefects to take a lead attimes such as these,” said George in a good imitationof Percy’s most pompous manner. “Now let’s getupstairs and fight, or all the good Death Eaters’ll betaken.”

“So, you’re my sister-in-law now?” said Percy, shakinghands with Fleur as they hurried off toward thestaircase with Bill, Fred, and George.

“Ginny!” barked Mrs. Weasley.

Ginny had been attempting, under cover of thereconciliation, to sneak upstairs too.

“Molly, how about this,” said Lupin. “Why doesn’tGinny stay here, then at least she’ll be on the sceneand know what’s going on, but she won’t be in themiddle of the fighting?”

“That’s a good idea,” said Mr. Weasley firmly. “Ginny,you stay in this room, you hear me?”

Page | 685 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ginny did not seem to like the idea much, but underher father’s unusually stern gaze, she nodded. Mr.and Mrs. Weasley and Lupin headed off for the stairsas well.

“Where’s Ron?” asked Harry. “Where’s Hermione?”

“They must have gone up to the Great Hall already,”Mr. Weasley called over his shoulder.

“I didn’t see them pass me,” said Harry.

“They said something about a bathroom,” said Ginny,“not long after you left.”

“A bathroom?”

Harry strode across the room to an open door leadingoff the Room of Requirement and checked thebathroom beyond. It was empty.

“You’re sure they said bath — ?”

But then his scar seared and the Room ofRequirement vanished: He was looking through thehigh wrought-iron gates with winged boars on pillarsat either side, looking through the dark groundstoward the castle, which was ablaze with lights.Nagini lay draped over his shoulders. He waspossessed of that cold, cruel sense of purpose thatpreceded murder.

Page | 686 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE BATTLE OF HOGWARTS

The enchanted ceiling of the Great Hall was dark andscattered with stars, and below it the four long Housetables were lined with disheveled students, some intraveling cloaks, others in dressing gowns. Here andthere shone the pearly white figures of the schoolghosts. Every eye, living and dead, was fixed uponProfessor McGonagall, who was speaking from theraised platform at the top of the Hall. Behind herstood the remaining teachers, including the palominocentaur, Firenze, and the members of the Order of thePhoenix who had arrived to fight.

"... evacuation will be overseen by Mr. Filch andMadam Pomfrey. Prefects, when I give the word, youwill organize your House and take your charges, in anorderly fashion, to the evacuation point.”

Many of the students looked petrified. However, asHarry skirted the walls, scanning the Gryffindor tablefor Ron and Hermione, Ernie Macmillan stood up atthe Hufflepuff table and shouted, “And what if wewant to stay and fight?”

Page | 687 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There was a smattering of applause.

“If you are of age, you may stay,” said ProfessorMcGonagall.

“What about our things?” called a girl at theRavenclaw table. “Our trunks, our owls?”

“We have no time to collect possessions,” saidProfessor McGonagall. “The important thing is to getyou out of here safely.”

“Where’s Professor Snape?” shouted a girl from theSlytherin table.

“He has, to use the common phrase, done a bunk,”replied Professor McGonagall, and a great cheererupted from the Gryffindors, Hufflepuffs, andRavenclaws.

Harry moved up the Hall alongside the Gryffindortable, still looking for Ron and Hermione. As hepassed, faces turned in his direction, and a great dealof whispering broke out in his wake.

“We have already placed protection around thecastle,” Professor McGonagall was saying, “but it isunlikely to hold for very long unless we reinforce it. Imust ask you, therefore, to move quickly and calmly,and do as your prefects —”

But her final words were drowned as a different voiceechoed throughout the Hall. It was high, cold, andclear: There was no telling from where it came; itseemed to issue from the walls themselves. Like themonster it had once commanded, it might have laindormant there for centuries.

Page | 688 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I know that you are preparing to fight.” There werescreams amongst the students, some of whomclutched each other, looking around in terror for thesource of the sound. “Your efforts are futile. Youcannot fight me. I do not want to kill you. I have greatrespect for the teachers of Hogwarts. I do not want tospill magical blood.”

There was silence in the Hall now, the kind of silencethat presses against the eardrums, that seems toohuge to be contained by walls.

“Give me Harry Potter,” said Voldemort’s voice, “andnone shall be harmed. Give me Harry Potter, and Ishall leave the school untouched. Give me HarryPotter, and you will be rewarded.

“You have until midnight.”

The silence swallowed them all again. Every headturned, every eye in the place seemed to have foundHarry, to hold him frozen in the glare of thousands ofinvisible beams. Then a figure rose from the Slytherintable and he recognized Pansy Parkinson as sheraised a shaking arm and screamed, “But he’s there!Potter’s there\ Someone grab him!”

Before Harry could speak, there was a massivemovement. The Gryffindors in front of him had risenand stood facing, not Harry, but the Slytherins. Thenthe Hufflepuffs stood, and almost at the samemoment, the Ravenclaws, all of them with their backsto Harry, all of them looking toward Pansy instead,and Harry, awestruck and overwhelmed, saw wandsemerging everywhere, pulled from beneath cloaks andfrom under sleeves.

“Thank you, Miss Parkinson,” said ProfessorMcGonagall in a clipped voice. “You will leave the Hall

Page | 689 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

first with Mr. Filch. If the rest of your House couldfollow.”

Harry heard the grinding of benches and then thesound of the Slytherins trooping out on the other sideof the Hall.

“Ravenclaws, follow on!” cried Professor McGonagall.

Slowly the four tables emptied. The Slytherin tablewas completely deserted, but a number of olderRavenclaws remained seated while their fellows filedout; even more Hufflepuffs stayed behind, and half ofGryffindor remained in their seats, necessitatingProfessor McGonagall’s descent from the teachers’platform to chivvy the underage on their way.

“Absolutely not, Creevey, go! And you, Peakes!”

Harry hurried over to the Weasleys, all sittingtogether at the Gryffindor table.

“Where are Ron and Hermione?”

“Haven’t you found — ?” began Mr. Weasley, lookingworried.

But he broke off as Kingsley had stepped forward onthe raised platform to address those who hadremained behind.

“We’ve only got half an hour until midnight, so weneed to act fast! A battle plan has been agreedbetween the teachers of Hogwarts and the Order ofthe Phoenix. Professors Flitwick, Sprout, andMcGonagall are going to take groups of fighters up tothe three highest towers — Ravenclaw, Astronomy,and Gryffindor — where they’ll have a good overview,excellent positions from which to work spells.

Page | 690 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Meanwhile Remus” — he indicated Lupin — “Arthur”— he pointed toward Mr. Weasley, sitting at theGryffindor table — “and I will take groups into thegrounds. We’ll need somebody to organize defense ofthe entrances of the passageways into the school —”

“Sounds like a job for us,” called Fred, indicatinghimself and George, and Kingsley nodded hisapproval.

“All right, leaders up here and we’ll divide up thetroops!”

“Potter,” said Professor McGonagall, hurrying up tohim, as students flooded the platform, jostling forposition, receiving instructions, “Aren’t you supposedto be looking for something?”

“What? Oh,” said Harry, “oh yeah!”

He had almost forgotten about the Horcrux, almostforgotten that the battle was being fought so that hecould search for it: The inexplicable absence of Ronand Hermione had momentarily driven every otherthought from his mind.

“Then go, Potter, go!”

“Right — yeah —”

He sensed eyes following him as he ran out of theGreat Hall again, into the entrance hall still crowdedwith evacuating students. He allowed himself to beswept up the marble staircase with them, but at thetop he hurried off along a deserted corridor. Fear andpanic were clouding his thought processes. He triedto calm himself, to concentrate on finding theHorcrux, but his thoughts buzzed as frantically andfruitlessly as wasps trapped beneath a glass. WithoutPage | 691 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ron and Hermione to help him he could not seem tomarshal his ideas. He slowed down, coming to a halthalfway along an empty passage, where he sat downupon the plinth of a departed statue and pulled theMarauder’s Map out of the pouch around his neck.

He could not see Ron’s or Hermione’s namesanywhere on it, though the density of the crowd ofdots now making its way to the Room of Requirementmight, he thought, be concealing them. He put themap away, pressed his hands over his face, andclosed his eyes, trying to concentrate. ...

Voldemort thought I’d go to Ravenclaw Tower.

There it was: a solid fact, the place to start. Voldemorthad stationed Alecto Carrow in the Ravenclawcommon room, and there could only be oneexplanation: Voldemort feared that Harry alreadyknew his Horcrux was connected to that House.

But the only object anyone seemed to associate withRavenclaw was the lost diadem ... and how could theHorcrux be the diadem? How was it possible thatVoldemort, the Slytherin, had found the diadem thathad eluded generations of Ravenclaws? Who couldhave told him where to look, when nobody had seenthe diadem in living memory?

In living memory ...

Beneath his fingers, Harry’s eyes flew open again. Heleapt up from the plinth and tore back the way he hadcome, now in pursuit of his one last hope. The soundof hundreds of people marching toward the Room ofRequirement grew louder and louder as he returnedto the marble stairs. Prefects were shoutinginstructions, trying to keep track of the students intheir own Houses; there was much pushing andshoving; Harry saw Zacharias Smith bowling overPage | 692 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

first-years to get to the front of the queue; here andthere younger students were in tears, while older onescalled desperately for friends or siblings. ...

Harry caught sight of a pearly white figure driftingacross the entrance hall below and yelled as loudly ashe could over the clamor.

“Nick! NICK! I need to talk to you!”

He forced his way back through the tide of students,finally reaching the bottom of the stairs, where NearlyHeadless Nick, ghost of Gryffindor Tower, stoodwaiting for him.

“Harry! My dear boy!”

Nick made to grasp Harry’s hands with both of hisown: Harry’s felt as though they had been thrust intoicy water.

“Nick, you’ve got to help me. Who’s the ghost ofRavenclaw Tower?”

Nearly Headless Nick looked surprised and a littleoffended.

“The Gray Lady, of course; but if it is ghostly servicesyou require — ?”

“It’s got to be her — d’you know where she is?”

“Let’s see. ...”

Nick’s head wobbled a little on his ruff as he turnedhither and thither, peering over the heads of theswarming students.

Page | 693 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“That’s her over there, Harry, the young woman withthe long hair.”

Harry looked in the direction of Nick’s transparent,pointing finger and saw a tall ghost who caught sightof Harry looking at her, raised her eyebrows, anddrifted away through a solid wall.

Harry ran after her. Once through the door of thecorridor into which she had disappeared, he saw herat the very end of the passage, still gliding smoothlyaway from him.

“Hey — wait — come back!”

She consented to pause, floating a few inches fromthe ground. Harry supposed that she was beautiful,with her waist-length hair and floor-length cloak, butshe also looked haughty and proud. Close to, herecognized her as a ghost he had passed several timesin the corridor, but to whom he had never spoken.

“You’re the Gray Lady?”

She nodded but did not speak.

“The ghost of Ravenclaw Tower?”

“That is correct.”

Her tone was not encouraging.

“Please: I need some help. I need to know anythingyou can tell me about the lost diadem.”

A cold smile curved her lips.

“I am afraid,” she said, turning to leave, “that I cannothelp you.”

Page | 694 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“WAIT!”

He had not meant to shout, but anger and panic werethreatening to overwhelm him. He glanced at hiswatch as she hovered in front of him: It was a quarterto midnight.

“This is urgent,” he said fiercely. “If that diadem’s atHogwarts, I’ve got to find it, fast.”

“You are hardly the first student to covet the diadem,”she said disdainfully. “Generations of students havebadgered me —”

“This isn’t about trying to get better marks!” Harryshouted at her. “It’s about Voldemort — defeatingVoldemort — or aren’t you interested in that?”

She could not blush, but her transparent cheeksbecame more opaque, and her voice was heated asshe replied, “Of course I — how dare you suggest — ?”

“Well, help me, then!”

Her composure was slipping.

“It — it is not a question of —” she stammered. “Mymother’s diadem —”

“Your mother’s?”

She looked angry with herself.

“When I lived,” she said stiffly, “I was HelenaRavenclaw.”

“You’re her daughter? But then, you must know whathappened to it!”

Page | 695 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“While the diadem bestows wisdom,” she said with anobvious effort to pull herself together, “I doubt that itwould greatly increase your chances of defeating thewizard who calls himself Lord —”

“Haven’t I just told you, I’m not interested in wearingit!” Harry said fiercely. “There’s no time to explain —but if you care about Hogwarts, if you want to seeVoldemort finished, you’ve got to tell me anything youknow about the diadem!”

She remained quite still, floating in midair, staringdown at him, and a sense of hopelessness engulfedHarry. Of course, if she had known anything, shewould have told Flitwick or Dumbledore, who hadsurely asked her the same question. He had shakenhis head and made to turn away when she spoke in alow voice.

“I stole the diadem from my mother.”

“You — you did what?”

“I stole the diadem,” repeated Helena Ravenclaw in awhisper. “I sought to make myself cleverer, moreimportant than my mother. I ran away with it.”

He did not know how he had managed to gain herconfidence, and did not ask; he simply listened, hard,as she went on:

“My mother, they say, never admitted that the diademwas gone, but pretended that she had it still. Sheconcealed her loss, my dreadful betrayal, even fromthe other founders of Hogwarts.

“Then my mother fell ill — fatally ill. In spite of myperfidy, she was desperate to see me one more time.She sent a man who had long loved me, though I

Page | 696 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

spurned his advances, to find me. She knew that hewould not rest until he had done so.”

Harry waited. She drew a deep breath and threw backher head.

“He tracked me to the forest where I was hiding.

When I refused to return with him, he became violent.The Baron was always a hot-tempered man. Furiousat my refusal, jealous of my freedom, he stabbed me.”

“The Baron? You mean — ?”

“The Bloody Baron, yes,” said the Gray Lady, and shelifted aside the cloak she wore to reveal a single darkwound in her white chest. “When he saw what he haddone, he was overcome with remorse. He took theweapon that had claimed my life, and used it to killhimself. All these centuries later, he wears his chainsas an act of penitence ... as he should,” she addedbitterly.

“And ... and the diadem?”

“It remained where I had hidden it when I heard theBaron blundering through the forest toward me.Concealed inside a hollow tree.

“A hollow tree?” repeated Harry. “What tree? Wherewas this?”

“A forest in Albania. A lonely place I thought was farbeyond my mother’s reach.”

“Albania,” repeated Harry. Sense was emergingmiraculously from confusion, and now he understoodwhy she was telling him what she had deniedDumbledore and Flitwick. “You’ve already toldsomeone this story, haven’t you? Another student?”Page | 697 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

She closed her eyes and nodded.

“I had ... no idea. ... He was ... flattering. He seemedto ... to understand ... to sympathize. ...”

Yes, Harry thought, Tom Riddle would certainly haveunderstood Helena Ravenclaw’s desire to possessfabulous objects to which she had little right.

“Well, you weren’t the first person Riddle wormedthings out of,” Harry muttered. “He could becharming when he wanted. ...”

So Voldemort had managed to wheedle the location ofthe lost diadem out of the Gray Lady. He had traveledto that far-flung forest and retrieved the diadem fromits hiding place, perhaps as soon as he left Hogwarts,before he even started work at Borgin and Burkes.

And wouldn’t those secluded Albanian woods haveseemed an excellent refuge when, so much later,Voldemort had needed a place to lie low, undisturbed,for ten long years?

But the diadem, once it became his precious Horcrux,had not been left in that lowly tree. ... No, the diademhad been returned secretly to its true home, andVoldemort must have put it there —

“— the night he asked for a job!” said Harry, finishinghis thought.

“I beg your pardon?”

“He hid the diadem in the castle, the night he askedDumbledore to let him teach!” said Harry. Saying itout loud enabled him to make sense of it all. “Hemust’ve hidden the diadem on his way up to, or downfrom, Dumbledore’s office! But it was still worth tryingPage | 698 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

to get the job — then he might’ve got the chance tonick Gryffindor’s sword as well — thank you, thanks!”

Harry left her floating there, looking utterlybewildered. As he rounded the corner back into theentrance hall, he checked his watch. It was fiveminutes until midnight, and though he now knewwhat the last Horcrux was, he was no closer todiscovering where it was. ...

Generations of students had failed to find the diadem;that suggested that it was not in Ravenclaw Tower —but if not there, where? What hiding place had TomRiddle discovered inside Hogwarts Castle, that hebelieved would remain secret forever?

Lost in desperate speculation, Harry turned a corner,but he had taken only a few steps down the newcorridor when the window to his left broke open witha deafening, shattering crash. As he leapt aside, agigantic body flew in through the window and hit theopposite wall. Something large and furry detacheditself, whimpering, from the new arrival and flungitself at Harry.

“Hagrid!” Harry bellowed, fighting off Fang theboarhound’s attentions as the enormous beardedfigure clambered to his feet. “What the — ?”

“Harry, yer here! Yer here\”

Hagrid stooped down, bestowed upon Harry a cursoryand rib-cracking hug, then ran back to the shatteredwindow.

“Good boy, Grawpy!” he bellowed through the hole inthe window. “I’ll see yer in a moment, there’s a goodlad!”

Page | 699 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Beyond Hagrid, out in the dark night, Harry sawbursts of light in the distance and heard a weird,keening scream. He looked down at his watch: It wasmidnight. The battle had begun.

“Blimey, Harry,” panted Hagrid, “this is it, eh? Timeter fight?”

“Hagrid, where have you come from?”

“Heard You-Know-Who from up in our cave,” saidHagrid grimly. “Voice carried, didn’ it? Yeh got tillmidnight ter gimme Potter.’ Knew yeh mus’ be here,knew what mus’ be happenin’. Get down, Fang. So wecome ter join in, me an’ Grawpy an’ Fang. Smashedour way through the boundary by the forest, Grawpywas carryin’ us, Fang an’ me. Told him ter let medown at the castle, so he shoved me through thewindow, bless him. Not exac’ly what I meant, bu’ —where’s Ron an’ Hermione?”

“That,” said Harry, “is a really good question. Comeon.”

They hurried together along the corridor, Fanglolloping beside them. Harry could hear movementthrough the corridors all around: running footsteps,shouts; through the windows, he could see moreflashes of light in the dark grounds.

“Where’re we goin’?” puffed Hagrid, pounding along atHarry’s heels, making the floorboards quake.

“I dunno exactly,” said Harry, making anotherrandom turn, “but Ron and Hermione must bearound here somewhere. ...”

The first casualties of the battle were already strewnacross the passage ahead: The two stone gargoyles

Page | 700 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

that usually guarded the entrance to the staffroomhad been smashed apart by a jinx that had sailedthrough another broken window. Their remainsstirred feebly on the floor, and as Harry leapt over oneof their disembodied heads, it moaned faintly, “Oh,don’t mind me ... I’ll just lie here and crumble. ...”

Its ugly stone face made Harry think suddenly of themarble bust of Rowena Ravenclaw at Xenophilius’shouse, wearing that mad headdress — and then ofthe statue in Ravenclaw Tower, with the stone diademupon her white curls. ...

And as he reached the end of the passage, thememory of a third stone effigy came back to him: thatof an ugly old warlock, onto whose head Harryhimself had placed a wig and a battered old tiara. Theshock shot through Harry with the heat of firewhisky,and he nearly stumbled.

He knew, at last, where the Horcrux sat waiting forhim. ...

Tom Riddle, who confided in no one and operatedalone, might have been arrogant enough to assumethat he, and only he, had penetrated the deepestmysteries of Hogwarts Castle. Of course, Dumbledoreand Flitwick, those model pupils, had never set foot inthat particular place, but he, Harry, had strayed offthe beaten track in his time at school — here at lastwas a secret he and Voldemort knew, thatDumbledore had never discovered —

He was roused by Professor Sprout, who wasthundering past followed by Neville and half a dozenothers, all of them wearing earmuffs and carryingwhat appeared to be large potted plants.

Page | 701 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Mandrakes!” Neville bellowed at Harry over hisshoulder as he ran. “Going to lob them over the walls— they won’t like this!”

Harry knew now where to go: He sped off, with Hagridand Fang galloping behind him. They passed portraitafter portrait, and the painted figures raced alongsidethem, wizards and witches in ruffs and breeches, inarmor and cloaks, cramming themselves into eachothers’ canvases, screaming news from other parts ofthe castle. As they reached the end of this corridor,the whole castle shook, and Harry knew, as a giganticvase blew off its plinth with explosive force, that itwas in the grip of enchantments more sinister thanthose of the teachers and the Order.

“It’s all righ’, Fang — it’s all righ’!” yelled Hagrid, butthe great boarhound had taken flight as slivers ofchina flew like shrapnel through the air, and Hagridpounded off after the terrified dog, leaving Harryalone.

He forged on through the trembling passages, hiswand at the ready, and for the length of one corridorthe little painted knight, Sir Cadogan, rushed frompainting to painting beside him, clanking along in hisarmor, screaming encouragement, his fat little ponycantering behind him.

“Braggarts and rogues, dogs and scoundrels, drivethem out, Harry Potter, see them off!”

Harry hurtled around a corner and found Fred and asmall knot of students, including Lee Jordan andHannah Abbott, standing beside another emptyplinth, whose statue had concealed a secretpassageway. Their wands were drawn and they werelistening at the concealed hole.

Page | 702 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Nice night for it!” Fred shouted as the castle quakedagain, and Harry sprinted by, elated and terrified inequal measure. Along yet another corridor he dashed,and then there were owls everywhere, and Mrs. Norriswas hissing and trying to bat them with her paws, nodoubt to return them to their proper place. ...

“Potter!”

Aberforth Dumbledore stood blocking the corridorahead, his wand held ready.

“I’ve had hundreds of kids thundering through mypub, Potter!”

“I know, we’re evacuating,” Harry said, “Voldemort’s

“— attacking because they haven’t handed you over,yeah,” said Aberforth, “I’m not deaf, the whole ofHogsmeade heard him. And it never occurred to anyof you to keep a few Slytherins hostage? There arekids of Death Eaters you’ve just sent to safety.Wouldn’t it have been a bit smarter to keep ’em here?”

“It wouldn’t stop Voldemort,” said Harry, “and yourbrother would never have done it.”

Aberforth grunted and tore away in the oppositedirection.

Your brother would never have done it. ... Well, it wasthe truth, Harry thought as he ran on again;Dumbledore, who had defended Snape for so long,would never have held students ransom. ...

And then he skidded around a final corner and with ayell of mingled relief and fury he saw them: Ron andHermione, both with their arms full of large, curved,

Page | 703 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

dirty yellow objects, Ron with a broomstick under hisarm.

“Where the hell have you been?” Harry shouted.

“Chamber of Secrets,” said Ron.

“Chamber — what?” said Harry, coming to anunsteady halt before them.

“It was Ron, all Ron’s idea!” said Hermionebreathlessly. “Wasn’t it absolutely brilliant? There wewere, after you left, and I said to Ron, even if we findthe other one, how are we going to get rid of it? Westill hadn’t got rid of the cup! And then he thought ofit! The basilisk!”

“What the — ?”

“Something to get rid of Horcruxes,” said Ron simply.

Harry’s eyes dropped to the objects clutched in Ronand Hermione’s arms: great curved fangs, torn, henow realized, from the skull of a dead basilisk.

“But how did you get in there?” he asked, staringfrom the fangs to Ron. “You need to speakParseltongue!”

“He did!” whispered Hermione. “Show him, Ron!”

Ron made a horrible strangled hissing noise.

“It’s what you did to open the locket,” he told Harryapologetically. “I had to have a few goes to get it right,but,” he shrugged modestly, “we got there in the end.”

“He was amazing.” said Hermione. “Amazing!”

Page | 704 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“So ...” Harry was struggling to keep up. “So ...”

“So we’re another Horcrux down,” said Ron, and fromunder his jacket he pulled the mangled remains ofHufflepuff’s cup. “Hermione stabbed it. Thought sheshould. She hasn’t had the pleasure yet.”

“Genius!” yelled Harry.

“It was nothing,” said Ron, though he lookeddelighted with himself. “So what’s new with you?”

As he said it, there was an explosion from overhead:All three of them looked up as dust fell from theceiling and they heard a distant scream.

“I know what the diadem looks like, and I know whereit is,” said Harry, talking fast. “He hid it exactly whereI hid my old Potions book, where everyone’s beenhiding stuff for centuries. He thought he was the onlyone to find it. Come on.”

As the walls trembled again, he led the other two backthrough the concealed entrance and down thestaircase into the Room of Requirement. It was emptyexcept for three women: Ginny, Tonks, and an elderlywitch wearing a moth-eaten hat, whom Harryrecognized immediately as Neville’s grandmother.

“Ah, Potter,” she said crisply as if she had beenwaiting for him. “You can tell us what’s going on.”

“Is everyone okay?” said Ginny and Tonks together.

“ ’S far as we know,” said Harry. “Are there still peoplein the passage to the Hog’s Head?”

He knew that the room would not be able totransform while there were still users inside it.

Page | 705 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I was the last to come through,” said Mrs.Longbottom. “I sealed it, I think it unwise to leave itopen now Aberforth has left his pub. Have you seenmy grandson?”

“He’s fighting,” said Harry.

“Naturally,” said the old lady proudly. “Excuse me, Imust go and assist him.”

With surprising speed she trotted off toward the stonesteps.

Harry looked at Tonks.

“I thought you were supposed to be with Teddy atyour mother’s?”

“I couldn’t stand not knowing —” Tonks lookedanguished. “She’ll look after him — have you seenRemus?”

“He was planning to lead a group of fighters into thegrounds —”

Without another word, Tonks sped off.

“Ginny,” said Harry, “I’m sorry, but we need you toleave too. Just for a bit. Then you can come back in.”

Ginny looked simply delighted to leave her sanctuary.

“And then you can come back in!” he shouted afterher as she ran up the steps after Tonks. “ You’ve got tocome back ini”

“Hang on a moment!” said Ron sharply. “We’veforgotten someone!”

Page | 706 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Who?” asked Hermione.

“The house-elves, they’ll all be down in the kitchen,won’t they?”

“You mean we ought to get them fighting?” askedHarry.

“No,” said Ron seriously, “I mean we should tell themto get out. We don’t want any more Dobbies, do we?We can’t order them to die for us —”

There was a clatter as the basilisk fangs cascaded outof Hermione’s arms. Running at Ron, she flung themaround his neck and kissed him full on the mouth.Ron threw away the fangs and broomstick he washolding and responded with such enthusiasm that helifted Hermione off her feet.

“Is this the moment?” Harry asked weakly, and whennothing happened except that Ron and Hermionegripped each other still more firmly and swayed onthe spot, he raised his voice. “01! There’s a war goingon here!”

Ron and Hermione broke apart, their arms stillaround each other.

“I know, mate,” said Ron, who looked as though hehad recently been hit on the back of the head with aBludger, “so it’s now or never, isn’t it?”

“Never mind that, what about the Horcrux?” Harryshouted. “D’you think you could just —just hold it inuntil we’ve got the diadem?”

“Yeah — right — sorry —” said Ron, and he andHermione set about gathering up fangs, both pink inthe face.

Page | 707 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

It was clear, as the three of them stepped back intothe corridor upstairs, that in the minutes that theyhad spent in the Room of Requirement the situationwithin the castle had deteriorated severely: The wallsand ceiling were shaking worse than ever; dust filledthe air, and through the nearest window, Harry sawbursts of green and red light so close to the foot of thecastle that he knew the Death Eaters must be verynear to entering the place. Looking down, Harry sawGrawp the giant meandering past, swinging whatlooked like a stone gargoyle torn from the roof androaring his displeasure.

“Let’s hope he steps on some of them!” said Ron asmore screams echoed from close by.

“As long as it’s not any of our lot!” said a voice: Harryturned and saw Ginny and Tonks, both with theirwands drawn at the next window, which was missingseveral panes. Even as he watched, Ginny sent a well-aimed jinx into a crowd of fighters below.

“Good girl!” roared a figure running through the dusttoward them, and Harry saw Aberforth again, his grayhair flying as he led a small group of students past.“They look like they might be breaching the northbattlements, they’ve brought giants of their own!”

“Have you seen Remus?” Tonks called after him.

“He was dueling Dolohov,” shouted Aberforth,

“haven’t seen him since!

“Tonks,” said Ginny, “Tonks, I’m sure he’s okay —”But Tonks had run off into the dust after Aberforth.Ginny turned, helpless, to Harry, Ron, and Hermione.

Page | 708 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“They’ll be all right,” said Harry, though he knew theywere empty words. “Ginny, we’ll be back in a moment,just keep out of the way, keep safe — come on!” hesaid to Ron and Hermione, and they ran back to thestretch of wall beyond which the Room ofRequirement was waiting to do the bidding of the nextentrant.

I need the place where everything is hidden, Harrybegged of it inside his head, and the door materializedon their third run past.

The furor of the battle died the moment they crossedthe threshold and closed the door behind them: Allwas silent. They were in a place the size of a cathedralwith the appearance of a city, its towering walls builtof objects hidden by thousands of long-gone students.

“And he never realized anyone could get in?” saidRon, his voice echoing in the silence.

“He thought he was the only one,” said Harry. “Toobad for him I’ve had to hide stuff in my time ... thisway,” he added, “I think it’s down here. ...”

He passed the stuffed troll and the Vanishing CabinetDraco Malfoy had mended last year with suchdisastrous consequences, then hesitated, looking upand down aisles of junk; he could not rememberwhere to go next. ...

“Accio Diadem).” cried Hermione in desperation, butnothing flew through the air toward them. It seemedthat, like the vault at Gringotts, the room would notyield its hidden objects that easily.

“Let’s split up,” Harry told the other two. “Look for astone bust of an old man wearing a wig and a tiara!

Page | 709 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

It’s standing on a cupboard and it’s definitelysomewhere near here. ...”

They sped off up adjacent aisles; Harry could hear theothers’ footsteps echoing through the towering piles ofjunk, of bottles, hats, crates, chairs, books, weapons,broomsticks, bats. ...

“Somewhere near here,” Harry muttered to himself.“Somewhere ... somewhere ...”

Deeper and deeper into the labyrinth he went, lookingfor objects he recognized from his one previous tripinto the room. His breath was loud in his ears, andthen his very soul seemed to shiver: There it was,right ahead, the blistered old cupboard in which hehad hidden his old Potions book, and on top of it, thepockmarked stone warlock wearing a dusty old wigand what looked like an ancient, discolored tiara.

He had already stretched out his hand, though heremained ten feet away, when a voice behind himsaid, “Hold it, Potter.”

He skidded to a halt and turned around. Crabbe andGoyle were standing behind him, shoulder toshoulder, wands pointing right at Harry. Through thesmall space between their leering faces he saw DracoMalfoy.

“That’s my wand you’re holding, Potter,” said Malfoy,pointing his own through the gap between Crabbeand Goyle.

“Not anymore,” panted Harry, tightening his grip onthe hawthorn wand. “Winners, keepers, Malfoy. Who’slent you theirs?”

“My mother,” said Draco.

Page | 710 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry laughed, though there was nothing veryhumorous about the situation. He could not hear Ronor Hermione anymore. They seemed to have run outof earshot, searching for the diadem.

“So how come you three aren’t with Voldemort?”asked Harry.

“We’re gonna be rewarded,” said Crabbe: His voicewas surprisingly soft for such an enormous person;Harry had hardly ever heard him speak before.

Crabbe was smiling like a small child promised alarge bag of sweets. “We ’ung back, Potter. We decidednot to go. Decided to bring you to ’im.”

“Good plan,” said Harry in mock admiration. He couldnot believe that he was this close, and was going to bethwarted by Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle. He beganedging slowly backward toward the place where theHorcrux sat lopsided upon the bust. If he could justget his hands on it before the fight broke out ...

“So how did you get in here?” he asked, trying todistract them.

“I virtually lived in the Room of Hidden Things all lastyear,” said Malfoy, his voice brittle. “I know how to getin.”

“We was hiding in the corridor outside,” gruntedGoyle. “We can do Diss-lusion Charms now! Andthen,” his face split into a gormless grin, “you turnedup right in front of us and said you was looking for adie-dum! What’s a die-dum?”

“Harry?” Ron’s voice echoed suddenly from the otherside of the wall to Harry’s right. “Are you talking tosomeone?”

Page | 711 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

With a whiplike movement, Crabbe pointed his wandat the fifty-foot mountain of old furniture, of brokentrunks, of old books and robes and unidentifiablejunk, and shouted, “DescendoV’

The wall began to totter, then the top third crumbledinto the aisle next door where Ron stood.

“Ron!” Harry bellowed, as somewhere out of sightHermione screamed, and Harry heard innumerableobjects crashing to the floor on the other side of thedestabilized wall: He pointed his wand at the rampart,cried, “Finite!” and it steadied.

“No!” shouted Malfoy, staying Crabbe’s arm as thelatter made to repeat his spell. “If you wreck the roomyou might bury this diadem thing!”

“What’s that matter?” said Crabbe, tugging himselffree. “It’s Potter the Dark Lord wants, who caresabout a die-dum?”

“Potter came in here to get it,” said Malfoy with ill-disguised impatience at the slow-wittedness of hiscolleagues, “so that must mean —”

“ ‘Must mean?” Crabbe turned on Malfoy withundisguised ferocity. “Who cares what you think? Idon’t take your orders no more, Draco. You an’ yourdad are finished.”

“Harry?” shouted Ron again, from the other side ofthe junk wall. “What’s going on?”

“Harry?” mimicked Crabbe. “What’s going — no,

Potter! Cruciol”

Harry had lunged for the tiara; Crabbe’s curse missedhim but hit the stone bust, which flew into the air;

Page | 712 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the diadem soared upward and then dropped out ofsight in the mass of objects on which the bust hadrested.

“STOP!” Malfoy shouted at Crabbe, his voice echoingthrough the enormous room. “The Dark Lord wantshim alive —”

“So? I’m not killing him, am I?” yelled Crabbe,throwing off Malfoy’s restraining arm. “But if I can, Iwill, the Dark Lord wants him dead anyway, what’sthediff—?”

A jet of scarlet light shot past Harry by inches:Hermione had run around the corner behind him andsent a Stunning Spell straight at Crabbe’s head. Itonly missed because Malfoy pulled him out of theway.

“It’s that Mudblood! Avada Kedavral”

Harry saw Hermione dive aside, and his fury thatCrabbe had aimed to kill wiped all else from his mind.He shot a Stunning Spell at Crabbe, who lurched outof the way, knocking Malfoy’s wand out of his hand; itrolled out of sight beneath a mountain of brokenfurniture and boxes.

“Don’t kill him! DONT KILL HIM!” Malfoy yelled atCrabbe and Goyle, who were both aiming at Harry:Their split second’s hesitation was all Harry needed.

“ Expelliarmusl”

Goyle’s wand flew out of his hand and disappearedinto the bulwark of objects beside him; Goyle leaptfoolishly on the spot, trying to retrieve it; Malfoyjumped out of range of Hermione’s second StunningSpell, and Ron, appearing suddenly at the end of thePage | 713 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

aisle, shot a full Body-Bind Curse at Crabbe, whichnarrowly missed.

Crabbe wheeled around and screamed, “AvadaKedavraY’ again. Ron leapt out of sight to avoid the jetof green light. The wandless Malfoy cowered behind athree-legged wardrobe as Hermione charged towardthem, hitting Goyle with a Stunning Spell as shecame.

“It’s somewhere here!” Harry yelled at her, pointing atthe pile of junk into which the old tiara had fallen.“Look for it while I go and help R —”

“HARRY!” she screamed.

A roaring, billowing noise behind him gave him amoment’s warning. He turned and saw both Ron andCrabbe running as hard as they could up the aisletoward them.

“Like it hot, scum?” roared Crabbe as he ran.

But he seemed to have no control over what he haddone. Flames of abnormal size were pursuing them,licking up the sides of the junk bulwarks, which werecrumbling to soot at their touch.

“Aguamenti\” Harry bawled, but the jet of water thatsoared from the tip of his wand evaporated in the air.

“RUN!”

Malfoy grabbed the Stunned Goyle and dragged himalong; Crabbe outstripped all of them, now lookingterrified; Harry, Ron, and Hermione pelted along inhis wake, and the fire pursued them. It was notnormal fire; Crabbe had used a curse of which Harryhad no knowledge: As they turned a corner the flamesPage | 714 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

chased them as though they were alive, sentient,intent upon killing them. Now the fire was mutating,forming a gigantic pack of fiery beasts: Flamingserpents, chimaeras, and dragons rose and fell androse again, and the detritus of centuries on whichthey were feeding was thrown up in the air into theirfanged mouths, tossed high on clawed feet, beforebeing consumed by the inferno.

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had vanished from view:Harry, Ron, and Hermione stopped dead; the fierymonsters were circling them, drawing closer andcloser, claws and horns and tails lashed, and the heatwas solid as a wall around them.

“What can we do?” Hermione screamed over thedeafening roars of the fire. “What can we do?”

“Here!”

Harry seized a pair of heavy-looking broomsticks fromthe nearest pile of junk and threw one to Ron, whopulled Hermione onto it behind him. Harry swung hisleg over the second broom and, with hard kicks to theground, they soared up into the air, missing by feetthe horned beak of a flaming raptor that snapped itsjaws at them. The smoke and heat were becomingoverwhelming: Below them the cursed fire wasconsuming the contraband of generations of huntedstudents, the guilty outcomes of a thousand bannedexperiments, the secrets of the countless souls whohad sought refuge in the room. Harry could not see atrace of Malfoy, Crabbe, or Goyle anywhere: Heswooped as low as he dared over the maraudingmonsters of flame to try to find them, but there wasnothing but fire: What a terrible way to die. ... He hadnever wanted this. ...

Page | 715 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, let’s get out, let’s get out!” bellowed Ron,though it was impossible to see where the door wasthrough the black smoke.

And then Harry heard a thin, piteous human screamfrom amidst the terrible commotion, the thunder ofdevouring flame.

“It’s — too — dangerous — !” Ron yelled, but Harrywheeled in the air. His glasses giving his eyes somesmall protection from the smoke, he raked thefirestorm below, seeking a sign of life, a limb or a facethat was not yet charred like wood. ...

And he saw them: Malfoy with his arms around theunconscious Goyle, the pair of them perched on afragile tower of charred desks, and Harry dived.

Malfoy saw him coming and raised one arm, but evenas Harry grasped it he knew at once that it was nogood: Goyle was too heavy and Malfoy’s hand, coveredin sweat, slid instantly out of Harry’s —

“IF WE DIE FOR THEM, I’LL KILL YOU, HARRY!”roared Ron’s voice, and, as a great flaming chimaerabore down upon them, he and Hermione draggedGoyle onto their broom and rose, rolling and pitching,into the air once more as Malfoy clambered up behindHarry.

“The door, get to the door, the door!” screamed Malfoyin Harry’s ear, and Harry sped up, following Ron,Hermione, and Goyle through the billowing blacksmoke, hardly able to breathe: and all around themthe last few objects unburned by the devouring flameswere flung into the air, as the creatures of the cursedfire cast them high in celebration: cups and shields, asparkling necklace, and an old, discolored tiara —

Page | 716 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“ What are you doing, what are you doing, the door’sthat way\” screamed Malfoy, but Harry made ahairpin swerve and dived. The diadem seemed to fallin slow motion, turning and glittering as it droppedtoward the maw of a yawning serpent, and then hehad it, caught it around his wrist —

Harry swerved again as the serpent lunged at him; hesoared upward and straight toward the place where,he prayed, the door stood open: Ron, Hermione, andGoyle had vanished; Malfoy was screaming andholding Harry so tightly it hurt. Then, through thesmoke, Harry saw a rectangular patch on the walland steered the broom at it, and moments later cleanair filled his lungs and they collided with the wall inthe corridor beyond.

Malfoy fell off the broom and lay facedown, gasping,coughing, and retching. Harry rolled over and sat up:The door to the Room of Requirement had vanished,and Ron and Hermione sat panting on the floor besideGoyle, who was still unconscious.

“C-Crabbe,” choked Malfoy as soon as he couldspeak. “C-Crabbe ...”

“He’s dead,” said Ron harshly.

There was silence, apart from panting and coughing.Then a number of huge bangs shook the castle, and agreat cavalcade of transparent figures galloped paston horses, their heads screaming with bloodlustunder their arms. Harry staggered to his feet whenthe Headless Hunt had passed and looked around:

The battle was still going on all around him. He couldhear more screams than those of the retreatingghosts. Panic flared within him.

Page | 717 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Where’s Ginny?” he said sharply. “She was here. Shewas supposed to be going back into the Room ofRequirement.”

“Blimey, d’you reckon it’ll still work after that fire?”asked Ron, but he too got to his feet, rubbing hischest and looking left and right. “Shall we split upand look — ?”

“No,” said Hermione, getting to her feet too. Malfoyand Goyle remained slumped hopelessly on thecorridor floor; neither of them had wands. “Let’s sticktogether. I say we go — Harry, what’s that on yourarm?”

“What? Oh yeah —”

He pulled the diadem from his wrist and held it up. Itwas still hot, blackened with soot, but as he looked atit closely he was just able to make out the tiny wordsetched upon it: WIT BEYOND MEASURE IS MAN’SGREATEST TREASURE.

A bloodlike substance, dark and tarry, seemed to beleaking from the diadem. Suddenly Harry felt thething vibrate violently, then break apart in his hands,and as it did so, he thought he heard the faintest,most distant scream of pain, echoing not from thegrounds or the castle, but from the thing that hadjust fragmented in his fingers.

“It must have been Fiendfyre!” whimpered Hermione,her eyes on the broken pieces.

“Sorry?”

“Fiendfyre — cursed fire — it’s one of the substancesthat destroy Horcruxes, but I would never, ever have

Page | 718 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

dared use it, it’s so dangerous — how did Crabbeknow how to — ?”

“Must’ve learned from the Carrows,” said Harrygrimly.

“Shame he wasn’t concentrating when theymentioned how to stop it, really,” said Ron, whosehair, like Hermione’s, was singed, and whose face wasblackened. “If he hadn’t tried to kill us all, I’d be quitesorry he was dead.”

“But don’t you realize?” whispered Hermione. “Thismeans, if we can just get the snake —”

But she broke off as yells and shouts and theunmistakable noises of dueling filled the corridor.Harry looked around and his heart seemed to fail:Death Eaters had penetrated Hogwarts. Fred andPercy had just backed into view, both of them duelingmasked and hooded men.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione ran forward to help: Jets oflight flew in every direction and the man duelingPercy backed off, fast: Then his hood slipped and theysaw a high forehead and streaked hair —

“Hello, Minister!” bellowed Percy, sending a neat jinxstraight at Thicknesse, who dropped his wand andclawed at the front of his robes, apparently in awfuldiscomfort. “Did I mention I’m resigning?”

“You’re joking, Perce!” shouted Fred as the DeathEater he was battling collapsed under the weight ofthree separate Stunning Spells. Thicknesse had fallento the ground with tiny spikes erupting all over him;he seemed to be turning into some form of sea urchin.Fred looked at Percy with glee.

Page | 719 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You actually are joking, Perce. ... I don’t think I’veheard you joke since you were —”

The air exploded. They had been grouped together,Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, and Percy, the twoDeath Eaters at their feet, one Stunned, the otherTransfigured; and in that fragment of a moment,when danger seemed temporarily at bay, the worldwas rent apart. Harry felt himself flying through theair, and all he could do was hold as tightly as possibleto that thin stick of wood that was his one and onlyweapon, and shield his head in his arms: He heardthe screams and yells of his companions without ahope of knowing what had happened to them —

And then the world resolved itself into pain andsemidarkness: He was half buried in the wreckage ofa corridor that had been subjected to a terribleattack. Cold air told him that the side of the castlehad been blown away, and hot stickiness on hischeek told him that he was bleeding copiously. Thenhe heard a terrible cry that pulled at his insides, thatexpressed agony of a kind neither flame nor cursecould cause, and he stood up, swaying, morefrightened than he had been that day, morefrightened, perhaps, than he had been in his life. ...

And Hermione was struggling to her feet in thewreckage, and three redheaded men were grouped onthe ground where the wall had blasted apart. Harrygrabbed Hermione’s hand as they staggered andstumbled over stone and wood.

“No — no — no!” someone was shouting. “No! Fred!No!”

And Percy was shaking his brother, and Ron waskneeling beside them, and Fred’s eyes stared without

Page | 720 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

seeing, the ghost of his last laugh still etched uponhis face.

Page | 721 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE ELDER WAND

The world had ended, so why had the battle notceased, the castle fallen silent in horror, and everycombatant laid down their arms? Harry’s mind was infree fall, spinning out of control, unable to grasp theimpossibility, because Fred Weasley could not bedead, the evidence of all his senses must be lying —

And then a body fell past the hole blown into the sideof the school, and curses flew in at them from thedarkness, hitting the wall behind their heads.

“Get down!” Harry shouted, as more curses flewthrough the night: He and Ron had both grabbedHermione and pulled her to the floor, but Percy layacross Fred’s body, shielding it from further harm,and when Harry shouted, “Percy, come on, we’ve gotto move!” he shook his head.

“Percy!” Harry saw tear tracks streaking the grimecoating Ron’s face as he seized his elder brother’sshoulders and pulled, but Percy would not budge.

Page | 722 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Percy, you can’t do anything for him! We’re going to

Hermione screamed, and Harry, turning, did not needto ask why. A monstrous spider the size of a small carwas trying to climb through the huge hole in the wall:One of Aragog’s descendants had joined the fight.

Ron and Harry shouted together; their spells collidedand the monster was blown backward, its legs jerkinghorribly, and vanished into the darkness.

“It brought friends!” Harry called to the others,glancing over the edge of the castle through the holein the wall the curses had blasted: More giant spiderswere climbing the side of the building, liberated fromthe Forbidden Forest, into which the Death Eatersmust have penetrated. Harry fired Stunning Spellsdown upon them, knocking the lead monster into itsfellows, so that they rolled back down the buildingand out of sight. Then more curses came soaring overHarry’s head, so close he felt the force of them blowhis hair.

“Let’s move, NOW!”

Pushing Hermione ahead of him with Ron, Harrystooped to seize Fred’s body under the armpits. Percy,realizing what Harry was trying to do, stoppedclinging to the body and helped; together, crouchinglow to avoid the curses flying at them from thegrounds, they hauled Fred out of the way.

“Here,” said Harry, and they placed him in a nichewhere a suit of armor had stood earlier. He could notbear to look at Fred a second longer than he had to,and after making sure that the body was well hidden,he took off after Ron and Hermione. Malfoy and Goylehad vanished, but at the end of the corridor, whichPage | 723 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

was now full of dust and falling masonry, glass longgone from the windows, he saw many people runningbackward and forward, whether friends or foes hecould not tell. Rounding the corner, Percy let out abull-like roar: “ROOKWOOD!” and sprinted off in thedirection of a tall man, who was pursuing a couple ofstudents.

“Harry, in here!” Hermione screamed.

She had pulled Ron behind a tapestry: They seemedto be wrestling together, and for one mad secondHarry thought that they were embracing again; thenhe saw that Hermione was trying to restrain Ron, tostop him running after Percy.

“Listen to me — LISTEN, ROM”

“I wanna help — I wanna kill Death Eaters —”

His face was contorted, smeared with dust andsmoke, and he was shaking with rage and grief.

“Ron, we’re the only ones who can end it! Please —Ron — we need the snake, we’ve got to kill the snake!”said Hermione.

But Harry knew how Ron felt: Pursuing anotherHorcrux could not bring the satisfaction of revenge;he too wanted to fight, to punish them, the peoplewho had killed Fred, and he wanted to find the otherWeasleys, and above all make sure, make quite sure,that Ginny was not — but he could not permit thatidea to form in his mind —

“We will fight!” Hermione said. “We’ll have to, to reachthe snake! But let’s not lose sight now of what we’resupposed to be d-doing! We’re the only ones who canend it!”

Page | 724 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

She was crying too, and she wiped her face on hertorn and singed sleeve as she spoke, but she tookgreat heaving breaths to calm herself as, still keepinga tight hold on Ron, she turned to Harry.

“You need to find out where Voldemort is, becausehell have the snake with him, won’t he? Do it, Harry— look inside him!”

Why was it so easy? Because his scar had beenburning for hours, yearning to show him Voldemort’sthoughts? He closed his eyes on her command, and atonce, the screams and the bangs and all thediscordant sounds of the battle were drowned untilthey became distant, as though he stood far, far awayfrom them. ...

He was standing in the middle of a desolate butstrangely familiar room, with peeling paper on thewalls and all the windows boarded except for one. Thesounds of the assault on the castle were muffled anddistant. The single unblocked window revealeddistant bursts of light where the castle stood, butinside the room it was dark except for a solitary oillamp.

He was rolling his wand between his fingers, watchingit, his thoughts on the room in the castle, the secretroom only he had ever found, the room, like theChamber, that you had to be clever and cunning andinquisitive to discover. ... He was confident that theboy would not find the diadem ... althoughDumbledore’s puppet had come much farther than hehad ever expected ... too far. ...

“My Lord,” said a voice, desperate and cracked. Heturned: There was Lucius Malfoy sitting in thedarkest corner, ragged and still bearing the marks ofthe punishment he had received after the boy’s last

Page | 725 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

escape. One of his eyes remained closed and puffy.“My Lord ... please ... my son ...”

“If your son is dead, Lucius, it is not my fault. He didnot come and join me, like the rest of the Slytherins.Perhaps he has decided to befriend Harry Potter?”

“No — never,” whispered Malfoy.

“You must hope not.”

“Aren’t — aren’t you afraid, my Lord, that Pottermight die at another hand but yours?” asked Malfoy,his voice shaking. “Wouldn’t it be ... forgive me ...more prudent to call off this battle, enter the castle,and seek him y-yourself?”

“Do not pretend, Lucius. You wish the battle to ceaseso that you can discover what has happened to yourson. And I do not need to seek Potter. Before the nightis out, Potter will have come to find me.”

Voldemort dropped his gaze once more to the wand inhis fingers. It troubled him ... and those things thattroubled Lord Voldemort needed to be rearranged. ...

“Go and fetch Snape.”

“Snape, m-my Lord?”

“Snape. Now. I need him. There is a — service — Irequire from him. Go.”

Frightened, stumbling a little through the gloom,Lucius left the room. Voldemort continued to standthere, twirling the wand between his fingers, staringat it.

Page | 726 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It is the only way, Nagini,” he whispered, and helooked around, and there was the great thick snake,now suspended in midair, twisting gracefully withinthe enchanted, protected space he had made for her,a starry, transparent sphere somewhere betweenglittering cage and tank.

With a gasp, Harry pulled back and opened his eyes;at the same moment his ears were assaulted with thescreeches and cries, the smashes and bangs of battle.

“He’s in the Shrieking Shack. The snake’s with him,it’s got some sort of magical protection around it. He’sjust sent Lucius Malfoy to find Snape.”

“Voldemort’s sitting in the Shrieking Shack?” saidHermione, outraged. “He’s not — he’s not evenfighting?”

“He doesn’t think he needs to fight,” said Harry. “Hethinks I’m going to go to him.”

“But why?”

“He knows I’m after Horcruxes — he’s keeping Naginiclose beside him — obviously I’m going to have to goto him to get near the thing —”

“Right,” said Ron, squaring his shoulders. “So youcan’t go, that’s what he wants, what he’s expecting.You stay here and look after Hermione, and I’ll go andget it —”

Harry cut across Ron.

“You two stay here, I’ll go under the Cloak and I’ll beback as soon as I —”

Page | 727 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Hermione, “it makes much more sense if Itake the Cloak and —”

“Don’t even think about it,” Ron snarled at her.

Before Hermione could get farther than “Ron, I’m justas capable —” the tapestry at the top of the staircaseon which they stood was ripped open.

“POTTER!”

Two masked Death Eaters stood there, but evenbefore their wands were fully raised, Hermioneshouted, “Glisseo\”

The stairs beneath their feet flattened into a chuteand she, Harry, and Ron hurtled down it, unable tocontrol their speed but so fast that the Death Eaters’Stunning Spells flew far over their heads. They shotthrough the concealing tapestry at the bottom andspun onto the floor, hitting the opposite wall.

“Duro\” cried Hermione, pointing her wand at thetapestry, and there were two loud, sickening crunchesas the tapestry turned to stone and the Death Eaterspursuing them crumpled against it.

“Get back!” shouted Ron, and he, Harry, andHermione flattened themselves against a door as aherd of galloping desks thundered past, shepherdedby a sprinting Professor McGonagall. She appearednot to notice them: Her hair had come down andthere was a gash on her cheek. As she turned thecorner, they heard her scream, “CHARGE!”

“Harry, you get the Cloak on,” said Hermione. “Nevermind us —”

Page | 728 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

But he threw it over all three of them; large thoughthey were, he doubted anyone would see theirdisembodied feet through the dust that clogged theair, the falling stone, the shimmer of spells.

They ran down the next staircase and foundthemselves in a corridor full of duelers. The portraitson either side of the fighters were crammed withfigures screaming advice and encouragement, whileDeath Eaters, both masked and unmasked, dueledstudents and teachers. Dean had won himself awand, for he was face-to-face with Dolohov, Parvatiwith Travers. Harry, Ron, and Hermione raised theirwands at once, ready to strike, but the duelers wereweaving and darting around so much that there was astrong likelihood of hurting one of their own side ifthey cast curses. Even as they stood braced, lookingfor the opportunity to act, there came a great“Wheeeeeeeeeeee\” and, looking up, Harry saw Peeveszooming over them, dropping Snargaluff pods downonto the Death Eaters, whose heads were suddenlyengulfed in wriggling green tubers like fat worms.

“Argh!”

A fistful of tubers had hit the Cloak over Ron’s head;the slimy green roots were suspended improbably inmidair as Ron tried to shake them loose.

“Someone’s invisible there!” shouted a masked DeathEater, pointing.

Dean made the most of the Death Eater’s momentarydistraction, knocking him out with a Stunning Spell;Dolohov attempted to retaliate and Parvati shot aBody-Bind Curse at him.

“LET’S GO!” Harry yelled, and he, Ron, and Hermionegathered the Cloak tightly around themselves and

Page | 729 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

pelted, heads down, through the midst of the fighters,slipping a little in pools of Snargaluff juice, toward thetop of the marble staircase into the entrance hall.

“I’m Draco Malfoy, I’m Draco, I’m on your side!”

Draco was on the upper landing, pleading withanother masked Death Eater. Harry Stunned theDeath Eater as they passed: Malfoy looked around,beaming, for his savior, and Ron punched him fromunder the Cloak. Malfoy fell backward on top of theDeath Eater, his mouth bleeding, utterly bemused.

“And that’s the second time we’ve saved your lifetonight, you two-faced bastard!” Ron yelled.

There were more duelers all over the stairs and in thehall, Death Eaters everywhere Harry looked: Yaxley,close to the front doors, in combat with Flitwick, amasked Death Eater dueling Kingsley right besidethem. Students ran in every direction, some carryingor dragging injured friends. Harry directed a StunningSpell toward the masked Death Eater; it missed butnearly hit Neville, who had emerged from nowherebrandishing armfuls of Venomous Tentacula, whichlooped itself happily around the nearest Death Eaterand began reeling him in.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione sped down the marblestaircase: Glass shattered to their left, and theSlytherin hourglass that had recorded House pointsspilled its emeralds everywhere, so that people slippedand staggered as they ran. Two bodies fell from thebalcony overhead as they reached the ground, and agray blur that Harry took for an animal sped four-legged across the hall to sink its teeth into one of thefallen.

Page | 730 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“NO!” shrieked Hermione, and with a deafening blastfrom her wand, Fenrir Greyback was thrownbackward from the feebly stirring body of LavenderBrown. He hit the marble banisters and struggled toreturn to his feet. Then, with a bright white flash anda crack, a crystal ball fell on top of his head, and hecrumpled to the ground and did not move.

“I have more!” shrieked Professor Trelawney from overthe banisters. “More for any who want them! Here —”

And with a movement like a tennis serve, she heavedanother enormous crystal sphere from her bag, wavedher wand through the air, and caused the ball tospeed across the hall and smash through a window.At the same moment, the heavy wooden front doorsburst open, and more of the gigantic spiders forcedtheir way into the entrance hall.

Screams of terror rent the air: The fighters scattered,Death Eaters and Hogwartians alike, and red andgreen jets of light flew into the midst of the oncomingmonsters, which shuddered and reared, moreterrifying than ever.

“How do we get out?” yelled Ron over all thescreaming, but before either Harry or Hermione couldanswer they were bowled aside: Hagrid had comethundering down the stairs, brandishing his flowerypink umbrella.

“Don’t hurt ’em, don’t hurt ’em!” he yelled.

“HAGRID, NO!”

Harry forgot everything else: He sprinted out fromunder the Cloak, running bent double to avoid thecurses illuminating the whole hall.

Page | 731 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“HAGRID, COME BACK!”

But he was not even halfway to Hagrid when he saw ithappen: Hagrid vanished amongst the spiders, andwith a great scurrying, a foul swarming movement,they retreated under the onslaught of spells, Hagridburied in their midst.

“HAGRID!”

Harry heard someone calling his own name, whetherfriend or foe he did not care: He was sprinting downthe front steps into the dark grounds, and the spiderswere swarming away with their prey, and he could seenothing of Hagrid at all.

“HAGRID!”

He thought he could make out an enormous armwaving from the midst of the spider swarm, but as hemade to chase after them, his way was impeded by amonumental foot, which swung down out of thedarkness and made the ground on which he stoodshudder. He looked up: A giant stood before him,twenty feet high, its head hidden in shadow, nothingbut its treelike, hairy shins illuminated by light fromthe castle doors. With one brutal, fluid movement, itsmashed a massive fist through an upper window,and glass rained down upon Harry, forcing him backunder the shelter of the doorway.

“Oh my — !” shrieked Hermione, as she and Roncaught up with Harry and gazed upward at the giantnow trying to seize people through the window above.

“DONT!” Ron yelled, grabbing Hermione’s hand asshe raised her wand. “Stun him and hell crush halfthe castle —”

Page | 732 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“HAGGER?”

Grawp came lurching around the corner of the castle;only now did Harry realize that Grawp was, indeed,an undersized giant. The gargantuan monster tryingto crush people on the upper floors looked aroundand let out a roar. The stone steps trembled as hestomped toward his smaller kin, and Grawp’slopsided mouth fell open, showing yellow, half-brick-sized teeth; and then they launched themselves ateach other with the savagery of lions.

“RUN!” Harry roared; the night was full of hideousyells and blows as the giants wrestled, and he seizedHermione’s hand and tore down the steps into thegrounds, Ron bringing up the rear. Harry had not losthope of finding and saving Hagrid; he ran so fast thatthey were halfway toward the forest before they werebrought up short again.

The air around them had frozen: Harry’s breathcaught and solidified in his chest. Shapes moved outin the darkness, swirling figures of concentratedblackness, moving in a great wave toward the castle,their faces hooded and their breath rattling. ...

Ron and Hermione closed in beside him as thesounds of fighting behind them grew suddenly muted,deadened, because a silence only dementors couldbring was falling thickly through the night, and Fredwas gone, and Hagrid was surely dying or alreadydead. ...

“Come on, Harry!” said Hermione’s voice from a verylong way away. “Patronuses, Harry, come on!”

He raised his wand, but a dull hopelessness wasspreading through him: How many more lay dead

Page | 733 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

that he did not yet know about; he felt as though hissoul had already half left his body. ...

“HARRY, COME ON!” screamed Hermione.

A hundred dementors were advancing, gliding toward

them, sucking their way closer to Harry’s despair,which was like a promise of a feast. ...

He saw Ron’s silver terrier burst into the air, flickerfeebly, and expire; he saw Hermione’s otter twist inmidair and fade; and his own wand trembled in hishand, and he almost welcomed the oncomingoblivion, the promise of nothing, of no feeling. ...

And then a silver hare, a boar, and a fox soared pastHarry, Ron, and Hermione’s heads: The dementorsfell back before the creatures’ approach. Three morepeople had arrived out of the darkness to standbeside them, their wands outstretched, continuing tocast their Patronuses: Luna, Ernie, and Seamus.

“That’s right,” said Luna encouragingly, as if theywere back in the Room of Requirement and this wassimply spell practice for the D.A. “That’s right, Harry... come on, think of something happy. ...”

“Something happy?” he said, his voice cracked.

“We’re all still here,” she whispered, “we’re stillfighting. Come on, now. ...”

There was a silver spark, then a wavering light, and

then, with the greatest effort it had ever cost him, thestag burst from the end of Harry’s wand. It canteredforward, and now the dementors scattered in earnest,and immediately the night was mild again, but thesounds of the surrounding battle were loud in hisears.

Page | 734 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Can’t thank you enough,” said Ron shakily, turningto Luna, Ernie, and Seamus, “you just saved —”

With a roar and an earth-quaking tremor, anothergiant came lurching out of the darkness from thedirection of the forest, brandishing a club taller thanany of them.

“RUN!” Harry shouted again, but the others neededno telling: They all scattered, and not a second toosoon, for next moment the creature’s vast foot hadfallen exactly where they had been standing. Harrylooked round: Ron and Hermione were following him,but the other three had vanished back into the battle.

“Let’s get out of range!” yelled Ron as the giant swungits club again and its bellows echoed through thenight, across the grounds where bursts of red andgreen light continued to illuminate the darkness.

“The Whomping Willow,” said Harry, “go!”

Somehow he walled it all up in his mind, crammed itinto a small space into which he could not look now:Thoughts of Fred and Hagrid, and his terror for all thepeople he loved, scattered in and outside the castle,must all wait, because they had to run, had to reachthe snake and Voldemort, because that was, asHermione said, the only way to end it —

He sprinted, half believing he could outdistance deathitself, ignoring the jets of light flying in the darknessall around him, and the sound of the lake crashinglike the sea, and the creaking of the Forbidden Forestthough the night was windless; through grounds thatseemed themselves to have risen in rebellion, he ranfaster than he had ever moved in his life, and it washe who saw the great tree first, the Willow that

Page | 735 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

protected the secret at its roots with whiplike,slashing branches.

Panting and gasping, Harry slowed down, skirting theWillow’s swiping branches, peering through thedarkness toward its thick trunk, trying to see thesingle knot in the bark of the old tree that wouldparalyze it. Ron and Hermione caught up, Hermioneso out of breath she could not speak.

“How — how’re we going to get in?” panted Ron. “I can— see the place — if we just had — Crookshanksagain —”

“Crookshanks?” wheezed Hermione, bent double,clutching her chest. “Are you a wizard, or what?”

“Oh — right — yeah —”

Ron looked around, then directed his wand at a twigon the ground and said, “Wingardium Leviosal” Thetwig flew up from the ground, spun through the air asif caught by a gust of wind, then zoomed directly atthe trunk through the Willow’s ominously swayingbranches. It jabbed at a place near the roots, and atonce, the writhing tree became still.

“Perfect!” panted Hermione.

“Wait.”

For one teetering second, while the crashes andbooms of the battle filled the air, Harry hesitated.Voldemort wanted him to do this, wanted him tocome. ... Was he leading Ron and Hermione into atrap?

But then the reality seemed to close upon him, crueland plain: The only way forward was to kill the snake,

Page | 736 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and the snake was where Voldemort was, andVoldemort was at the end of this tunnel. ...

“Harry, we’re coming, just get in there!” said Ron,pushing him forward.

Harry wriggled into the earthy passage hidden in thetree’s roots. It was a much tighter squeeze than it hadbeen the last time they had entered it. The tunnel waslow-ceilinged: They had had to double up to movethrough it nearly four years previously; now there wasnothing for it but to crawl. Harry went first, his wandilluminated, expecting at any moment to meetbarriers, but none came. They moved in silence,Harry’s gaze fixed upon the swinging beam of thewand held in his fist.

At last the tunnel began to slope upward and Harrysaw a sliver of light ahead. Hermione tugged at hisankle.

“The Cloak!” she whispered. “Put the Cloak on!”

He groped behind him and she forced the bundle ofslippery cloth into his free hand. With difficulty hedragged it over himself, murmured, “Nox,”extinguishing his wandlight, and continued on hishands and knees, as silently as possible, all hissenses straining, expecting every second to bediscovered, to hear a cold clear voice, see a flash ofgreen light.

And then he heard voices coming from the roomdirectly ahead of them, only slightly muffled by thefact that the opening at the end of the tunnel hadbeen blocked up by what looked like an old crate.Hardly daring to breathe, Harry edged right up to theopening and peered through a tiny gap left betweencrate and wall.

Page | 737 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

The room beyond was dimly lit, but he could seeNagini, swirling and coiling like a serpent underwater,safe in her enchanted, starry sphere, which floatedunsupported in midair. He could see the edge of atable, and a long-fingered white hand toying with awand. Then Snape spoke, and Harry’s heart lurched:Snape was inches away from where he crouched,hidden.

"... my Lord, their resistance is crumbling —”

“— and it is doing so without your help,” saidVoldemort in his high, clear voice. “Skilled wizardthough you are, Severus, I do not think you will makemuch difference now. We are almost there ... almost.”

“Let me find the boy. Let me bring you Potter. I know Ican find him, my Lord. Please.”

Snape strode past the gap, and Harry drew back alittle, keeping his eyes fixed upon Nagini, wonderingwhether there was any spell that might penetrate theprotection surrounding her, but he could not think ofanything. One failed attempt, and he would give awayhis position. ...

Voldemort stood up. Harry could see him now, see thered eyes, the flattened, serpentine face, the pallor ofhim gleaming slightly in the semidarkness.

“I have a problem, Severus,” said Voldemort softly.

“My Lord?” said Snape.

Voldemort raised the Elder Wand, holding it asdelicately and precisely as a conductor’s baton.

“Why doesn’t it work for me, Severus?”

Page | 738 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

In the silence Harry imagined he could hear the snakehissing slightly as it coiled and uncoiled — or was itVoldemort’s sibilant sigh lingering on the air?

“My — my Lord?” said Snape blankly. “I do notunderstand. You — you have performed extraordinarymagic with that wand.”

“No,” said Voldemort. “I have performed my usualmagic. I am extraordinary, but this wand ... no. It hasnot revealed the wonders it has promised. I feel nodifference between this wand and the one I procuredfrom Ollivander all those years ago.”

Voldemort’s tone was musing, calm, but Harry’s scarhad begun to throb and pulse: Pain was building inhis forehead, and he could feel that controlled senseof fury building inside Voldemort.

“No difference,” said Voldemort again.

Snape did not speak. Harry could not see his face: Hewondered whether Snape sensed danger, was tryingto find the right words to reassure his master.

Voldemort started to move around the room: Harrylost sight of him for seconds as he prowled, speakingin that same measured voice, while the pain and furymounted in Harry.

“I have thought long and hard, Severus. ... Do youknow why I have called you back from the battle?”

And for a moment Harry saw Snape’s profile: His eyeswere fixed upon the coiling snake in its enchantedcage.

“No, my Lord, but I beg you will let me return. Let mefind Potter.”

Page | 739 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You sound like Lucius. Neither of you understandsPotter as I do. He does not need finding. Potter willcome to me. I know his weakness, you see, his onegreat flaw. He will hate watching the others struckdown around him, knowing that it is for him that ithappens. He will want to stop it at any cost. He willcome.”

“But my Lord, he might be killed accidentally by oneother than yourself —”

“My instructions to my Death Eaters have beenperfectly clear. Capture Potter. Kill his friends — themore, the better — but do not kill him.

“But it is of you that I wished to speak, Severus, notHarry Potter. You have been very valuable to me. Veryvaluable.”

“My Lord knows I seek only to serve him. But — letme go and find the boy, my Lord. Let me bring him toyou. I know I can —”

“I have told you, no!” said Voldemort, and Harrycaught the glint of red in his eyes as he turned again,and the swishing of his cloak was like the slithering ofa snake, and he felt Voldemort’s impatience in hisburning scar. “My concern at the moment, Severus, iswhat will happen when I finally meet the boy!”

“My Lord, there can be no question, surely — ?”

“— but there is a question, Severus. There is.”

Voldemort halted, and Harry could see him plainlyagain as he slid the Elder Wand through his whitefingers, staring at Snape.

Page | 740 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Why did both the wands I have used fail whendirected at Harry Potter?”

“I — I cannot answer that, my Lord.”

“Can’t you?”

The stab of rage felt like a spike driven throughHarry’s head: He forced his own fist into his mouth tostop himself from crying out in pain. He closed hiseyes, and suddenly he was Voldemort, looking intoSnape’s pale face.

“My wand of yew did everything of which I asked it,Severus, except to kill Harry Potter. Twice it failed.Ollivander told me under torture of the twin cores,told me to take another’s wand. I did so, but Lucius’swand shattered upon meeting Potter’s.”

“I — I have no explanation, my Lord.”

Snape was not looking at Voldemort now. His darkeyes were still fixed upon the coiling serpent in itsprotective sphere.

“I sought a third wand, Severus. The Elder Wand, theWand of Destiny, the Deathstick. I took it from itsprevious master. I took it from the grave of AlbusDumbledore.”

And now Snape looked at Voldemort, and Snape’sface was like a death mask. It was marble white andso still that when he spoke, it was a shock to see thatanyone lived behind the blank eyes.

“My Lord — let me go to the boy —”

“All this long night, when I am on the brink of victory,

I have sat here,” said Voldemort, his voice barely

Page | 741 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

louder than a whisper, “wondering, wondering, whythe Elder Wand refuses to be what it ought to be,refuses to perform as legend says it must perform forits rightful owner ... and I think I have the answer.”

Snape did not speak.

“Perhaps you already know it? You are a clever man,after all, Severus. You have been a good and faithfulservant, and I regret what must happen.”

“My Lord —”

“The Elder Wand cannot serve me properly, Severus,because I am not its true master. The Elder Wandbelongs to the wizard who killed its last owner. Youkilled Albus Dumbledore. While you live, Severus, theElder Wand cannot be truly mine.”

“My Lord!” Snape protested, raising his wand.

“It cannot be any other way,” said Voldemort. “I mustmaster the wand, Severus. Master the wand, and Imaster Potter at last.”

And Voldemort swiped the air with the Elder Wand. Itdid nothing to Snape, who for a split second seemedto think he had been reprieved: But then Voldemort’sintention became clear. The snake’s cage was rollingthrough the air, and before Snape could do anythingmore than yell, it had encased him, head andshoulders, and Voldemort spoke in Parseltongue.

“Kill.”

There was a terrible scream. Harry saw Snape’s facelosing the little color it had left; it whitened as hisblack eyes widened, as the snake’s fangs pierced his

Page | 742 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

neck, as he failed to push the enchanted cage offhimself, as his knees gave way and he fell to the floor.

“I regret it,” said Voldemort coldly.

He turned away; there was no sadness in him, noremorse. It was time to leave this shack and takecharge, with a wand that would now do his fullbidding. He pointed it at the starry cage holding thesnake, which drifted upward, off Snape, who fellsideways onto the floor, blood gushing from thewounds in his neck. Voldemort swept from the roomwithout a backward glance, and the great serpentfloated after him in its huge protective sphere.

Back in the tunnel and his own mind, Harry openedhis eyes: He had drawn blood biting down on hisknuckles in the effort not to shout out. Now he waslooking through the tiny crack between crate andwall, watching a foot in a black boot trembling on thefloor.

“Harry!” breathed Hermione behind him, but he hadalready pointed his wand at the crate blocking hisview. It lifted an inch into the air and drifted sidewayssilently. As quietly as he could, he pulled himself upinto the room.

He did not know why he was doing it, why he wasapproaching the dying man: He did not know what hefelt as he saw Snape’s white face, and the fingerstrying to staunch the bloody wound at his neck.

Harry took off the Invisibility Cloak and looked downupon the man he hated, whose widening black eyesfound Harry as he tried to speak. Harry bent overhim, and Snape seized the front of his robes andpulled him close.

Page | 743 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

A terrible rasping, gurgling noise issued from Snape’sthroat.

“Take ... it. ... Take ... it. ...”

Something more than blood was leaking from Snape.Silvery blue, neither gas nor liquid, it gushed from hismouth and his ears and his eyes, and Harry knewwhat it was, but did not know what to do —

A flask, conjured from thin air, was thrust into hisshaking hands by Hermione. Harry lifted the silverysubstance into it with his wand. When the flask wasfull to the brim, and Snape looked as though therewas no blood left in him, his grip on Harry’s robesslackened.

“Look ... at ... me. ...” he whispered.

The green eyes found the black, but after a second,something in the depths of the dark pair seemed tovanish, leaving them fixed, blank, and empty. Thehand holding Harry thudded to the floor, and Snapemoved no more.

Page | 744 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE PRINCE’S TALE

Harry remained kneeling at Snape’s side, simplystaring down at him, until quite suddenly a high, coldvoice spoke so close to them that Harry jumped to hisfeet, the flask gripped tightly in his hands, thinkingthat Voldemort had reentered the room.

Voldemort’s voice reverberated from the walls andfloor, and Harry realized that he was talking toHogwarts and to all the surrounding area, that theresidents of Hogsmeade and all those still fighting inthe castle would hear him as clearly as if he stoodbeside them, his breath on the back of their necks, adeathblow away.

“You have fought,” said the high, cold voice,

“valiantly. Lord Voldemort knows how to valuebravery.

“Yet you have sustained heavy losses. If you continueto resist me, you will all die, one by one. I do not wishthis to happen. Every drop of magical blood spilled isa loss and a waste.

Page | 745 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Lord Voldemort is merciful. I command my forces toretreat immediately.

“You have one hour. Dispose of your dead withdignity. Treat your injured.

“I speak now, Harry Potter, directly to you. You havepermitted your friends to die for you rather than faceme yourself. I shall wait for one hour in the ForbiddenForest. If, at the end of that hour, you have not cometo me, have not given yourself up, then battlerecommences. This time, I shall enter the fray myself,Harry Potter, and I shall find you, and I shall punishevery last man, woman, and child who has tried toconceal you from me. One hour.”

Both Ron and Hermione shook their heads frantically,looking at Harry.

“Don’t listen to him,” said Ron.

“It’ll be all right,” said Hermione wildly. “Let’s — let’sget back to the castle, if he’s gone to the forest we’llneed to think of a new plan —”

She glanced at Snape’s body, then hurried back tothe tunnel entrance. Ron followed her. Harry gatheredup the Invisibility Cloak, then looked down at Snape.He did not know what to feel, except shock at the waySnape had been killed, and the reason for which ithad been done. ...

They crawled back through the tunnel, none of themtalking, and Harry wondered whether Ron andHermione could still hear Voldemort ringing in theirheads, as he could.

Page | 746 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

You have permitted your friends to die for you ratherthan face me yourself I shall wait for one hour in theForbidden Forest. ... One hour. ...

Small bundles seemed to litter the lawn at the front ofthe castle. It could only be an hour or so from dawn,yet it was pitch-black. The three of them hurriedtoward the stone steps. A lone clog, the size of a smallboat, lay abandoned in front of them. There was noother sign of Grawp or of his attacker.

The castle was unnaturally silent. There were noflashes of light now, no bangs or screams or shouts.The flagstones of the deserted entrance hall werestained with blood. Emeralds were still scattered allover the floor, along with pieces of marble andsplintered wood. Part of the banisters had been blownaway.

“Where is everyone?” whispered Hermione.

Ron led the way to the Great Hall. Harry stopped inthe doorway.

The House tables were gone and the room wascrowded. The survivors stood in groups, their armsaround each other’s necks. The injured were beingtreated upon the raised platform by Madam Pomfreyand a group of helpers. Firenze was amongst theinjured; his flank poured blood and he shook wherehe lay, unable to stand.

The dead lay in a row in the middle of the Hall. Harrycould not see Fred’s body, because his familysurrounded him. George was kneeling at his head;Mrs. Weasley was lying across Fred’s chest, her bodyshaking, Mr. Weasley stroking her hair while tearscascaded down his cheeks.

Page | 747 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Without a word to Harry, Ron and Hermione walkedaway. Harry saw Hermione approach Ginny, whoseface was swollen and blotchy, and hug her. Ronjoined Bill, Fleur, and Percy, who flung an armaround Ron’s shoulders. As Ginny and Hermionemoved closer to the rest of the family, Harry had aclear view of the bodies lying next to Fred: Remus andTonks, pale and still and peaceful-looking, apparentlyasleep beneath the dark, enchanted ceiling.

The Great Hall seemed to fly away, become smaller,shrink, as Harry reeled backward from the doorway.He could not draw breath. He could not bear to lookat any of the other bodies, to see who else had diedfor him. He could not bear to join the Weasleys, couldnot look into their eyes, when if he had given himselfup in the first place, Fred might never have died. ...

He turned away and ran up the marble staircase.Lupin, Tonks ... He yearned not to feel. ... He wishedhe could rip out his heart, his innards, everythingthat was screaming inside him. ...

The castle was completely empty; even the ghostsseemed to have joined the mass mourning in theGreat Hall. Harry ran without stopping, clutching thecrystal flask of Snape’s last thoughts, and he did notslow down until he reached the stone gargoyleguarding the headmaster’s office.

“Password?”

“Dumbledore!” said Harry without thinking, becauseit was he whom he yearned to see, and to his surprisethe gargoyle slid aside, revealing the spiral staircasebehind.

But when Harry burst into the circular office he founda change. The portraits that hung all around the

Page | 748 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

walls were empty. Not a single headmaster orheadmistress remained to see him; all, it seemed, hadflitted away, charging through the paintings that linedthe castle, so that they could have a clear view ofwhat was going on.

Harry glanced hopelessly at Dumbledore’s desertedframe, which hung directly behind the headmaster’schair, then turned his back on it. The stone Pensievelay in the cabinet where it had always been: Harryheaved it onto the desk and poured Snape’s memoriesinto the wide basin with its runic markings aroundthe edge. To escape into someone else’s head wouldbe a blessed relief. ... Nothing that even Snape hadleft him could be worse than his own thoughts. Thememories swirled, silver white and strange, andwithout hesitating, with a feeling of recklessabandonment, as though this would assuage historturing grief, Harry dived.

He fell headlong into sunlight, and his feet foundwarm ground. When he straightened up, he saw thathe was in a nearly deserted playground. A single hugechimney dominated the distant skyline. Two girlswere swinging backward and forward, and a skinnyboy was watching them from behind a clump ofbushes. His black hair was overlong and his clotheswere so mismatched that it looked deliberate: tooshort jeans, a shabby, overlarge coat that might havebelonged to a grown man, an odd smocklike shirt.

Harry moved closer to the boy. Snape looked no morethan nine or ten years old, sallow, small, stringy.There was undisguised greed in his thin face as hewatched the younger of the two girls swinging higherand higher than her sister.

“Lily, don’t do it!” shrieked the elder of the two.

Page | 749 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

But the girl had let go of the swing at the very heightof its arc and flown into the air, quite literally flown,launched herself skyward with a great shout oflaughter, and instead of crumpling on the playgroundasphalt, she soared like a trapeze artist through theair, staying up far too long, landing far too lightly.

“Mummy told you not to!”

Petunia stopped her swing by dragging the heels ofher sandals on the ground, making a crunching,grinding sound, then leapt up, hands on hips.

“Mummy said you weren’t allowed, Lily!”

“But I’m fine,” said Lily, still giggling. “Tuney, look atthis. Watch what I can do.”

Petunia glanced around. The playground wasdeserted apart from themselves and, though the girlsdid not know it, Snape. Lily had picked up a fallenflower from the bush behind which Snape lurked.Petunia advanced, evidently torn between curiosityand disapproval. Lily waited until Petunia was nearenough to have a clear view, then held out her palm.The flower sat there, opening and closing its petals,like some bizarre, many-lipped oyster.

“Stop it!” shrieked Petunia.

“It’s not hurting you,” said Lily, but she closed herhand on the blossom and threw it back to the ground.

“It’s not right,” said Petunia, but her eyes hadfollowed the flower’s flight to the ground and lingeredupon it. “How do you do it?” she added, and therewas definite longing in her voice.

Page | 750 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“It’s obvious, isn’t it?” Snape could no longer containhimself, but had jumped out from behind the bushes.Petunia shrieked and ran backward toward theswings, but Lily, though clearly startled, remainedwhere she was. Snape seemed to regret hisappearance. A dull flush of color mounted the sallowcheeks as he looked at Lily.

“What’s obvious?” asked Lily.

Snape had an air of nervous excitement. With aglance at the distant Petunia, now hovering beside theswings, he lowered his voice and said, “I know whatyou are.”

“What do you mean?”

“You’re ... you’re a witch,” whispered Snape.

She looked affronted.

“That’s not a very nice thing to say to somebody!”

She turned, nose in the air, and marched off towardher sister.

“No!” said Snape. He was highly colored now, andHarry wondered why he did not take off theridiculously large coat, unless it was because he didnot want to reveal the smock beneath it. He flappedafter the girls, looking ludicrously batlike, like hisolder self.

The sisters considered him, united in disapproval,both holding on to one of the swing poles as though itwas the safe place in tag.

Page | 751 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You are,” said Snape to Lily. “You are a witch. I’vebeen watching you for a while. But there’s nothingwrong with that. My mum’s one, and I’m a wizard.”

Petunia’s laugh was like cold water.

“Wizard!” she shrieked, her courage returned nowthat she had recovered from the shock of hisunexpected appearance. “I know who you are. You’rethat Snape boy! They live down Spinner’s End by theriver,” she told Lily, and it was evident from her tonethat she considered the address a poorrecommendation. “Why have you been spying on us?”

“Haven’t been spying,” said Snape, hot anduncomfortable and dirty-haired in the bright sunlight.“Wouldn’t spy on you, anyway,” he added spitefully,

“you’re a Muggle.”

Though Petunia evidently did not understand theword, she could hardly mistake the tone.

“Lily, come on, we’re leaving!” she said shrilly. Lilyobeyed her sister at once, glaring at Snape as she left.He stood watching them as they marched through theplayground gate, and Harry, the only one left toobserve him, recognized Snape’s bitterdisappointment, and understood that Snape had beenplanning this moment for a while, and that it had allgone wrong. ...

The scene dissolved, and before Harry knew it, re-formed around him. He was now in a small thicket oftrees. He could see a sunlit river glittering throughtheir trunks. The shadows cast by the trees made abasin of cool green shade. Two children sat facingeach other, cross-legged on the ground. Snape hadremoved his coat now; his odd smock looked lesspeculiar in the half light.

Page | 752 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

"... and the Ministry can punish you if you do magicoutside school, you get letters.”

“But I have done magic outside school!”

“We’re all right. We haven’t got wands yet. They letyou off when you’re a kid and you can’t help it. Butonce you’re eleven,” he nodded importantly, “and theystart training you, then you’ve got to go careful.”

There was a little silence. Lily had picked up a fallentwig and twirled it in the air, and Harry knew that shewas imagining sparks trailing from it. Then shedropped the twig, leaned in toward the boy, and said,“It is real, isn’t it? It’s not a joke? Petunia says you’relying to me. Petunia says there isn’t a Hogwarts. It isreal, isn’t it?”

“It’s real for us,” said Snape. “Not for her. But we’ll getthe letter, you and me.”

“Really?” whispered Lily.

“Definitely,” said Snape, and even with his poorly cuthair and his odd clothes, he struck an oddlyimpressive figure sprawled in front of her, brimful ofconfidence in his destiny.

“And will it really come by owl?” Lily whispered.

“Normally,” said Snape. “But you’re Muggle-born, sosomeone from the school will have to come andexplain to your parents.”

“Does it make a difference, being Muggle-born?”

Snape hesitated. His black eyes, eager in the greenishgloom, moved over the pale face, the dark red hair.

Page | 753 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No,” he said. “It doesn’t make any difference.”

“Good,” said Lily, relaxing: It was clear that she hadbeen worrying.

“You’ve got loads of magic,” said Snape. “I saw that.All the time I was watching you ...”

His voice trailed away; she was not listening, but hadstretched out on the leafy ground and was looking upat the canopy of leaves overhead. He watched her asgreedily as he had watched her in the playground.

“How are things at your house?” Lily asked.

A little crease appeared between his eyes.

“Fine,” he said.

“They’re not arguing anymore?”

“Oh yes, they’re arguing,” said Snape. He picked up afistful of leaves and began tearing them apart,apparently unaware of what he was doing. “But itwon’t be that long and I’ll be gone.”

“Doesn’t your dad like magic?”

“He doesn’t like anything, much,” said Snape.

“Severus?”

A little smile twisted Snape’s mouth when she saidhis name.

“Yeah?”

“Tell me about the dementors again.”

Page | 754 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“What d’you want to know about them for?”

“If I use magic outside school —”

“They wouldn’t give you to the dementors for that!Dementors are for people who do really bad stuff.They guard the wizard prison, Azkaban. You’re notgoing to end up in Azkaban, you’re too —”

He turned red again and shredded more leaves. Thena small rustling noise behind Harry made him turn:Petunia, hiding behind a tree, had lost her footing.

“Tuney!” said Lily, surprise and welcome in her voice,but Snape had jumped to his feet.

“Who’s spying now?” he shouted. “What d’you want?”

Petunia was breathless, alarmed at being caught.Harry could see her struggling for something hurtfulto say.

“What is that you’re wearing, anyway?” she said,pointing at Snape’s chest. “Your mum’s blouse?”

There was a crack: A branch over Petunia’s head hadfallen. Lily screamed: The branch caught Petunia onthe shoulder, and she staggered backward and burstinto tears.

“Tuney!”

But Petunia was running away. Lily rounded onSnape.

“Did you make that happen?”

“No.” He looked both defiant and scared.

Page | 755 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You did!” She was backing away from him. “You did).You hurt her!”

“No — no I didn’t!”

But the lie did not convince Lily: After one lastburning look, she ran from the little thicket, off afterher sister, and Snape looked miserable and confused.

And the scene re-formed. Harry looked around: Hewas on platform nine and three-quarters, and Snapestood beside him, slightly hunched, next to a thin,sallow-faced, sour-looking woman who greatlyresembled him. Snape was staring at a family of foura short distance away. The two girls stood a littleapart from their parents. Lily seemed to be pleadingwith her sister; Harry moved closer to listen.

"... I’m sorry, Tuney, I’m sorry! Listen —” She caughther sister’s hand and held tight to it, even thoughPetunia tried to pull it away. “Maybe once I’m there —no, listen, Tuney! Maybe once I’m there, I’ll be able togo to Professor Dumbledore and persuade him tochange his mind!”

“I don’t — want — to — go!” said Petunia, and shedragged her hand back out of her sister’s grasp. “Youthink I want to go to some stupid castle and learn tobe a — a —”

Her pale eyes roved over the platform, over the catsmewling in their owners’ arms, over the owlsfluttering and hooting at each other in cages, over thestudents, some already in their long black robes,loading trunks onto the scarlet steam engine or elsegreeting one another with glad cries after a summerapart.

Page | 756 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“— you think I want to be a — a freak?”

Lily’s eyes filled with tears as Petunia succeeded intugging her hand away.

“I’m not a freak,” said Lily. “That’s a horrible thing tosay.”

“That’s where you’re going,” said Petunia with relish.“A special school for freaks. You and that Snape boy... weirdos, that’s what you two are. It’s good you’rebeing separated from normal people. It’s for oursafety.”

Lily glanced toward her parents, who were lookingaround the platform with an air of wholeheartedenjoyment, drinking in the scene. Then she lookedback at her sister, and her voice was low and fierce.

“You didn’t think it was such a freak’s school whenyou wrote to the headmaster and begged him to takeyou.”

Petunia turned scarlet.

“Beg? I didn’t beg!”

“I saw his reply. It was very kind.”

“You shouldn’t have read —” whispered Petunia, “thatwas my private — how could you — ?”

Lily gave herself away by half-glancing toward whereSnape stood nearby. Petunia gasped.

“That boy found it! You and that boy have beensneaking in my room!”

Page | 757 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No — not sneaking —” Now Lily was on thedefensive. “Severus saw the envelope, and he couldn’tbelieve a Muggle could have contacted Hogwarts,that’s all! He says there must be wizards workingundercover in the postal service who take care of —”

“Apparently wizards poke their noses in everywhere!”said Petunia, now as pale as she had been flushed.

“Freak).” she spat at her sister, and she flounced off towhere her parents stood. ...

The scene dissolved again. Snape was hurrying alongthe corridor of the Hogwarts Express as it clatteredthrough the countryside. He had already changed intohis school robes, had perhaps taken the firstopportunity to take off his dreadful Muggle clothes. Atlast he stopped, outside a compartment in which agroup of rowdy boys were talking. Hunched in acorner seat beside the window was Lily, her facepressed against the windowpane.

Snape slid open the compartment door and sat downopposite Lily. She glanced at him and then lookedback out of the window. She had been crying.

“I don’t want to talk to you,” she said in a constrictedvoice.

“Why not?”

“Tuney h-hates me. Because we saw that letter fromDumbledore.”

“So what?”

She threw him a look of deep dislike.

“So she’s my sister!”

Page | 758 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“She’s only a —” He caught himself quickly; Lily, toobusy trying to wipe her eyes without being noticed,did not hear him.

“But we’re going!” he said, unable to suppress theexhilaration in his voice. “This is it! We’re off toHogwarts!”

She nodded, mopping her eyes, but in spite of herself,she half smiled.

“You’d better be in Slytherin,” said Snape, encouragedthat she had brightened a little.

“Slytherin?”

One of the boys sharing the compartment, who hadshown no interest at all in Lily or Snape until thatpoint, looked around at the word, and Harry, whoseattention had been focused entirely on the two besidethe window, saw his father: slight, black-haired likeSnape, but with that indefinable air of having beenwell-cared-for, even adored, that Snape soconspicuously lacked.

“Who wants to be in Slytherin? I think I’d leave,wouldn’t you?” James asked the boy lounging on theseats opposite him, and with a jolt, Harry realizedthat it was Sirius. Sirius did not smile.

“My whole family have been in Slytherin,” he said.

“Blimey,” said James, “and I thought you seemed allright!”

Sirius grinned.

“Maybe I’ll break the tradition. Where are youheading, if you’ve got the choice?”

Page | 759 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

James lifted an invisible sword.

“ ‘Gryffindor, where dwell the brave at heart!’ Like mydad.”

Snape made a small, disparaging noise. James turnedon him.

“Got a problem with that?”

“No,” said Snape, though his slight sneer saidotherwise. “If you’d rather be brawny than brainy —”

“Where’re you hoping to go, seeing as you’re neither?”interjected Sirius.

James roared with laughter. Lily sat up, ratherflushed, and looked from James to Sirius in dislike.

“Come on, Severus, let’s find another compartment.”

“Oooooo ...”

James and Sirius imitated her lofty voice; James triedto trip Snape as he passed.

“See ya, Snivellus!” a voice called, as thecompartment door slammed. ...

And the scene dissolved once more. ...

Harry was standing right behind Snape as they facedthe candlelit House tables, lined with rapt faces. ThenProfessor McGonagall said, “Evans, Lily!”

He watched his mother walk forward on tremblinglegs and sit down upon the rickety stool. ProfessorMcGonagall dropped the Sorting Hat onto her head,

Page | 760 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and barely a second after it had touched the dark redhair, the hat cried, “ Gryffindoii”

Harry heard Snape let out a tiny groan. Lily took offthe hat, handed it back to Professor McGonagall, thenhurried toward the cheering Gryffindors, but as shewent she glanced back at Snape, and there was a sadlittle smile on her face. Harry saw Sirius move up thebench to make room for her. She took one look athim, seemed to recognize him from the train, foldedher arms, and firmly turned her back on him.

The roll call continued. Harry watched Lupin,Pettigrew, and his father join Lily and Sirius at theGryffindor table. At last, when only a dozen studentsremained to be sorted, Professor McGonagall calledSnape.

Harry walked with him to the stool, watched himplace the hat upon his head. “Slytherinl” cried theSorting Hat.

And Severus Snape moved off to the other side of theHall, away from Lily, to where the Slytherins werecheering him, to where Lucius Malfoy, a prefect badgegleaming upon his chest, patted Snape on the back ashe sat down beside him. ...

And the scene changed. ...

Lily and Snape were walking across the castlecourtyard, evidently arguing. Harry hurried to catchup with them, to listen in. As he reached them, herealized how much taller they both were: A few yearsseemed to have passed since their Sorting.

"... thought we were supposed to be friends?” Snapewas saying. “Best friends?”

Page | 761 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“We are, Sev, but I don’t like some of the people you’rehanging round with! I’m sorry, but I detest Avery andMulciber! Mulciber\ What do you see in him, Sev, he’screepy! D’you know what he tried to do to MaryMacdonald the other day?”

Lily had reached a pillar and leaned against it,looking up into the thin, sallow face.

“That was nothing,” said Snape. “It was a laugh,that’s all —”

“It was Dark Magic, and if you think that’s funny —”

“What about the stuff Potter and his mates get upto?” demanded Snape. His color rose again as he saidit, unable, it seemed, to hold in his resentment.

“What’s Potter got to do with anything?” said Lily.

“They sneak out at night. There’s something weirdabout that Lupin. Where does he keep going?”

“He’s ill,” said Lily. “They say he’s ill —”

“Every month at the full moon?” said Snape.

“I know your theory,” said Lily, and she sounded cold.“Why are you so obsessed with them anyway? Why doyou care what they’re doing at night?”

“I’m just trying to show you they’re not as wonderfulas everyone seems to think they are.”

The intensity of his gaze made her blush.

“They don’t use Dark Magic, though.” She droppedher voice. “And you’re being really ungrateful. I heardwhat happened the other night. You went sneaking

Page | 762 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

down that tunnel by the Whomping Willow, andJames Potter saved you from whatever’s down there

Snape’s whole face contorted and he spluttered,“Saved? Saved? You think he was playing the hero?

He was saving his neck and his friends’ too! You’renot going to — I won’t let you —”

“Let me? Let me?”

Lily’s bright green eyes were slits. Snape backtrackedat once.

“I didn’t mean — I just don’t want to see you made afool of— He fancies you, James Potter fancies you!”The words seemed wrenched from him against hiswill. “And he’s not ... everyone thinks ... big Quidditchhero —” Snape’s bitterness and dislike were renderinghim incoherent, and Lily’s eyebrows were travelingfarther and farther up her forehead.

“I know James Potter’s an arrogant toerag,” she said,cutting across Snape. “I don’t need you to tell methat. But Mulciber’s and Avery’s idea of humor is justevil. Evil, Sev. I don’t understand how you can befriends with them.”

Harry doubted that Snape had even heard herstrictures on Mulciber and Avery. The moment shehad insulted James Potter, his whole body hadrelaxed, and as they walked away there was a newspring in Snape’s step. ...

And the scene dissolved. ...

Harry watched again as Snape left the Great Hall aftersitting his O.W.L. in Defense Against the Dark Arts,watched as he wandered away from the castle and

Page | 763 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

strayed inadvertently close to the place beneath thebeech tree where James, Sirius, Lupin, and Pettigrewsat together. But Harry kept his distance this time,because he knew what happened after James hadhoisted Severus into the air and taunted him; heknew what had been done and said, and it gave himno pleasure to hear it again. ... He watched as Lilyjoined the group and went to Snape’s defense.Distantly he heard Snape shout at her in hishumiliation and his fury, the unforgivable word:“MudbloocL.”

The scene changed. ...

“I’m sorry.”

“I’m not interested.”

“I’m sorry!”

“Save your breath.”

It was nighttime. Lily, who was wearing a dressinggown, stood with her arms folded in front of theportrait of the Fat Lady, at the entrance to GryffindorTower.

“I only came out because Mary told me you werethreatening to sleep here.”

“I was. I would have done. I never meant to call youMudblood, it just —”

“Slipped out?” There was no pity in Lily’s voice. “It’stoo late. I’ve made excuses for you for years. None ofmy friends can understand why I even talk to you.You and your precious little Death Eater friends —you see, you don’t even deny it! You don’t even deny

Page | 764 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

that’s what you’re all aiming to be! You can’t wait tojoin You-Know-Who, can you?”

He opened his mouth, but closed it without speaking.

“I can’t pretend anymore. You’ve chosen your way,

I’ve chosen mine.”

“No — listen, I didn’t mean —”

“— to call me Mudblood? But you call everyone of mybirth Mudblood, Severus. Why should I be anydifferent?”

He struggled on the verge of speech, but with acontemptuous look she turned and climbed backthrough the portrait hole. ...

The corridor dissolved, and the scene took a littlelonger to reform: Harry seemed to fly through shiftingshapes and colors until his surroundings solidifiedagain and he stood on a hilltop, forlorn and cold inthe darkness, the wind whistling through thebranches of a few leafless trees. The adult Snape waspanting, turning on the spot, his wand gripped tightlyin his hand, waiting for something or for someone. ...His fear infected Harry too, even though he knew thathe could not be harmed, and he looked over hisshoulder, wondering what it was that Snape waswaiting for —

Then a blinding, jagged jet of white light flew throughthe air: Harry thought of lightning, but Snape haddropped to his knees and his wand had flown out ofhis hand.

“Don’t kill me!”

“That was not my intention.”

Page | 765 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Any sound of Dumbledore Apparating had beendrowned by the sound of the wind in the branches.

He stood before Snape with his robes whippingaround him, and his face was illuminated from belowin the light cast by his wand.

“Well, Severus? What message does Lord Voldemorthave for me?”

“No — no message — I’m here on my own account!”

Snape was wringing his hands: He looked a littlemad, with his straggling black hair flying around him.

“I — I come with a warning — no, a request — please

Dumbledore flicked his wand. Though leaves andbranches still flew through the night air around them,silence fell on the spot where he and Snape facedeach other.

“What request could a Death Eater make of me?”

“The — the prophecy ... the prediction ... Trelawney

“Ah, yes,” said Dumbledore. “How much did you relayto Lord Voldemort?”

“Everything — everything I heard!” said Snape. “Thatis why — it is for that reason — he thinks it meansLily Evans!”

“The prophecy did not refer to a woman,” saidDumbledore. “It spoke of a boy born at the end ofJuly —”

Page | 766 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You know what I mean! He thinks it means her son,he is going to hunt her down — kill them all —”

“If she means so much to you,” said Dumbledore,“surely Lord Voldemort will spare her? Could you notask for mercy for the mother, in exchange for theson?”

“I have — I have asked him —”

“You disgust me,” said Dumbledore, and Harry hadnever heard so much contempt in his voice. Snapeseemed to shrink a little. “You do not care, then,about the deaths of her husband and child? They candie, as long as you have what you want?”

Snape said nothing, but merely looked up atDumbledore.

“Hide them all, then,” he croaked. “Keep her — them— safe. Please.”

“And what will you give me in return, Severus?”

“In — in return?” Snape gaped at Dumbledore, andHarry expected him to protest, but after a longmoment he said, “Anything.”

The hilltop faded, and Harry stood in Dumbledore’soffice, and something was making a terrible sound,like a wounded animal. Snape was slumped forwardin a chair and Dumbledore was standing over him,looking grim. After a moment or two, Snape raised hisface, and he looked like a man who had lived ahundred years of misery since leaving the wild hilltop.

“I thought ... you were going ... to keep her ... safe.

Page | 767 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“She and James put their faith in the wrong person,”said Dumbledore. “Rather like you, Severus. Weren’tyou hoping that Lord Voldemort would spare her?”

Snape’s breathing was shallow.

“Her boy survives,” said Dumbledore.

With a tiny jerk of the head, Snape seemed to flick offan irksome fly.

“Her son lives. He has her eyes, precisely her eyes.

You remember the shape and color of Lily Evans’seyes, I am sure?”

“DON’T!” bellowed Snape. “Gone ... dead ...”

“Is this remorse, Severus?”

“I wish ... I wish /were dead. ...”

“And what use would that be to anyone?” saidDumbledore coldly. “If you loved Lily Evans, if youtruly loved her, then your way forward is clear.”

Snape seemed to peer through a haze of pain, andDumbledore’s words appeared to take a long time toreach him.

“What — what do you mean?”

“You know how and why she died. Make sure it wasnot in vain. Help me protect Lily’s son.”

“He does not need protection. The Dark Lord has gone

“The Dark Lord will return, and Harry Potter will be interrible danger when he does.”

Page | 768 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

There was a long pause, and slowly Snape regainedcontrol of himself, mastered his own breathing. Atlast he said, “Very well. Very well. But never — nevertell, Dumbledore! This must be between us! Swear it! Icannot bear ... especially Potter’s son ... I want yourword!”

“My word, Severus, that I shall never reveal the bestof you?” Dumbledore sighed, looking down intoSnape’s ferocious, anguished face. “If you insist ...”

The office dissolved but re-formed instantly. Snapewas pacing up and down in front of Dumbledore.

“— mediocre, arrogant as his father, a determinedrule-breaker, delighted to find himself famous,attention-seeking and impertinent —”

“You see what you expect to see, Severus,” saidDumbledore, without raising his eyes from a copy ofTransfiguration Today. “Other teachers report that theboy is modest, likable, and reasonably talented.Personally, I find him an engaging child.”

Dumbledore turned a page, and said, without lookingup, “Keep an eye on Quirrell, won’t you?”

A whirl of color, and now everything darkened, andSnape and Dumbledore stood a little apart in theentrance hall, while the last stragglers from the YuleBall passed them on their way to bed.

“Well?” murmured Dumbledore.

“Karkaroff’s Mark is becoming darker too. He ispanicking, he fears retribution; you know how muchhelp he gave the Ministry after the Dark Lord fell.”Snape looked sideways at Dumbledore’s crooked-

P a g e | 769 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

nosed profile. “Karkaroff intends to flee if the Markburns.”

“Does he?” said Dumbledore softly, as Fleur Delacourand Roger Davies came giggling in from the grounds.“And are you tempted to join him?”

“No,” said Snape, his black eyes on Fleur’s andRoger’s retreating figures. “I am not such a coward.”

“No,” agreed Dumbledore. “You are a braver man byfar than Igor Karkaroff. You know, I sometimes thinkwe Sort too soon. ...”

He walked away, leaving Snape looking stricken. ...

And now Harry stood in the headmaster’s office yetagain. It was nighttime, and Dumbledore saggedsideways in the thronelike chair behind the desk,apparently semiconscious. His right hand dangledover the side, blackened and burned. Snape wasmuttering incantations, pointing his wand at thewrist of the hand, while with his left hand he tipped agoblet full of thick golden potion down Dumbledore’sthroat. After a moment or two, Dumbledore’s eyelidsfluttered and opened.

“Why,” said Snape, without preamble, “why did youput on that ring? It carries a curse, surely yourealized that. Why even touch it?”

Marvolo Gaunt’s ring lay on the desk beforeDumbledore. It was cracked; the sword of Gryffindorlay beside it.

Dumbledore grimaced.

“I ... was a fool. Sorely tempted ...”

Page | 770 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Tempted by what?”Dumbledore did not answer.

“It is a miracle you managed to return here!” Snapesounded furious. “That ring carried a curse ofextraordinary power, to contain it is all we can hopefor; I have trapped the curse in one hand for the timebeing —”

Dumbledore raised his blackened, useless hand, andexamined it with the expression of one being shownan interesting curio.

“You have done very well, Severus. How long do youthink I have?”

Dumbledore’s tone was conversational; he might havebeen asking for a weather forecast. Snape hesitated,and then said, “I cannot tell. Maybe a year. There isno halting such a spell forever. It will spreadeventually, it is the sort of curse that strengthens overtime.”

Dumbledore smiled. The news that he had less than ayear to live seemed a matter of little or no concern tohim.

“I am fortunate, extremely fortunate, that I have you,Severus.”

“If you had only summoned me a little earlier, I mighthave been able to do more, buy you more time!” saidSnape furiously. He looked down at the broken ringand the sword. “Did you think that breaking the ringwould break the curse?”

“Something like that ... I was delirious, no doubt. ...”said Dumbledore. With an effort he straightened

Page | 771 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

himself in his chair. “Well, really, this makes mattersmuch more straightforward.”

Snape looked utterly perplexed. Dumbledore smiled.

“I refer to the plan Lord Voldemort is revolving aroundme. His plan to have the poor Malfoy boy murder me.”

Snape sat down in the chair Harry had so oftenoccupied, across the desk from Dumbledore. Harrycould tell that he wanted to say more on the subjectof Dumbledore’s cursed hand, but the other held it upin polite refusal to discuss the matter further.Scowling, Snape said, “The Dark Lord does not expectDraco to succeed. This is merely punishment forLucius’s recent failures. Slow torture for Draco’sparents, while they watch him fail and pay the price.”

“In short, the boy has had a death sentencepronounced upon him as surely as I have,” saidDumbledore. “Now, I should have thought the naturalsuccessor to the job, once Draco fails, is yourself?”

There was a short pause.

“That, I think, is the Dark Lord’s plan.”

“Lord Voldemort foresees a moment in the near futurewhen he will not need a spy at Hogwarts?”

“He believes the school will soon be in his grasp, yes.”

“And if it does fall into his grasp,” said Dumbledore,almost, it seemed, as an aside, “I have your word thatyou will do all in your power to protect the students ofHogwarts?”

Snape gave a stiff nod.

Page | 772 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Good. Now then. Your first priority will be to discoverwhat Draco is up to. A frightened teenage boy is adanger to others as well as to himself. Offer him helpand guidance, he ought to accept, he likes you —”

“— much less since his father has lost favor. Dracoblames me, he thinks I have usurped Lucius’sposition.”

“All the same, try. I am concerned less for myself thanfor accidental victims of whatever schemes mightoccur to the boy. Ultimately, of course, there is onlyone thing to be done if we are to save him from LordVoldemort’s wrath.”

Snape raised his eyebrows and his tone was sardonicas he asked, “Are you intending to let him kill you?”

“Certainly not. You must kill me.”

There was a long silence, broken only by an oddclicking noise. Fawkes the phoenix was gnawing a bitof cuttlebone.

“Would you like me to do it now?” asked Snape, hisvoice heavy with irony. “Or would you like a fewmoments to compose an epitaph?”

“Oh, not quite yet,” said Dumbledore, smiling. “Idaresay the moment will present itself in due course.Given what has happened tonight,” he indicated hiswithered hand, “we can be sure that it will happenwithin a year.”

“If you don’t mind dying,” said Snape roughly, “whynot let Draco do it?”

Page | 773 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“That boy’s soul is not yet so damaged,” saidDumbledore. “I would not have it ripped apart on myaccount.”

“And my soul, Dumbledore? Mine?”

“You alone know whether it will harm your soul tohelp an old man avoid pain and humiliation,” saidDumbledore. “I ask this one great favor of you,Severus, because death is coming for me as surely asthe Chudley Cannons will finish bottom of this year’sleague. I confess I should prefer a quick, painless exitto the protracted and messy affair it will be if, forinstance, Greyback is involved — I hear Voldemorthas recruited him? Or dear Bellatrix, who likes toplay with her food before she eats it.”

His tone was light, but his blue eyes pierced Snape asthey had frequently pierced Harry, as though the soulthey discussed was visible to him. At last Snape gaveanother curt nod.

Dumbledore seemed satisfied.

“Thank you, Severus ...”

The office disappeared, and now Snape andDumbledore were strolling together in the desertedcastle grounds by twilight.

“What are you doing with Potter, all these eveningsyou are closeted together?” Snape asked abruptly.

Dumbledore looked weary.

“Why? You aren’t trying to give him more detentions,Severus? The boy will soon have spent more time indetention than out.”

Page | 774 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“He is his father over again —”

“In looks, perhaps, but his deepest nature is muchmore like his mother’s. I spend time with Harrybecause I have things to discuss with him,information I must give him before it is too late.”

“Information,” repeated Snape. “You trust him ... youdo not trust me.”

“It is not a question of trust. I have, as we both know,limited time. It is essential that I give the boy enoughinformation for him to do what he needs to do.”

“And why may I not have the same information?”

“I prefer not to put all of my secrets in one basket,particularly not a basket that spends so much timedangling on the arm of Lord Voldemort.”

“Which I do on your orders!”

“And you do it extremely well. Do not think that Iunderestimate the constant danger in which youplace yourself, Severus. To give Voldemort whatappears to be valuable information while withholdingthe essentials is a job I would entrust to nobody butyou.”

“Yet you confide much more in a boy who is incapableof Occlumency, whose magic is mediocre, and whohas a direct connection into the Dark Lord’s mind!”

“Voldemort fears that connection,” said Dumbledore.“Not so long ago he had one small taste of what trulysharing Harry’s mind means to him. It was pain suchas he has never experienced. He will not try topossess Harry again, I am sure of it. Not in that way.”

Page | 775 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t understand.”

“Lord Voldemort’s soul, maimed as it is, cannot bearclose contact with a soul like Harry’s. Like a tongueon frozen steel, like flesh in flame —”

“Souls? We were talking of minds!”

“In the case of Harry and Lord Voldemort, to speak ofone is to speak of the other.”

Dumbledore glanced around to make sure that theywere alone. They were close by the Forbidden Forestnow, but there was no sign of anyone near them.

“After you have killed me, Severus —”

“You refuse to tell me everything, yet you expect thatsmall service of me!” snarled Snape, and real angerflared in the thin face now. “You take a great deal forgranted, Dumbledore! Perhaps I have changed mymind!”

“You gave me your word, Severus. And while we aretalking about services you owe me, I thought youagreed to keep a close eye on our young Slytherinfriend?”

Snape looked angry, mutinous. Dumbledore sighed.

“Come to my office tonight, Severus, at eleven, andyou shall not complain that I have no confidence inyou. ...”

They were back in Dumbledore’s office, the windowsdark, and Fawkes sat silent as Snape sat quite still,as Dumbledore walked around him, talking.

Page | 776 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry must not know, not until the last moment, notuntil it is necessary, otherwise how could he have thestrength to do what must be done?”

“But what must he do?”

“That is between Harry and me. Now listen closely,Severus. There will come a time — after my death —do not argue, do not interrupt! There will come a timewhen Lord Voldemort will seem to fear for the life ofhis snake.”

“For Nagini?” Snape looked astonished.

“Precisely. If there comes a time when Lord Voldemortstops sending that snake forth to do his bidding, butkeeps it safe beside him under magical protection,then, I think, it will be safe to tell Harry.”

“Tell him what?”

Dumbledore took a deep breath and closed his eyes.

“Tell him that on the night Lord Voldemort tried to killhim, when Lily cast her own life between them as ashield, the Killing Curse rebounded upon LordVoldemort, and a fragment of Voldemort’s soul wasblasted apart from the whole, and latched itself ontothe only living soul left in that collapsing building.

Part of Lord Voldemort lives inside Harry, and it isthat which gives him the power of speech withsnakes, and a connection with Lord Voldemort’s mindthat he has never understood. And while thatfragment of soul, unmissed by Voldemort, remainsattached to and protected by Harry, Lord Voldemortcannot die.”

Page | 777 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry seemed to be watching the two men from oneend of a long tunnel, they were so far away from him,their voices echoing strangely in his ears.

“So the boy ... the boy must die?” asked Snape quitecalmly.

“And Voldemort himself must do it, Severus. That isessential.”

Another long silence. Then Snape said, “I thought ...all these years ... that we were protecting him for her.For Lily.”

“We have protected him because it has been essentialto teach him, to raise him, to let him try his strength,”said Dumbledore, his eyes still tight shut.

“Meanwhile, the connection between them grows everstronger, a parasitic growth: Sometimes I havethought he suspects it himself. If I know him, he willhave arranged matters so that when he does set outto meet his death, it will truly mean the end ofVoldemort.”

Dumbledore opened his eyes. Snape looked horrified.

“You have kept him alive so that he can die at theright moment?”

“Don’t be shocked, Severus. How many men andwomen have you watched die?”

“Lately, only those whom I could not save,” saidSnape. He stood up. “You have used me.”

“Meaning?”

“I have spied for you and lied for you, put myself inmortal danger for you. Everything was supposed to be

Page | 778 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

to keep Lily Potter’s son safe. Now you tell me youhave been raising him like a pig for slaughter —”

“But this is touching, Severus,” said Dumbledoreseriously. “Have you grown to care for the boy, afterall?”

“For him?” shouted Snape. “Expecto Patronuml”

From the tip of his wand burst the silver doe: Shelanded on the office floor, bounded once across theoffice, and soared out of the window. Dumbledorewatched her fly away, and as her silvery glow fadedhe turned back to Snape, and his eyes were full oftears.

“After all this time?”

“Always,” said Snape.

And the scene shifted. Now, Harry saw Snape talkingto the portrait of Dumbledore behind his desk.

“You will have to give Voldemort the correct date ofHarry’s departure from his aunt and uncle’s,” saidDumbledore. “Not to do so will raise suspicion, whenVoldemort believes you so well informed. However,you must plant the idea of decoys; that, I think, oughtto ensure Harry’s safety. Try Confunding MundungusFletcher. And Severus, if you are forced to take partin the chase, be sure to act your part convincingly. ...

I am counting upon you to remain in LordVoldemort’s good books as long as possible, orHogwarts will be left to the mercy of the Carrows. ...”

Now Snape was head to head with Mundungus in anunfamiliar tavern, Mundungus’s face lookingcuriously blank, Snape frowning in concentration.

Page | 779 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You will suggest to the Order of the Phoenix,” Snapemurmured, “that they use decoys. Polyjuice Potion.Identical Potters. It is the only thing that might work.You will forget that I have suggested this. You willpresent it as your own idea. You understand?”

“I understand,” murmured Mundungus, his eyesunfocused. ...

Now Harry was flying alongside Snape on abroomstick through a clear dark night: He wasaccompanied by other hooded Death Eaters, andahead were Lupin and a Harry who was really George.... A Death Eater moved ahead of Snape and raisedhis wand, pointing it directly at Lupin’s back —

“Sectumsemprcd” shouted Snape.

But the spell, intended for the Death Eater’s wandhand, missed and hit George instead —

And next, Snape was kneeling in Sirius’s oldbedroom. Tears were dripping from the end of hishooked nose as he read the old letter from Lily. Thesecond page carried only a few words:

could ever have been friends with Gellert Grindelwald.

I think her mind’s going, personally!

Lots of love,

Lily

Snape took the page bearing Lily’s signature, and herlove, and tucked it inside his robes. Then he ripped intwo the photograph he was also holding, so that hekept the part from which Lily laughed, throwing theportion showing James and Harry back onto the floor,under the chest of drawers. ...

Page | 780 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

And now Snape stood again in the headmaster’sstudy as Phineas Nigellus came hurrying into hisportrait.

“Headmaster! They are camping in the Forest of Dean!The Mudblood —”

“Do not use that word!”

“— the Granger girl, then, mentioned the place as sheopened her bag and I heard her!”

“Good. Very good!” cried the portrait of Dumbledorebehind the headmaster’s chair. “Now, Severus, thesword! Do not forget that it must be taken underconditions of need and valor — and he must not knowthat you give it! If Voldemort should read Harry’smind and see you acting for him —”

“I know,” said Snape curtly. He approached theportrait of Dumbledore and pulled at its side. Itswung forward, revealing a hidden cavity behind itfrom which he took the sword of Gryffindor.

“And you still aren’t going to tell me why it’s soimportant to give Potter the sword?” said Snape as heswung a traveling cloak over his robes.

“No, I don’t think so,” said Dumbledore’s portrait. “Hewill know what to do with it. And Severus, be verycareful, they may not take kindly to your appearanceafter George Weasley’s mishap —”

Snape turned at the door.

“Don’t worry, Dumbledore,” he said coolly. “I have aplan. ...”

Page | 781 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

And Snape left the room. Harry rose up out of thePensieve, and moments later he lay on the carpetedfloor in exactly the same room: Snape might just haveclosed the door.

Page | 782 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE FOREST AGAIN

Finally, the truth. Lying with his face pressed into thedusty carpet of the office where he had once thoughthe was learning the secrets of victory, Harryunderstood at last that he was not supposed tosurvive. His job was to walk calmly into Death’swelcoming arms. Along the way, he was to dispose ofVoldemort’s remaining links to life, so that when atlast he flung himself across Voldemort’s path, and didnot raise a wand to defend himself, the end would beclean, and the job that ought to have been done inGodric’s Hollow would be finished: Neither would live,neither could survive.

He felt his heart pounding fiercely in his chest. Howstrange that in his dread of death, it pumped all theharder, valiantly keeping him alive. But it would haveto stop, and soon. Its beats were numbered. Howmany would there be time for, as he rose and walkedthrough the castle for the last time, out into thegrounds and into the forest?

Page | 783 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Terror washed over him as he lay on the floor, withthat funeral drum pounding inside him. Would it hurtto die? All those times he had thought that it wasabout to happen and escaped, he had never reallythought of the thing itself: His will to live had alwaysbeen so much stronger than his fear of death. Yet itdid not occur to him now to try to escape, to outrunVoldemort. It was over, he knew it, and all that wasleft was the thing itself: dying.

If he could only have died on that summer’s nightwhen he had left number four, Privet Drive, for thelast time, when the noble phoenix-feather wand hadsaved him! If he could only have died like Hedwig, soquickly he would not have known it had happened!

Or if he could have launched himself in front of awand to save someone he loved. ... He envied even hisparents’ deaths now. This cold-blooded walk to hisown destruction would require a different kind ofbravery. He felt his fingers trembling slightly andmade an effort to control them, although no one couldsee him; the portraits on the walls were all empty.

Slowly, very slowly, he sat up, and as he did so he feltmore alive and more aware of his own living bodythan ever before. Why had he never appreciated whata miracle he was, brain and nerve and boundingheart? It would all be gone ... or at least, he would begone from it. His breath came slow and deep, and hismouth and throat were completely dry, but so werehis eyes.

Dumbledore’s betrayal was almost nothing. Of coursethere had been a bigger plan; Harry had simply beentoo foolish to see it, he realized that now. He hadnever questioned his own assumption thatDumbledore wanted him alive. Now he saw that hislife span had always been determined by how long ittook to eliminate all the Horcruxes. Dumbledore hadPage | 784 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

passed the job of destroying them to him, andobediently he had continued to chip away at thebonds tying not only Voldemort, but himself, to life!How neat, how elegant, not to waste any more lives,but to give the dangerous task to the boy who hadalready been marked for slaughter, and whose deathwould not be a calamity, but another blow againstVoldemort.

And Dumbledore had known that Harry would notduck out, that he would keep going to the end, eventhough it was his end, because he had taken troubleto get to know him, hadn’t he? Dumbledore knew, asVoldemort knew, that Harry would not let anyone elsedie for him now that he had discovered it was in hispower to stop it. The images of Fred, Lupin, andTonks lying dead in the Great Hall forced their wayback into his mind’s eye, and for a moment he couldhardly breathe: Death was impatient. ...

But Dumbledore had overestimated him. He hadfailed: The snake survived. One Horcrux remained tobind Voldemort to the earth, even after Harry hadbeen killed. True, that would mean an easier job forsomebody. He wondered who would do it. ... Ron andHermione would know what needed to be done, ofcourse. ... That would have been why Dumbledorewanted him to confide in two others ... so that if hefulfilled his true destiny a little early, they could carryon. ...

Like rain on a cold window, these thoughts patteredagainst the hard surface of the incontrovertible truth,which was that he must die. I must die. It must end.

Ron and Hermione seemed a long way away, in a far-off country; he felt as though he had parted fromthem long ago. There would be no good-byes and noexplanations, he was determined of that. This was a

Page | 785 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

journey they could not take together, and theattempts they would make to stop him would wastevaluable time. He looked down at the battered goldwatch he had received on his seventeenth birthday.Nearly half of the hour allotted by Voldemort for hissurrender had elapsed.

He stood up. His heart was leaping against his ribslike a frantic bird. Perhaps it knew it had little timeleft, perhaps it was determined to fulfill a lifetime’sbeats before the end. He did not look back as heclosed the office door.

The castle was empty. He felt ghostly striding throughit alone, as if he had already died. The portrait peoplewere still missing from their frames; the whole placewas eerily still, as if all its remaining lifeblood wereconcentrated in the Great Hall where the dead andthe mourners were crammed.

Harry pulled the Invisibility Cloak over himself anddescended through the floors, at last walking downthe marble staircase into the entrance hall. Perhapssome tiny part of him hoped to be sensed, to be seen,to be stopped, but the Cloak was, as ever,impenetrable, perfect, and he reached the front doorseasily.

Then Neville nearly walked into him. He was one halfof a pair that was carrying a body in from thegrounds. Harry glanced down and felt another dullblow to his stomach: Colin Creevey, though underage,must have sneaked back just as Malfoy, Crabbe, andGoyle had done. He was tiny in death.

“You know what? I can manage him alone, Neville,”said Oliver Wood, and he heaved Colin over hisshoulder in a fireman’s lift and carried him into theGreat Hall.

Page | 786 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Neville leaned against the door frame for a momentand wiped his forehead with the back of his hand. Helooked like an old man. Then he set off down thesteps again into the darkness to recover more bodies.

Harry took one glance back at the entrance of theGreat Hall. People were moving around, trying tocomfort each other, drinking, kneeling beside thedead, but he could not see any of the people he loved,no hint of Hermione, Ron, Ginny, or any of the otherWeasleys, no Luna. He felt he would have given all thetime remaining to him for just one last look at them;but then, would he ever have the strength to stoplooking? It was better like this.

He moved down the steps and out into the darkness.

It was nearly four in the morning, and the deathlystillness of the grounds felt as though they wereholding their breath, waiting to see whether he coulddo what he must.

Harry moved toward Neville, who was bending overanother body.

“Neville.”

“Blimey, Harry, you nearly gave me heart failure!”

Harry had pulled off the Cloak: The idea had come tohim out of nowhere, born out of a desire to makeabsolutely sure.

“Where are you going, alone?” Neville askedsuspiciously.

“It’s all part of the plan,” said Harry. “There’ssomething I’ve got to do. Listen — Neville —”

Page | 787 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Harry!” Neville looked suddenly scared. “Harry,you’re not thinking of handing yourself over?”

“No,” Harry lied easily. “ ’Course not ... this issomething else. But I might be out of sight for a while.You know Voldemort’s snake, Neville? He’s got a hugesnake. ... Calls it Nagini ...”

“I’ve heard, yeah. ... What about it?”

“It’s got to be killed. Ron and Hermione know that,but just in case they —”

The awfulness of that possibility smothered him for amoment, made it impossible to keep talking. But hepulled himself together again: This was crucial, hemust be like Dumbledore, keep a cool head, makesure there were backups, others to carry on.Dumbledore had died knowing that three people stillknew about the Horcruxes; now Neville would takeHarry’s place: There would still be three in the secret.

“Just in case they’re — busy — and you get thechance —”

“Kill the snake?”

“Kill the snake,” Harry repeated.

“All right, Harry. You’re okay, are you?”

“I’m fine. Thanks, Neville.”

But Neville seized his wrist as Harry made to moveon.

“We’re all going to keep fighting, Harry. You knowthat?”

Page | 788 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, I —”

The suffocating feeling extinguished the end of thesentence; he could not go on. Neville did not seem tofind it strange. He patted Harry on the shoulder,released him, and walked away to look for morebodies.

Harry swung the Cloak back over himself and walkedon. Someone else was moving not far away, stoopingover another prone figure on the ground. He was feetaway from her when he realized it was Ginny.

He stopped in his tracks. She was crouching over agirl who was whispering for her mother.

“It’s all right,” Ginny was saying. “It’s okay. We’regoing to get you inside.”

“But I want to go home,” whispered the girl. “I don’twant to fight anymore!”

“I know,” said Ginny, and her voice broke. “It’s goingto be all right.”

Ripples of cold undulated over Harry’s skin. Hewanted to shout out to the night, he wanted Ginny toknow that he was there, he wanted her to know wherehe was going. He wanted to be stopped, to be draggedback, to be sent back home. ...

But he was home. Hogwarts was the first and besthome he had known. He and Voldemort and Snape,the abandoned boys, had all found home here. ...

Ginny was kneeling beside the injured girl now,holding her hand. With a huge effort Harry forcedhimself on. He thought he saw Ginny look around ashe passed, and wondered whether she had sensed

Page | 789 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

someone walking nearby, but he did not speak, andhe did not look back.

Hagrid’s hut loomed out of the darkness. There wereno lights, no sound of Fang scrabbling at the door,his bark booming in welcome. All those visits toHagrid, and the gleam of the copper kettle on the fire,and rock cakes and giant grubs, and his greatbearded face, and Ron vomiting slugs, and Hermionehelping him save Norbert ...

He moved on, and now he reached the edge of theforest, and he stopped.

A swarm of dementors was gliding amongst the trees;he could feel their chill, and he was not sure he wouldbe able to pass safely through it. He had no strengthleft for a Patronus. He could no longer control his owntrembling. It was not, after all, so easy to die. Everysecond he breathed, the smell of the grass, the coolair on his face, was so precious: To think that peoplehad years and years, time to waste, so much time itdragged, and he was clinging to each second. At thesame time he thought that he would not be able to goon, and knew that he must. The long game wasended, the Snitch had been caught, it was time toleave the air. ...

The Snitch. His nerveless fingers fumbled for amoment with the pouch at his neck and he pulled itout.

I open at the close.

Breathing fast and hard, he stared down at it. Nowthat he wanted time to move as slowly as possible, itseemed to have sped up, and understanding wascoming so fast it seemed to have bypassed thought.This was the close. This was the moment.

Page | 790 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He pressed the golden metal to his lips andwhispered, “I am about to die.”

The metal shell broke open. He lowered his shakinghand, raised Draco’s wand beneath the Cloak, andmurmured, “Lumos.”

The black stone with its jagged crack running downthe center sat in the two halves of the Snitch. TheResurrection Stone had cracked down the vertical linerepresenting the Elder Wand. The triangle and circlerepresenting the Cloak and the stone were stilldiscernible.

And again Harry understood without having to think.It did not matter about bringing them back, for hewas about to join them. He was not really fetchingthem: They were fetching him.

He closed his eyes and turned the stone over in hishand three times.

He knew it had happened, because he heard slightmovements around him that suggested frail bodiesshifting their footing on the earthy, twig-strewnground that marked the outer edge of the forest. Heopened his eyes and looked around.

They were neither ghost nor truly flesh, he could seethat. They resembled most closely the Riddle that hadescaped from the diary so long ago, and he had beenmemory made nearly solid. Less substantial thanliving bodies, but much more than ghosts, theymoved toward him, and on each face, there was thesame loving smile.

James was exactly the same height as Harry. He waswearing the clothes in which he had died, and his

Page | 791 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

hair was untidy and ruffled, and his glasses were alittle lopsided, like Mr. Weasley’s.

Sirius was tall and handsome, and younger by farthan Harry had seen him in life. He loped with aneasy grace, his hands in his pockets and a grin on hisface.

Lupin was younger too, and much less shabby, andhis hair was thicker and darker. He looked happy tobe back in this familiar place, scene of so manyadolescent wanderings.

Lily’s smile was widest of all. She pushed her longhair back as she drew close to him, and her greeneyes, so like his, searched his face hungrily, asthough she would never be able to look at himenough.

“You’ve been so brave.”

He could not speak. His eyes feasted on her, and hethought that he would like to stand and look at herforever, and that would be enough.

“You are nearly there,” said James. “Very close. Weare ... so proud of you.”

“Does it hurt?”

The childish question had fallen from Harry’s lipsbefore he could stop it.

“Dying? Not at all,” said Sirius. “Quicker and easierthan falling asleep.”

“And he will want it to be quick. He wants it over,”said Lupin.

Page | 792 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I didn’t want you to die,” Harry said. These wordscame without his volition. “Any of you. I’m sorry —”

He addressed Lupin more than any of them,beseeching him.

“— right after you’d had your son ... Remus, I’m sorry

“I am sorry too,” said Lupin. “Sorry I will never knowhim ... but he will know why I died and I hope he willunderstand. I was trying to make a world in which hecould live a happier life.”

A chilly breeze that seemed to emanate from the heartof the forest lifted the hair at Harry’s brow. He knewthat they would not tell him to go, that it would haveto be his decision.

“You’ll stay with me?”

“Until the very end,” said James.

“They won’t be able to see you?” asked Harry.

“We are part of you,” said Sirius. “Invisible to anyoneelse.”

Harry looked at his mother.

“Stay close to me,” he said quietly.

And he set off. The dementors’ chill did not overcomehim; he passed through it with his companions, andthey acted like Patronuses to him, and together theymarched through the old trees that grew closelytogether, their branches tangled, their roots gnarledand twisted underfoot. Harry clutched the Cloaktightly around him in the darkness, traveling deeperPage | 793 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and deeper into the forest, with no idea where exactlyVoldemort was, but sure that he would find him.Beside him, making scarcely a sound, walked James,Sirius, Lupin, and Lily, and their presence was hiscourage, and the reason he was able to keep puttingone foot in front of the other.

His body and mind felt oddly disconnected now, hislimbs working without conscious instruction, as if hewere passenger, not driver, in the body he was aboutto leave. The dead who walked beside him throughthe forest were much more real to him now than theliving back at the castle: Ron, Hermione, Ginny, andall the others were the ones who felt like ghosts as hestumbled and slipped toward the end of his life,toward Voldemort. ...

A thud and a whisper: Some other living creature hadstirred close by. Harry stopped under the Cloak,peering around, listening, and his mother and father,Lupin and Sirius stopped too.

“Someone there,” came a rough whisper close athand. “He’s got an Invisibility Cloak. Could it be — ?”

Two figures emerged from behind a nearby tree: Theirwands flared, and Harry saw Yaxley and Dolohovpeering into the darkness, directly at the place Harry,his mother and father and Sirius and Lupin stood.Apparently they could not see anything.

“Definitely heard something,” said Yaxley. “Animal,d’you reckon?”

“That head case Hagrid kept a whole bunch of stuff inhere,” said Dolohov, glancing over his shoulder.

Yaxley looked down at his watch.

Page | 794 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Time’s nearly up. Potter’s had his hour. He’s notcoming.”

“And he was sure he’d come! He won’t be happy.”

“Better go back,” said Yaxley. “Find out what the planis now.”

He and Dolohov turned and walked deeper into theforest. Harry followed them, knowing that they wouldlead him exactly where he wanted to go. He glancedsideways, and his mother smiled at him, and hisfather nodded encouragement.

They had traveled on mere minutes when Harry sawlight ahead, and Yaxley and Dolohov stepped out intoa clearing that Harry knew had been the place wherethe monstrous Aragog had once lived. The remnantsof his vast web were there still, but the swarm ofdescendants he had spawned had been driven out bythe Death Eaters, to fight for their cause.

A fire burned in the middle of the clearing, and itsflickering light fell over a crowd of completely silent,watchful Death Eaters. Some of them were stillmasked and hooded; others showed their faces. Twogiants sat on the outskirts of the group, castingmassive shadows over the scene, their faces cruel,rough-hewn like rock. Harry saw Fenrir, skulking,chewing his long nails; the great blond Rowle wasdabbing at his bleeding lip. He saw Lucius Malfoy,who looked defeated and terrified, and Narcissa,whose eyes were sunken and full of apprehension.

Every eye was fixed upon Voldemort, who stood withhis head bowed, and his white hands folded over theElder Wand in front of him. He might have beenpraying, or else counting silently in his mind, andHarry, standing still on the edge of the scene, thoughtPage | 795 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

absurdly of a child counting in a game of hide-and-seek. Behind his head, still swirling and coiling, thegreat snake Nagini floated in her glittering, charmedcage, like a monstrous halo.

When Dolohov and Yaxley rejoined the circle,Voldemort looked up.

“No sign of him, my Lord,” said Dolohov.

Voldemort’s expression did not change. The red eyesseemed to burn in the firelight. Slowly he drew theElder Wand between his long fingers.

“My Lord —”

Bellatrix had spoken: She sat closest to Voldemort,disheveled, her face a little bloody but otherwiseunharmed.

Voldemort raised his hand to silence her, and she didnot speak another word, but eyed him in worshipfulfascination.

“I thought he would come,” said Voldemort in hishigh, clear voice, his eyes on the leaping flames. “Iexpected him to come.”

Nobody spoke. They seemed as scared as Harry,whose heart was now throwing itself against his ribsas though determined to escape the body he wasabout to cast aside. His hands were sweating as hepulled off the Invisibility Cloak and stuffed it beneathhis robes, with his wand. He did not want to betempted to fight.

“I was, it seems ... mistaken,” said Voldemort.

“You weren’t.”

Page | 796 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry said it as loudly as he could, with all the forcehe could muster: He did not want to sound afraid.

The Resurrection Stone slipped from between hisnumb fingers, and out of the corner of his eyes hesaw his parents, Sirius, and Lupin vanish as hestepped forward into the firelight. At that moment hefelt that nobody mattered but Voldemort. It was justthe two of them.

The illusion was gone as soon as it had come. Thegiants roared as the Death Eaters rose together, andthere were many cries, gasps, even laughter.Voldemort had frozen where he stood, but his redeyes had found Harry, and he stared as Harry movedtoward him, with nothing but the fire between them.

Then a voice yelled: “HARRY! NO!”

He turned: Hagrid was bound and trussed, tied to atree nearby. His massive body shook the branchesoverhead as he struggled, desperate.

“NO! NO! HARRY, WHAT’RE YEH — ?”

“QUIET!” shouted Rowle, and with a flick of his wandHagrid was silenced.

Bellatrix, who had leapt to her feet, was lookingeagerly from Voldemort to Harry, her breast heaving.The only things that moved were the flames and thesnake, coiling and uncoiling in the glittering cagebehind Voldemort’s head.

Harry could feel his wand against his chest, but hemade no attempt to draw it. He knew that the snakewas too well protected, knew that if he managed topoint the wand at Nagini, fifty curses would hit himfirst. And still, Voldemort and Harry looked at eachother, and now Voldemort tilted his head a little toPage | 797 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the side, considering the boy standing before him,and a singularly mirthless smile curled the liplessmouth.

“Harry Potter,” he said very softly. His voice mighthave been part of the spitting fire. “The Boy WhoLived.”

None of the Death Eaters moved. They were waiting:Everything was waiting. Hagrid was struggling, andBellatrix was panting, and Harry thought inexplicablyof Ginny, and her blazing look, and the feel of her lipson his —

Voldemort had raised his wand. His head was stilltilted to one side, like a curious child, wondering whatwould happen if he proceeded. Harry looked back intothe red eyes, and wanted it to happen now, quickly,while he could still stand, before he lost control,before he betrayed fear —

He saw the mouth move and a flash of green light,and everything was gone.

Page | 798 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





KING’S CROSS

He lay facedown, listening to the silence. He wasperfectly alone. Nobody was watching. Nobody elsewas there. He was not perfectly sure that he wasthere himself.

A long time later, or maybe no time at all, it came tohim that he must exist, must be more thandisembodied thought, because he was lying, definitelylying, on some surface. Therefore he had a sense oftouch, and the thing against which he lay existed too.

Almost as soon as he had reached this conclusion,Harry became conscious that he was naked.Convinced as he was of his total solitude, this did notconcern him, but it did intrigue him slightly. Hewondered whether, as he could feel, he would be ableto see. In opening them, he discovered that he hadeyes.

He lay in a bright mist, though it was not like mist hehad ever experienced before. His surroundings werenot hidden by cloudy vapor; rather the cloudy vapor

Page | 799 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

had not yet formed into surroundings. The floor onwhich he lay seemed to be white, neither warm norcold, but simply there, a flat, blank something onwhich to be.

He sat up. His body appeared unscathed. He touchedhis face. He was not wearing glasses anymore.

Then a noise reached him through the unformednothingness that surrounded him: the small softthumpings of something that flapped, flailed, andstruggled. It was a pitiful noise, yet also slightlyindecent. He had the uncomfortable feeling that hewas eavesdropping on something furtive, shameful.

For the first time, he wished he were clothed.

Barely had the wish formed in his head than robesappeared a short distance away. He took them andpulled them on: They were soft, clean, and warm. Itwas extraordinary how they had appeared, just likethat, the moment he had wanted them. ...

He stood up, looking around. Was he in some greatRoom of Requirement? The longer he looked, the morethere was to see. A great domed glass roof glitteredhigh above him in sunlight. Perhaps it was a palace.All was hushed and still, except for those oddthumping and whimpering noises coming fromsomewhere close by in the mist. ...

Harry turned slowly on the spot, and hissurroundings seemed to invent themselves before hiseyes. A wide-open space, bright and clean, a halllarger by far than the Great Hall, with that clear,domed glass ceiling. It was quite empty. He was theonly person there, except for —

Page | 800 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He recoiled. He had spotted the thing that wasmaking the noises. It had the form of a small, nakedchild, curled on the ground, its skin raw and rough,flayed-looking, and it lay shuddering under a seatwhere it had been left, unwanted, stuffed out of sight,struggling for breath.

He was afraid of it. Small and fragile and woundedthough it was, he did not want to approach it.Nevertheless he drew slowly nearer, ready to jumpback at any moment. Soon he stood near enough totouch it, yet he could not bring himself to do it. Hefelt like a coward. He ought to comfort it, but itrepulsed him.

“You cannot help.”

He spun around. Albus Dumbledore was walkingtoward him, sprightly and upright, wearing sweepingrobes of midnight blue.

“Harry.” He spread his arms wide, and his hands wereboth whole and white and undamaged. “Youwonderful boy. You brave, brave man. Let us walk.”

Stunned, Harry followed as Dumbledore strode awayfrom where the flayed child lay whimpering, leadinghim to two seats that Harry had not previouslynoticed, set some distance away under that high,sparkling ceiling. Dumbledore sat down in one ofthem, and Harry fell into the other, staring at his oldheadmaster’s face. Dumbledore’s long silver hair andbeard, the piercingly blue eyes behind half-moonspectacles, the crooked nose: Everything was as hehad remembered it. And yet...

“But you’re dead,” said Harry.

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore matter-of-factly.

Page | 801 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Then ... I’m dead too?”

“Ah,” said Dumbledore, smiling still more broadly.“That is the question, isn’t it? On the whole, dear boy,I think not.”

They looked at each other, the old man still beaming.“Not?” repeated Harry.

“Not,” said Dumbledore.

“But ...” Harry raised his hand instinctively towardthe lightning scar. It did not seem to be there. “But Ishould have died — I didn’t defend myself! I meant tolet him kill me!”

“And that,” said Dumbledore, “will, I think, havemade all the difference.”

Happiness seemed to radiate from Dumbledore likelight, like fire: Harry had never seen the man soutterly, so palpably content.

“Explain,” said Harry.

“But you already know,” said Dumbledore. Hetwiddled his thumbs together.

“I let him kill me,” said Harry. “Didn’t I?”

“You did,” said Dumbledore, nodding. “Go on!”

“So the part of his soul that was in me ...”

Dumbledore nodded still more enthusiastically,urging Harry onward, a broad smile of encouragementon his face.

Page | 802 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

"... has it gone?”

“Oh yes!” said Dumbledore. “Yes, he destroyed it.

Your soul is whole, and completely your own, Harry.”

“But then ...”

Harry glanced over his shoulder to where the small,maimed creature trembled under the chair.

“What is that, Professor?”

“Something that is beyond either of our help,” saidDumbledore.

“But if Voldemort used the Killing Curse,” Harrystarted again, “and nobody died for me this time —how can I be alive?”

“I think you know,” said Dumbledore. “Think back.Remember what he did, in his ignorance, in his greedand his cruelty.”

Harry thought. He let his gaze drift over hissurroundings. If it was indeed a palace in which theysat, it was an odd one, with chairs set in little rowsand bits of railing here and there, and still, he andDumbledore and the stunted creature under the chairwere the only beings there. Then the answer rose tohis lips easily, without effort.

“He took my blood,” said Harry.

“Precisely!” said Dumbledore. “He took your blood andrebuilt his living body with it! Your blood in his veins,Harry, Lily’s protection inside both of you! He tetheredyou to life while he lives!”

Page | 803 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I live ... while he lives? But I thought ... I thought itwas the other way round! I thought we both had todie? Or is it the same thing?”

He was distracted by the whimpering and thumpingof the agonized creature behind them and glancedback at it yet again.

“Are you sure we can’t do anything?”

“There is no help possible.”

“Then explain ... more,” said Harry, and Dumbledoresmiled.

“You were the seventh Horcrux, Harry, the Horcruxhe never meant to make. He had rendered his soul sounstable that it broke apart when he committed thoseacts of unspeakable evil, the murder of your parents,the attempted killing of a child. But what escapedfrom that room was even less than he knew. He leftmore than his body behind. He left part of himselflatched to you, the would-be victim who had survived.

“And his knowledge remained woefully incomplete,Harry! That which Voldemort does not value, he takesno trouble to comprehend. Of house-elves andchildren’s tales, of love, loyalty, and innocence,Voldemort knows and understands nothing. Nothing.That they all have a power beyond his own, a powerbeyond the reach of any magic, is a truth he hasnever grasped.

“He took your blood believing it would strengthenhim. He took into his body a tiny part of theenchantment your mother laid upon you when shedied for you. His body keeps her sacrifice alive, andwhile that enchantment survives, so do you and sodoes Voldemort’s one last hope for himself.”

Page | 804 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore smiled at Harry, and Harry stared athim.

“And you knew this? You knew — all along?”

“I guessed. But my guesses have usually been good,”said Dumbledore happily, and they sat in silence forwhat seemed like a long time, while the creaturebehind them continued to whimper and tremble.

“There’s more,” said Harry. “There’s more to it. Whydid my wand break the wand he borrowed?”

“As to that, I cannot be sure.”

“Have a guess, then,” said Harry, and Dumbledorelaughed.

“What you must understand, Harry, is that you andLord Voldemort have journeyed together into realmsof magic hitherto unknown and untested. But here iswhat I think happened, and it is unprecedented, andno wandmaker could, I think, ever have predicted itor explained it to Voldemort.

“Without meaning to, as you now know, LordVoldemort doubled the bond between you when hereturned to a human form. A part of his soul was stillattached to yours, and, thinking to strengthenhimself, he took a part of your mother’s sacrifice intohimself. If he could only have understood the preciseand terrible power of that sacrifice, he would not,perhaps, have dared to touch your blood. ... But then,if he had been able to understand, he could not beLord Voldemort, and might never have murdered atall.

“Having ensured this two-fold connection, havingwrapped your destinies together more securely than

Page | 805 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

ever two wizards were joined in history, Voldemortproceeded to attack you with a wand that shared acore with yours. And now something very strangehappened, as we know. The cores reacted in a waythat Lord Voldemort, who never knew that your wandwas twin of his, had never expected.

“He was more afraid than you were that night, Harry.You had accepted, even embraced, the possibility ofdeath, something Lord Voldemort has never been ableto do. Your courage won, your wand overpowered his.And in doing so, something happened between thosewands, something that echoed the relationshipbetween their masters.

“I believe that your wand imbibed some of the powerand qualities of Voldemort’s wand that night, which isto say that it contained a little of Voldemort himself.So your wand recognized him when he pursued you,recognized a man who was both kin and mortalenemy, and it regurgitated some of his own magicagainst him, magic much more powerful thananything Lucius’s wand had ever performed. Yourwand now contained the power of your enormouscourage and of Voldemort’s own deadly skill: Whatchance did that poor stick of Lucius Malfoy’s stand?”

“But if my wand was so powerful, how comeHermione was able to break it?” asked Harry.

“My dear boy, its remarkable effects were directedonly at Voldemort, who had tampered so ill-advisedlywith the deepest laws of magic. Only toward him wasthat wand abnormally powerful. Otherwise it was awand like any other ... though a good one, I am sure,”Dumbledore finished kindly.

Page | 806 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry sat in thought for a long time, or perhapsseconds. It was very hard to be sure of things liketime, here.

“He killed me with your wand.”

“He failed to kill you with my wand,” Dumbledorecorrected Harry. “I think we can agree that you arenot dead — though, of course,” he added, as if fearinghe had been discourteous, “I do not minimize yoursufferings, which I am sure were severe.”

“I feel great at the moment, though,” said Harry,looking down at his clean, unblemished hands.“Where are we, exactly?”

“Well, I was going to ask you that,” said Dumbledore,looking around. “Where would you say that we are?”

Until Dumbledore had asked, Harry had not known.Now, however, he found that he had an answer readyto give.

“It looks,” he said slowly, “like King’s Cross station.Except a lot cleaner and empty, and there are notrains as far as I can see.”

“King’s Cross station!” Dumbledore was chucklingimmoderately. “Good gracious, really?”

“Well, where do you think we are?” asked Harry, alittle defensively.

“My dear boy, I have no idea. This is, as they say,your party.”

Harry had no idea what this meant; Dumbledore wasbeing infuriating. He glared at him, then remembered

Page | 807 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

a much more pressing question than that of theircurrent location.

“The Deathly Hallows,” he said, and he was glad tosee that the words wiped the smile fromDumbledore’s face.

“Ah, yes,” he said. He even looked a little worried.“Well?”

For the first time since Harry had met Dumbledore,he looked less than an old man, much less. He lookedfleetingly like a small boy caught in wrongdoing.

“Can you forgive me?” he said. “Can you forgive mefor not trusting you? For not telling you? Harry, I onlyfeared that you would fail as I had failed. I onlydreaded that you would make my mistakes. I craveyour pardon, Harry. I have known, for some time now,that you are the better man.”

“What are you talking about?” asked Harry, startledby Dumbledore’s tone, by the sudden tears in hiseyes.

“The Hallows, the Hallows,” murmured Dumbledore.“A desperate man’s dream!”

“But they’re real!”

“Real, and dangerous, and a lure for fools,” saidDumbledore. “And I was such a fool. But you know,don’t you? I have no secrets from you anymore. Youknow.”

“What do I know?”

Page | 808 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore turned his whole body to face Harry, andtears still sparkled in the brilliantly blue eyes.

“Master of death, Harry, master of Death! Was Ibetter, ultimately, than Voldemort?”

“Of course you were,” said Harry. “Of course — howcan you ask that? You never killed if you could avoidit!”

“True, true,” said Dumbledore, and he was like achild seeking reassurance. “Yet I too sought a way toconquer death, Harry.”

“Not the way he did,” said Harry. After all his anger atDumbledore, how odd it was to sit here, beneath thehigh, vaulted ceiling, and defend Dumbledore fromhimself. “Hallows, not Horcruxes.”

“Hallows,” murmured Dumbledore, “not Horcruxes.Precisely.”

There was a pause. The creature behind themwhimpered, but Harry no longer looked around.

“Grindelwald was looking for them too?” he asked.

Dumbledore closed his eyes for a moment andnodded.

“It was the thing, above all, that drew us together,” hesaid quietly. “Two clever, arrogant boys with a sharedobsession. He wanted to come to Godric’s Hollow, as Iam sure you have guessed, because of the grave ofIgnotus Peverell. He wanted to explore the place thethird brother had died.”

“So it’s true?” asked Harry. “All of it? The Peverellbrothers —”

Page | 809 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“— were the three brothers of the tale,” saidDumbledore, nodding. “Oh yes, I think so. Whetherthey met Death on a lonely road ... I think it morelikely that the Peverell brothers were simply gifted,dangerous wizards who succeeded in creating thosepowerful objects. The story of them being Death’s ownHallows seems to me the sort of legend that mighthave sprung up around such creations.

“The Cloak, as you know now, traveled down throughthe ages, father to son, mother to daughter, rightdown to Ignotus’s last living descendant, who wasborn, as Ignotus was, in the village of Godric’sHollow.”

Dumbledore smiled at Harry.

“Me?”

“You. You have guessed, I know, why the Cloak wasin my possession on the night your parents died.James had showed it to me just a few dayspreviously. It explained much of his undetectedwrong-doing at school! I could hardly believe what Iwas seeing. I asked to borrow it, to examine it. I hadlong since given up my dream of uniting the Hallows,but I could not resist, could not help taking a closerlook. ... It was a Cloak the likes of which I had neverseen, immensely old, perfect in every respect ... andthen your father died, and I had two Hallows at last,all to myself!”

His tone was unbearably bitter.

“The Cloak wouldn’t have helped them survive,though,” Harry said quickly. “Voldemort knew wheremy mum and dad were. The Cloak couldn’t havemade them curse-proof.”

Page | 810 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“True,” sighed Dumbledore. “True.”

Harry waited, but Dumbledore did not speak, so heprompted him.

“So you’d given up looking for the Hallows when yousaw the Cloak?”

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore faintly. It seemed that heforced himself to meet Harry’s eyes. “You know whathappened. You know. You cannot despise me morethan I despise myself.”

“But I don’t despise you —”

“Then you should,” said Dumbledore. He drew a deepbreath. “You know the secret of my sister’s ill health,what those Muggles did, what she became. You knowhow my poor father sought revenge, and paid theprice, died in Azkaban. You know how my mothergave up her own life to care for Ariana.

“I resented it, Harry.”

Dumbledore stated it baldly, coldly. He was lookingnow over the top of Harry’s head, into the distance.

“I was gifted, I was brilliant. I wanted to escape. Iwanted to shine. I wanted glory.

“Do not misunderstand me,” he said, and paincrossed the face so that he looked ancient again. “Iloved them. I loved my parents, I loved my brotherand my sister, but I was selfish, Harry, more selfishthan you, who are a remarkably selfless person, couldpossibly imagine.

“So that, when my mother died, and I was left theresponsibility of a damaged sister and a wayward

Page | 811 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

brother, I returned to my village in anger andbitterness. Trapped and wasted, I thought! And then,of course, he came. ...”

Dumbledore looked directly into Harry’s eyes again.

“Grindelwald. You cannot imagine how his ideascaught me, Harry, inflamed me. Muggles forced intosubservience. We wizards triumphant. Grindelwaldand I, the glorious young leaders of the revolution.

“Oh, I had a few scruples. I assuaged my consciencewith empty words. It would all be for the greater good,and any harm done would be repaid a hundredfold inbenefits for wizards. Did I know, in my heart ofhearts, what Gellert Grindelwald was? I think I did,but I closed my eyes. If the plans we were makingcame to fruition, all my dreams would come true.

“And at the heart of our schemes, the DeathlyHallows! How they fascinated him, how theyfascinated both of us! The unbeatable wand, theweapon that would lead us to power! TheResurrection Stone — to him, though I pretended notto know it, it meant an army of Inferi! To me, Iconfess, it meant the return of my parents, and thelifting of all responsibility from my shoulders.

“And the Cloak ... somehow, we never discussed theCloak much, Harry. Both of us could concealourselves well enough without the Cloak, the truemagic of which, of course, is that it can be used toprotect and shield others as well as its owner. Ithought that, if we ever found it, it might be useful inhiding Ariana, but our interest in the Cloak wasmainly that it completed the trio, for the legend saidthat the man who united all three objects would thenbe truly master of death, which we took to mean‘invincible.’

Page | 812 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Invincible masters of death, Grindelwald andDumbledore! Two months of insanity, of crueldreams, and neglect of the only two members of myfamily left to me.

“And then ... you know what happened. Realityreturned in the form of my rough, unlettered, andinfinitely more admirable brother. I did not want tohear the truths he shouted at me. I did not want tohear that I could not set forth to seek Hallows with afragile and unstable sister in tow.

“The argument became a fight. Grindelwald lostcontrol. That which I had always sensed in him,though I pretended not to, now sprang into terriblebeing. And Ariana ... after all my mother’s care andcaution ... lay dead upon the floor.”

Dumbledore gave a little gasp and began to cry inearnest. Harry reached out and was glad to find thathe could touch him: He gripped his arm tightly andDumbledore gradually regained control.

“Well, Grindelwald fled, as anyone but I could havepredicted. He vanished, with his plans for seizingpower, and his schemes for Muggle torture, and hisdreams of the Deathly Hallows, dreams in which Ihad encouraged him and helped him. He ran, while Iwas left to bury my sister, and learn to live with myguilt and my terrible grief, the price of my shame.

“Years passed. There were rumors about him. Theysaid he had procured a wand of immense power. I,meanwhile, was offered the post of Minister of Magic,not once, but several times. Naturally, I refused. I hadlearned that I was not to be trusted with power.”

“But you’d have been better, much better, than Fudgeor Scrimgeour!” burst out Harry.

Page | 813 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Would I?” asked Dumbledore heavily. “I am not sosure. I had proven, as a very young man, that powerwas my weakness and my temptation. It is a curiousthing, Harry, but perhaps those who are best suitedto power are those who have never sought it. Thosewho, like you, have leadership thrust upon them, andtake up the mantle because they must, and find totheir own surprise that they wear it well.

“I was safer at Hogwarts. I think I was a good teacher

“You were the best —”

“— you are very kind, Harry. But while I busiedmyself with the training of young wizards,

Grindelwald was raising an army. They say he fearedme, and perhaps he did, but less, I think, than Ifeared him.

“Oh, not death,” said Dumbledore, in answer toHarry’s questioning look. “Not what he could do to memagically. I knew that we were evenly matched,perhaps that I was a shade more skillful. It was thetruth I feared. You see, I never knew which of us, inthat last, horrific fight, had actually cast the cursethat killed my sister. You may call me cowardly: Youwould be right. Harry, I dreaded beyond all things theknowledge that it had been I who brought about herdeath, not merely through my arrogance andstupidity, but that I actually struck the blow thatsnuffed out her life.

“I think he knew it, I think he knew what frightenedme. I delayed meeting him until finally, it would havebeen too shameful to resist any longer. People weredying and he seemed unstoppable, and I had to dowhat I could.

Page | 814 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Well, you know what happened next. I won the duel.

I won the wand.”

Another silence. Harry did not ask whetherDumbledore had ever found out who struck Arianadead. He did not want to know, and even less did hewant Dumbledore to have to tell him. At last he knewwhat Dumbledore would have seen when he looked inthe Mirror of Erised, and why Dumbledore had beenso understanding of the fascination it had exercisedover Harry.

They sat in silence for a long time, and thewhimperings of the creature behind them barelydisturbed Harry anymore.

At last he said, “Grindelwald tried to stop Voldemortgoing after the wand. He lied, you know, pretended hehad never had it.”

Dumbledore nodded, looking down at his lap, tearsstill glittering on the crooked nose.

“They say he showed remorse in later years, alone inhis cell at Nurmengard. I hope that it is true. I wouldlike to think he did feel the horror and shame of whathe had done. Perhaps that lie to Voldemort was hisattempt to make amends ... to prevent Voldemortfrom taking the Hallow ...”

"... or maybe from breaking into your tomb?”suggested Harry, and Dumbledore dabbed his eyes.

After another short pause Harry said, “You tried touse the Resurrection Stone.”

Dumbledore nodded.

Page | 815 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“When I discovered it, after all those years, buried inthe abandoned home of the Gaunts — the Hallow Ihad craved most of all, though in my youth I hadwanted it for very different reasons — I lost my head,Harry. I quite forgot that it was now a Horcrux, thatthe ring was sure to carry a curse. I picked it up, andI put it on, and for a second I imagined that I wasabout to see Ariana, and my mother, and my father,and to tell them how very, very sorry I was. ...

“I was such a fool, Harry. After all those years I hadlearned nothing. I was unworthy to unite the DeathlyHallows, I had proved it time and again, and here wasfinal proof.”

“Why?” said Harry. “It was natural! You wanted to seethem again. What’s wrong with that?”

“Maybe a man in a million could unite the Hallows,Harry. I was fit only to possess the meanest of them,the least extraordinary. I was fit to own the ElderWand, and not to boast of it, and not to kill with it. Iwas permitted to tame and to use it, because I took it,not for gain, but to save others from it.

“But the Cloak, I took out of vain curiosity, and so itcould never have worked for me as it works for you,its true owner. The stone I would have used in anattempt to drag back those who are at peace, ratherthan to enable my self-sacrifice, as you did. You arethe worthy possessor of the Hallows.”

Dumbledore patted Harry’s hand, and Harry lookedup at the old man and smiled; he could not helphimself. How could he remain angry with Dumbledorenow?

“Why did you have to make it so difficult?”

Page | 816 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore’s smile was tremulous.

“I am afraid I counted on Miss Granger to slow youup, Harry. I was afraid that your hot head mightdominate your good heart. I was scared that, ifpresented outright with the facts about thosetempting objects, you might seize the Hallows as Idid, at the wrong time, for the wrong reasons. If youlaid hands on them, I wanted you to possess themsafely. You are the true master of death, because thetrue master does not seek to run away from Death.

He accepts that he must die, and understands thatthere are far, far worse things in the living world thandying.”

“And Voldemort never knew about the Hallows?”

“I do not think so, because he did not recognize theResurrection Stone he turned into a Horcrux. Buteven if he had known about them, Harry, I doubt thathe would have been interested in any except the first.He would not think that he needed the Cloak, and asfor the stone, whom would he want to bring backfrom the dead? He fears the dead. He does not love.”

“But you expected him to go after the wand?”

“I have been sure that he would try, ever since yourwand beat Voldemort’s in the graveyard of LittleHangleton. At first, he was afraid that you hadconquered him by superior skill. Once he hadkidnapped Ollivander, however, he discovered theexistence of the twin cores. He thought that explainedeverything. Yet the borrowed wand did no betteragainst yours! So Voldemort, instead of askinghimself what quality it was in you that had made yourwand so strong, what gift you possessed that he didnot, naturally set out to find the one wand that, theysaid, would beat any other. For him, the Elder WandPage | 817 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

has become an obsession to rival his obsession withyou. He believes that the Elder Wand removes his lastweakness and makes him truly invincible. PoorSeverus ...”

“If you planned your death with Snape, you meanthim to end up with the Elder Wand, didn’t you?”

“I admit that was my intention,” said Dumbledore,“but it did not work as I intended, did it?”

“No,” said Harry. “That bit didn’t work out.”

The creature behind them jerked and moaned, andHarry and Dumbledore sat without talking for thelongest time yet. The realization of what wouldhappen next settled gradually over Harry in the longminutes, like softly falling snow.

“I’ve got to go back, haven’t I?”

“That is up to you.”

“I’ve got a choice?”

“Oh yes.” Dumbledore smiled at him. “We are inKing’s Cross, you say? I think that if you decided notto go back, you would be able to ... let’s say ... boarda train.”

“And where would it take me?”

“On,” said Dumbledore simply.

Silence again.

“Voldemort’s got the Elder Wand.”

“True. Voldemort has the Elder Wand.”

Page | 818 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But you want me to go back?”

“I think,” said Dumbledore, “that if you choose toreturn, there is a chance that he may be finished forgood. I cannot promise it. But I know this, Harry, thatyou have less to fear from returning here than hedoes.”

Harry glanced again at the raw-looking thing thattrembled and choked in the shadow beneath thedistant chair.

“Do not pity the dead, Harry. Pity the living, and,above all, those who live without love. By returning,you may ensure that fewer souls are maimed, fewerfamilies are torn apart. If that seems to you a worthygoal, then we say good-bye for the present.”

Harry nodded and sighed. Leaving this place wouldnot be nearly as hard as walking into the forest hadbeen, but it was warm and light and peaceful here,and he knew that he was heading back to pain andthe fear of more loss. He stood up, and Dumbledoredid the same, and they looked for a long moment intoeach other’s faces.

“Tell me one last thing,” said Harry. “Is this real? Orhas this been happening inside my head?”

Dumbledore beamed at him, and his voice soundedloud and strong in Harry’s ears even though thebright mist was descending again, obscuring hisfigure.

“Of course it is happening inside your head, Harry,but why on earth should that mean that it is notreal?” *

Page | 819 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





THE FLAW IN THE PLAN

He was lying facedown on the ground again. Thesmell of the forest filled his nostrils. He could feel thecold hard ground beneath his cheek, and the hinge ofhis glasses, which had been knocked sideways by thefall, cutting into his temple. Every inch of him ached,and the place where the Killing Curse had hit him feltlike the bruise of an iron-clad punch. He did not stir,but remained exactly where he had fallen, with hisleft arm bent out at an awkward angle and his mouthgaping.

He had expected to hear cheers of triumph andjubilation at his death, but instead hurried footsteps,whispers, and solicitous murmurs filled the air.

“My Lord ...my Lord ...”

It was Bellatrix’s voice, and she spoke as if to a lover.Harry did not dare open his eyes, but allowed hisother senses to explore his predicament. He knewthat his wand was still stowed beneath his robesbecause he could feel it pressed between his chest

Page | 820 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

and the ground. A slight cushioning effect in the areaof his stomach told him that the Invisibility Cloak wasalso there, stuffed out of sight.

“My Lord ...”

“That will do,” said Voldemort’s voice.

More footsteps: Several people were backing awayfrom the same spot. Desperate to see what washappening and why, Harry opened his eyes by amillimeter.

Voldemort seemed to be getting to his feet. VariousDeath Eaters were hurrying away from him, returningto the crowd lining the clearing. Bellatrix aloneremained behind, kneeling beside Voldemort.

Harry closed his eyes again and considered what hehad seen. The Death Eaters had been huddledaround Voldemort, who seemed to have fallen to theground. Something had happened when he had hitHarry with the Killing Curse. Had Voldemort toocollapsed? It seemed like it. And both of them hadfallen briefly unconscious and both of them had nowreturned. ...

“My Lord, let me —”

“I do not require assistance,” said Voldemort coldly,and though he could not see it, Harry picturedBellatrix withdrawing a helpful hand. “The boy ... Ishe dead?”

There was complete silence in the clearing. Nobodyapproached Harry, but he felt their concentrated gaze;it seemed to press him harder into the ground, and hewas terrified a finger or an eyelid might twitch.

Page | 821 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You,” said Voldemort, and there was a bang and asmall shriek of pain. “Examine him. Tell me whetherhe is dead.”

Harry did not know who had been sent to verify. Hecould only lie there, with his heart thumpingtraitorously, and wait to be examined, but at thesame time noting, small comfort though it was, thatVoldemort was wary of approaching him, thatVoldemort suspected that all had not gone to plan. ...

Hands, softer than he had been expecting, touchedHarry’s face, pulled back an eyelid, crept beneath hisshirt, down to his chest, and felt his heart. He couldhear the woman’s fast breathing, her long hair tickledhis face. He knew that she could feel the steadypounding of life against his ribs.

“Is Draco alive? Is he in the castle?”

The whisper was barely audible; her lips were an inchfrom his ear, her head bent so low that her long hairshielded his face from the onlookers.

“Yes,” he breathed back.

He felt the hand on his chest contract; her nailspierced him. Then it was withdrawn. She had sat up.

“He is dead!” Narcissa Malfoy called to the watchers.

And now they shouted, now they yelled in triumphand stamped their feet, and through his eyelids,

Harry saw bursts of red and silver light shoot into theair in celebration.

Still feigning death on the ground, he understood.Narcissa knew that the only way she would bepermitted to enter Hogwarts, and find her son, was as

Page | 822 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

part of the conquering army. She no longer caredwhether Voldemort won.

“You see?” screeched Voldemort over the tumult.“Harry Potter is dead by my hand, and no man alivecan threaten me now! Watch! CrucioV’

Harry had been expecting it, knew his body would notbe allowed to remain unsullied upon the forest floor;it must be subjected to humiliation to proveVoldemort’s victory. He was lifted into the air, and ittook all his determination to remain limp, yet the painhe expected did not come. He was thrown once, twice,three times into the air: His glasses flew off and hefelt his wand slide a little beneath his robes, but hekept himself floppy and lifeless, and when he fell tothe ground for the last time, the clearing echoed withjeers and shrieks of laughter.

“Now,” said Voldemort, “we go to the castle, and showthem what has become of their hero. Who shall dragthe body? No — Wait —”

There was a fresh outbreak of laughter, and after afew moments Harry felt the ground trembling beneathhim.

“You carry him,” Voldemort said. “He will be nice andvisible in your arms, will he not? Pick up your littlefriend, Hagrid. And the glasses — put on the glasses— he must be recognizable —”

Someone slammed Harry’s glasses back onto his facewith deliberate force, but the enormous hands thatlifted him into the air were exceedingly gentle. Harrycould feel Hagrid’s arms trembling with the force ofhis heaving sobs; great tears splashed down uponhim as Hagrid cradled Harry in his arms, and Harry

Page | 823 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

did not dare, by movement or word, to intimate toHagrid that all was not, yet, lost.

“Move,” said Voldemort, and Hagrid stumbledforward, forcing his way through the close-growingtrees, back through the forest. Branches caught atHarry’s hair and robes, but he lay quiescent, hismouth lolling open, his eyes shut, and in thedarkness, while the Death Eaters crowed all aroundthem, and while Hagrid sobbed blindly, nobodylooked to see whether a pulse beat in the exposedneck of Harry Potter. ...

The two giants crashed along behind the DeathEaters; Harry could hear trees creaking and falling asthey passed; they made so much din that birds roseshrieking into the sky, and even the jeers of the DeathEaters were drowned. The victorious processionmarched on toward the open ground, and after awhile Harry could tell, by the lightening of thedarkness through his closed eyelids, that the treeswere beginning to thin.

“BANE!”

Hagrid’s unexpected bellow nearly forced Harry’s eyesopen. “Happy now, are yeh, that yeh didn’ fight, yehcowardly bunch o’ nags? Are yeh happy Harry Potter’s— d-dead...?”

Hagrid could not continue, but broke down in freshtears. Harry wondered how many centaurs werewatching their procession pass; he dared not open hiseyes to look. Some of the Death Eaters called insultsat the centaurs as they left them behind. A little later,Harry sensed, by a freshening of the air, that theyhad reached the edge of the forest.

“Stop.”

Page | 824 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Harry thought that Hagrid must have been forced toobey Voldemort’s command, because he lurched alittle. And now a chill settled over them where theystood, and Harry heard the rasping breath of thedementors that patrolled the outer trees. They wouldnot affect him now. The fact of his own survivalburned inside him, a talisman against them, asthough his father’s stag kept guardian in his heart.

Someone passed close by Harry, and he knew that itwas Voldemort himself because he spoke a momentlater, his voice magically magnified so that it swelledthrough the grounds, crashing upon Harry’seardrums.

“Harry Potter is dead. He was killed as he ran away,trying to save himself while you lay down your livesfor him. We bring you his body as proof that yourhero is gone.

“The battle is won. You have lost half of your fighters.My Death Eaters outnumber you, and the Boy WhoLived is finished. There must be no more war. Anyonewho continues to resist, man, woman, or child, will beslaughtered, as will every member of their family.Come out of the castle now, kneel before me, and youshall be spared. Your parents and children, yourbrothers and sisters will live and be forgiven, and youwill join me in the new world we shall build together.”

There was silence in the grounds and from the castle.Voldemort was so close to him that Harry did not dareopen his eyes again.

“Come,” said Voldemort, and Harry heard him moveahead, and Hagrid was forced to follow. Now Harryopened his eyes a fraction, and saw Voldemortstriding in front of them, wearing the great snakeNagini around his shoulders, now free of herPage | 825 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

enchanted cage. But Harry had no possibility ofextracting the wand concealed under his robeswithout being noticed by the Death Eaters, whomarched on either side of them through the slowlylightening darkness. ...

“Harry,” sobbed Hagrid. “Oh, Harry ... Harry ...”

Harry shut his eyes tight again. He knew that theywere approaching the castle and strained his ears todistinguish, above the gleeful voices of the DeathEaters and their tramping footsteps, signs of life fromthose within.

“Stop.”

The Death Eaters came to a halt: Harry heard themspreading out in a line facing the open front doors ofthe school. He could see, even through his closed lids,the reddish glow that meant light streamed upon himfrom the entrance hall. He waited. Any moment, thepeople for whom he had tried to die would see him,lying apparently dead, in Hagrid’s arms.

“NO!”

The scream was the more terrible because he hadnever expected or dreamed that Professor McGonagallcould make such a sound. He heard another womanlaughing nearby, and knew that Bellatrix gloried inMcGonagall’s despair. He squinted again for a singlesecond and saw the open doorway filling with people,as the survivors of the battle came out onto the frontsteps to face their vanquishers and see the truth ofHarry’s death for themselves. He saw Voldemortstanding a little in front of him, stroking Nagini’shead with a single white finger. He closed his eyesagain.

Page | 826 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No!”

“iVo!”

“Harry! HARRY!”

Ron’s, Hermione’s, and Ginny’s voices were worsethan McGonagall’s; Harry wanted nothing more thanto call back, yet he made himself lie silent, and theircries acted like a trigger; the crowd of survivors tookup the cause, screaming and yelling abuse at theDeath Eaters, until —

“SILENCE!” cried Voldemort, and there was a bangand a flash of bright light, and silence was forcedupon them all. “It is over! Set him down, Hagrid, atmy feet, where he belongs!”

Harry felt himself lowered onto the grass.

“You see?” said Voldemort, and Harry felt him stridingbackward and forward right beside the place where helay. “Harry Potter is dead! Do you understand now,deluded ones? He was nothing, ever, but a boy whorelied on others to sacrifice themselves for him!”

“He beat you!” yelled Ron, and the charm broke, andthe defenders of Hogwarts were shouting andscreaming again until a second, more powerful bangextinguished their voices once more.

“He was killed while trying to sneak out of the castlegrounds,” said Voldemort, and there was relish in hisvoice for the lie, “killed while trying to save himself—”

But Voldemort broke off: Harry heard a scuffle and ashout, then another bang, a flash of light, and a gruntof pain; he opened his eyes an infinitesimal amount.Someone had broken free of the crowd and charged at

Page | 827 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort: Harry saw the figure hit the ground,Disarmed, Voldemort throwing the challenger’s wandaside and laughing.

“And who is this?” he said in his soft snake’s hiss.“Who has volunteered to demonstrate what happensto those who continue to fight when the battle islost?”

Bellatrix gave a delighted laugh.

“It is Neville Longbottom, my Lord! The boy who hasbeen giving the Carrows so much trouble! The son ofthe Aurors, remember?”

“Ah, yes, I remember,” said Voldemort, looking downat Neville, who was struggling back to his feet,unarmed and unprotected, standing in the no-man’s-land between the survivors and the Death Eaters.

“But you are a pureblood, aren’t you, my brave boy?”Voldemort asked Neville, who stood facing him, hisempty hands curled in fists.

“So what if I am?” said Neville loudly.

“You show spirit and bravery, and you come of noblestock. You will make a very valuable Death Eater. Weneed your kind, Neville Longbottom.”

“I’ll join you when hell freezes over,” said Neville.“Dumbledore’s Army!” he shouted, and there was ananswering cheer from the crowd, whom Voldemort’sSilencing Charms seemed unable to hold.

“Very well,” said Voldemort, and Harry heard moredanger in the silkiness of his voice than in the mostpowerful curse. “If that is your choice, Longbottom,we revert to the original plan. On your head,” he saidquietly, “be it.”

Page | 828 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Still watching through his lashes, Harry sawVoldemort wave his wand. Seconds later, out of one ofthe castle’s shattered windows, something that lookedlike a misshapen bird flew through the half light andlanded in Voldemort’s hand. He shook the mildewedobject by its pointed end and it dangled, empty andragged: the Sorting Hat.

“There will be no more Sorting at Hogwarts School,”said Voldemort. “There will be no more Houses. Theemblem, shield, and colors of my noble ancestor,Salazar Slytherin, will suffice for everyone. Won’tthey, Neville Longbottom?”

He pointed his wand at Neville, who grew rigid andstill, then forced the hat onto Neville’s head, so that itslipped down below his eyes. There were movementsfrom the watching crowd in front of the castle, and asone, the Death Eaters raised their wands, holding thefighters of Hogwarts at bay.

“Neville here is now going to demonstrate whathappens to anyone foolish enough to continue tooppose me,” said Voldemort, and with a flick of hiswand, he caused the Sorting Hat to burst into flames.

Screams split the dawn, and Neville was aflame,rooted to the spot, unable to move, and Harry couldnot bear it: He must act —

And then many things happened at the samemoment.

They heard uproar from the distant boundary of theschool as what sounded like hundreds of people cameswarming over the out-of-sight walls and peltedtoward the castle, uttering loud war cries. At thesame time, Grawp came lumbering around the side ofthe castle and yelled, “HAGGER!” His cry wasPage | 829 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

answered by roars from Voldemort’s giants: They ranat Grawp like bull elephants, making the earth quake.Then came hooves and the twangs of bows, andarrows were suddenly falling amongst the DeathEaters, who broke ranks, shouting their surprise.Harry pulled the Invisibility Cloak from inside hisrobes, swung it over himself, and sprang to his feet,as Neville moved too.

In one swift, fluid motion, Neville broke free of theBody-Bind Curse upon him; the flaming hat fell offhim and he drew from its depths something silver,with a glittering, rubied handle —

The slash of the silver blade could not be heard overthe roar of the oncoming crowd or the sounds of theclashing giants or of the stampeding centaurs, andyet it seemed to draw every eye. With a single strokeNeville sliced off the great snake’s head, which spunhigh into the air, gleaming in the light flooding fromthe entrance hall, and Voldemort’s mouth was openin a scream of fury that nobody could hear, and thesnake’s body thudded to the ground at his feet —

Hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak, Harry cast aShield Charm between Neville and Voldemort beforethe latter could raise his wand. Then, over thescreams and the roars and the thunderous stamps ofthe battling giants, Hagrid’s yell came loudest of all.

“HARRY!” Hagrid shouted. “HARRY — WHERE’SHARRY?”

Chaos reigned. The charging centaurs were scatteringthe Death Eaters, everyone was fleeing the giants’stamping feet, and nearer and nearer thundered thereinforcements that had come from who knew where;Harry saw great winged creatures soaring around theheads of Voldemort’s giants, thestrals and BuckbeakPage | 830 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

the hippogriff scratching at their eyes while Grawppunched and pummeled them; and now the wizards,defenders of Hogwarts and Death Eaters alike, werebeing forced back into the castle. Harry was shootingjinxes and curses at any Death Eater he could see,and they crumpled, not knowing what or who had hitthem, and their bodies were trampled by theretreating crowd.

Still hidden beneath the Invisibility Cloak, Harry wasbuffeted into the entrance hall: He was searching forVoldemort and saw him across the room, firing spellsfrom his wand as he backed into the Great Hall, stillscreaming instructions to his followers as he sentcurses flying left and right; Harry cast more ShieldCharms, and Voldemort’s would-be victims, SeamusFinnigan and Hannah Abbott, darted past him intothe Great Hall, where they joined the fight alreadyflourishing inside it.

And now there were more, even more people stormingup the front steps, and Harry saw Charlie Weasleyovertaking Horace Slughorn, who was still wearinghis emerald pajamas. They seemed to have returnedat the head of what looked like the families andfriends of every Hogwarts student who had remainedto fight, along with the shopkeepers and homeownersof Hogsmeade. The centaurs Bane, Ronan, andMagorian burst into the hall with a great clatter ofhooves, as behind Harry the door that led to thekitchens was blasted off its hinges.

The house-elves of Hogwarts swarmed into theentrance hall, screaming and waving carving knivesand cleavers, and at their head, the locket of RegulusBlack bouncing on his chest, was Kreacher, hisbullfrog’s voice audible even above this din: “Fight!Fight! Fight for my Master, defender of house-elves!

Page | 831 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Fight the Dark Lord, in the name of brave Regulus!Fight!”

They were hacking and stabbing at the ankles andshins of Death Eaters, their tiny faces alive withmalice, and everywhere Harry looked Death Eaterswere folding under sheer weight of numbers,overcome by spells, dragging arrows from wounds,stabbed in the leg by elves, or else simply attemptingto escape, but swallowed by the oncoming horde.

But it was not over yet: Harry sped between duelers,past struggling prisoners, and into the Great Hall.

Voldemort was in the center of the battle, and he wasstriking and smiting all within reach. Harry could notget a clear shot, but fought his way nearer, stillinvisible, and the Great Hall became more and morecrowded as everyone who could walk forced their wayinside.

Harry saw Yaxley slammed to the floor by George andLee Jordan, saw Dolohov fall with a scream atFlitwick’s hands, saw Walden Macnair thrown acrossthe room by Hagrid, hit the stone wall opposite, andslide unconscious to the ground. He saw Ron andNeville bringing down Fenrir Greyback, AberforthStunning Rookwood, Arthur and Percy flooringThicknesse, and Lucius and Narcissa Malfoy runningthrough the crowd, not even attempting to fight,screaming for their son.

Voldemort was now dueling McGonagall, Slughorn,and Kingsley all at once, and there was cold hatred inhis face as they wove and ducked around him, unableto finish him —

Bellatrix was still fighting too, fifty yards away fromVoldemort, and like her master she dueled three at

Page | 832 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

once: Hermione, Ginny, and Luna, all battling theirhardest, but Bellatrix was equal to them, and Harry’sattention was diverted as a Killing Curse shot so closeto Ginny that she missed death by an inch —

He changed course, running at Bellatrix rather thanVoldemort, but before he had gone a few steps he wasknocked sideways.

“NOT MY DAUGHTER, YOU BITCH!”

Mrs. Weasley threw off her cloak as she ran, freeingher arms. Bellatrix spun on the spot, roaring withlaughter at the sight of her new challenger.

“OUT OF MY WAY!” shouted Mrs. Weasley to the threegirls, and with a swipe of her wand she began to duel.Harry watched with terror and elation as MollyWeasley’s wand slashed and twirled, and BellatrixLestrange’s smile faltered and became a snarl. Jets oflight flew from both wands, the floor around thewitches’ feet became hot and cracked; both womenwere fighting to kill.

“No!” Mrs. Weasley cried as a few students ranforward, trying to come to her aid. “Get back! Getback! She is mine!”

Hundreds of people now lined the walls, watching thetwo fights, Voldemort and his three opponents,Bellatrix and Molly, and Harry stood, invisible, tornbetween both, wanting to attack and yet to protect,unable to be sure that he would not hit the innocent.

“What will happen to your children when I’ve killedyou?” taunted Bellatrix, as mad as her master,capering as Molly’s curses danced around her. “WhenMummy’s gone the same way as Freddie?”

Page | 833 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You — will — never — touch — our — children —again!” screamed Mrs. Weasley.

Bellatrix laughed, the same exhilarated laugh hercousin Sirius had given as he toppled backwardthrough the veil, and suddenly Harry knew what wasgoing to happen before it did.

Molly’s curse soared beneath Bellatrix’s outstretchedarm and hit her squarely in the chest, directly overher heart.

Bellatrix’s gloating smile froze, her eyes seemed tobulge: For the tiniest space of time she knew whathad happened, and then she toppled, and thewatching crowd roared, and Voldemort screamed.

Harry felt as though he turned in slow motion; he sawMcGonagall, Kingsley, and Slughorn blastedbackward, flailing and writhing through the air, asVoldemort’s fury at the fall of his last, best lieutenantexploded with the force of a bomb. Voldemort raisedhis wand and directed it at Molly Weasley.

“Protego\” roared Harry, and the Shield Charmexpanded in the middle of the Hall, and Voldemortstared around for the source as Harry pulled off theInvisibility Cloak at last.

The yell of shock, the cheers, the screams on everyside of “Harry!” “HE’S ALIVE!” were stifled at once.

The crowd was afraid, and silence fell abruptly andcompletely as Voldemort and Harry looked at eachother, and began, at the same moment, to circle eachother.

“I don’t want anyone else to try to help,” Harry saidloudly, and in the total silence his voice carried like atrumpet call. “It’s got to be like this. It’s got to be me.”

Page | 834 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort hissed.

“Potter doesn’t mean that,” he said, his red eyes wide.“That isn’t how he works, is it? Who are you going touse as a shield today, Potter?”

“Nobody,” said Harry simply. “There are no moreHorcruxes. It’s just you and me. Neither can live whilethe other survives, and one of us is about to leave forgood. ...”

“One of us?” jeered Voldemort, and his whole bodywas taut and his red eyes stared, a snake that wasabout to strike. “You think it will be you, do you, theboy who has survived by accident, and becauseDumbledore was pulling the strings?”

“Accident, was it, when my mother died to save me?”asked Harry. They were still moving sideways, both ofthem, in that perfect circle, maintaining the samedistance from each other, and for Harry no faceexisted but Voldemort’s. “Accident, when I decided tofight in that graveyard? Accident, that I didn’t defendmyself tonight, and still survived, and returned tofight again?”

“Accidents'.” screamed Voldemort, but still he did notstrike, and the watching crowd was frozen as ifPetrified, and of the hundreds in the Hall, nobodyseemed to breathe but they two. “Accident andchance and the fact that you crouched and sniveledbehind the skirts of greater men and women, andpermitted me to kill them for you!”

“You won’t be killing anyone else tonight,” said Harryas they circled, and stared into each other’s eyes,green into red. “You won’t be able to kill any of themever again. Don’t you get it? I was ready to die to stopyou from hurting these people —”

Page | 835 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“But you did not!”

“— I meant to, and that’s what did it. I’ve done whatmy mother did. They’re protected from you. Haven’tyou noticed how none of the spells you put on themare binding? You can’t torture them. You can’t touchthem. You don’t learn from your mistakes, Riddle, doyou?”

“ You dare —”

“Yes, I dare,” said Harry. “I know things you don’tknow, Tom Riddle. I know lots of important thingsthat you don’t. Want to hear some, before you makeanother big mistake?”

Voldemort did not speak, but prowled in a circle, andHarry knew that he kept him temporarily mesmerizedand at bay, held back by the faintest possibility thatHarry might indeed know a final secret. ...

“Is it love again?” said Voldemort, his snake’s facejeering. “Dumbledore’s favorite solution, love, whichhe claimed conquered death, though love did not stophim falling from the tower and breaking like an oldwaxwork? Love, which did not prevent me stampingout your Mudblood mother like a cockroach, Potter —and nobody seems to love you enough to run forwardthis time and take my curse. So what will stop youdying now when I strike?”

“Just one thing,” said Harry, and still they circledeach other, wrapped in each other, held apart bynothing but the last secret.

“If it is not love that will save you this time,” saidVoldemort, “you must believe that you have magicthat I do not, or else a weapon more powerful thanmine?”

Page | 836 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I believe both,” said Harry, and he saw shock flitacross the snakelike face, though it was instantlydispelled; Voldemort began to laugh, and the soundwas more frightening than his screams; humorlessand insane, it echoed around the silent Hall.

“You think you know more magic than I do?” he said.“Than I, than Lord Voldemort, who has performedmagic that Dumbledore himself never dreamed of?”

“Oh, he dreamed of it,” said Harry, “but he knew morethan you, knew enough not to do what you’ve done.”

“You mean he was weak!” screamed Voldemort. “Tooweak to dare, too weak to take what might have beenhis, what will be mine!”

“No, he was cleverer than you,” said Harry, “a betterwizard, a better man.”

“I brought about the death of Albus Dumbledore!”

“You thought you did,” said Harry, “but you werewrong.”

For the first time, the watching crowd stirred as thehundreds of people around the walls drew breath asone.

“Dumbledore is dead\” Voldemort hurled the words atHarry as though they would cause him unendurablepain. “His body decays in the marble tomb in thegrounds of this castle, I have seen it, Potter, and hewill not return!”

“Yes, Dumbledore’s dead,” said Harry calmly, “butyou didn’t have him killed. He chose his own mannerof dying, chose it months before he died, arranged the

Page | 837 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

whole thing with the man you thought was yourservant.”

“What childish dream is this?” said Voldemort, butstill he did not strike, and his red eyes did not waverfrom Harry’s.

“Severus Snape wasn’t yours,” said Harry. “Snapewas Dumbledore’s, Dumbledore’s from the momentyou started hunting down my mother. And you neverrealized it, because of the thing you can’t understand.You never saw Snape cast a Patronus, did you,Riddle?”

Voldemort did not answer. They continued to circleeach other like wolves about to tear each other apart.

“Snape’s Patronus was a doe,” said Harry, “the sameas my mother’s, because he loved her for nearly all ofhis life, from the time when they were children. Youshould have realized,” he said as he saw Voldemort’snostrils flare, “he asked you to spare her life, didn’the?”

“He desired her, that was all,” sneered Voldemort,

“but when she had gone, he agreed that there wereother women, and of purer blood, worthier of him —”

“Of course he told you that,” said Harry, “but he wasDumbledore’s spy from the moment you threatenedher, and he’s been working against you ever since!Dumbledore was already dying when Snape finishedhim!”

“It matters not!” shrieked Voldemort, who hadfollowed every word with rapt attention, but now letout a cackle of mad laughter. “It matters not whetherSnape was mine or Dumbledore’s, or what pettyobstacles they tried to put in my path! I crushed themPage | 838 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

as I crushed your mother, Snape’s supposed greatlove\ Oh, but it all makes sense, Potter, and in waysthat you do not understand!

“Dumbledore was trying to keep the Elder Wand fromme! He intended that Snape should be the truemaster of the wand! But I got there ahead of you, littleboy — I reached the wand before you could get yourhands on it, I understood the truth before you caughtup. I killed Severus Snape three hours ago, and theElder Wand, the Deathstick, the Wand of Destiny istruly mine! Dumbledore’s last plan went wrong, HarryPotter!”

“Yeah, it did,” said Harry. “You’re right. But beforeyou try to kill me, I’d advise you to think about whatyou’ve done. ... Think, and try for some remorse,Riddle. ...”

“What is this?”

Of all the things that Harry had said to him, beyondany revelation or taunt, nothing had shockedVoldemort like this. Harry saw his pupils contract tothin slits, saw the skin around his eyes whiten.

“It’s your one last chance,” said Harry, “it’s all you’vegot left. ... I’ve seen what you’ll be otherwise. ... Be aman ... try ... Try for some remorse. ...”

“You dare — ?” said Voldemort again.

“Yes, I dare,” said Harry, “because Dumbledore’s lastplan hasn’t backfired on me at all. It’s backfired onyou, Riddle.”

Voldemort’s hand was trembling on the Elder Wand,and Harry gripped Draco’s very tightly. The moment,he knew, was seconds away.

Page | 839 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“That wand still isn’t working properly for youbecause you murdered the wrong person. SeverusSnape was never the true master of the Elder Wand.He never defeated Dumbledore.”

“He killed —”

“Aren’t you listening? Snape never beat DumbledorelDumbledore’s death was planned between them!Dumbledore intended to die undefeated, the wand’slast true master! If all had gone as planned, thewand’s power would have died with him, because ithad never been won from him!”

“But then, Potter, Dumbledore as good as gave me thewand!” Voldemort’s voice shook with maliciouspleasure. “I stole the wand from its last master’stomb! I removed it against its last master’s wishes! Itspower is mine!”

“You still don’t get it, Riddle, do you? Possessing thewand isn’t enough! Holding it, using it, doesn’t makeit really yours. Didn’t you listen to Ollivander? Thewand chooses the wizard. ... The Elder Wandrecognized a new master before Dumbledore died,someone who never even laid a hand on it. The newmaster removed the wand from Dumbledore againsthis will, never realizing exactly what he had done, orthat the world’s most dangerous wand had given himits allegiance. ...”

Voldemort’s chest rose and fell rapidly, and Harrycould feel the curse coming, feel it building inside thewand pointed at his face.

“The true master of the Elder Wand was DracoMalfoy.”

Page | 840 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Blank shock showed in Voldemort’s face for amoment, but then it was gone.

“But what does it matter?” he said softly. “Even if youare right, Potter, it makes no difference to you andme. You no longer have the phoenix wand: We duelon skill alone ... and after I have killed you, I canattend to Draco Malfoy. ...”

“But you’re too late,” said Harry. “You’ve missed yourchance. I got there first. I overpowered Draco weeksago. I took this wand from him.”

Harry twitched the hawthorn wand, and he felt theeyes of everyone in the Hall upon it.

“So it all comes down to this, doesn’t it?” whisperedHarry. “Does the wand in your hand know its lastmaster was Disarmed? Because if it does ... I am thetrue master of the Elder Wand.”

A red-gold glow burst suddenly across the enchantedsky above them as an edge of dazzling sun appearedover the sill of the nearest window. The light hit bothof their faces at the same time, so that Voldemort’swas suddenly a flaming blur. Harry heard the highvoice shriek as he too yelled his best hope to theheavens, pointing Draco’s wand:

“Avada KedavraV’

“ Expelliarmus\ ”

The bang was like a cannon blast, and the goldenflames that erupted between them, at the dead centerof the circle they had been treading, marked the pointwhere the spells collided. Harry saw Voldemort’sgreen jet meet his own spell, saw the Elder Wand flyhigh, dark against the sunrise, spinning across thePage | 841 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

enchanted ceiling like the head of Nagini, spinningthrough the air toward the master it would not kill,who had come to take full possession of it at last. AndHarry, with the unerring skill of the Seeker, caughtthe wand in his free hand as Voldemort fell backward,arms splayed, the slit pupils of the scarlet eyes rollingupward. Tom Riddle hit the floor with a mundanefinality, his body feeble and shrunken, the whitehands empty, the snakelike face vacant andunknowing. Voldemort was dead, killed by his ownrebounding curse, and Harry stood with two wands inhis hand, staring down at his enemy’s shell.

One shivering second of silence, the shock of themoment suspended: and then the tumult brokearound Harry as the screams and the cheers and theroars of the watchers rent the air. The fierce new sundazzled the windows as they thundered toward him,and the first to reach him were Ron and Hermione,and it was their arms that were wrapped around him,their incomprehensible shouts that deafened him.Then Ginny, Neville, and Luna were there, and thenall the Weasleys and Hagrid, and Kingsley andMcGonagall and Flitwick and Sprout, and Harry couldnot hear a word that anyone was shouting, nor tellwhose hands were seizing him, pulling him, trying tohug some part of him, hundreds of them pressing in,all of them determined to touch the Boy Who Lived,the reason it was over at last —

The sun rose steadily over Hogwarts, and the GreatHall blazed with life and light. Harry was anindispensable part of the mingled outpourings ofjubilation and mourning, of grief and celebration.

They wanted him there with them, their leader andsymbol, their savior and their guide, and that he hadnot slept, that he craved the company of only a few ofthem, seemed to occur to no one. He must speak tothe bereaved, clasp their hands, witness their tears,Page | 842 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

receive their thanks, hear the news now creeping infrom every quarter as the morning drew on; that theImperiused up and down the country had come backto themselves, that Death Eaters were fleeing or elsebeing captured, that the innocent of Azkaban werebeing released at that very moment, and that KingsleyShacklebolt had been named temporary Minister ofMagic. ...

They moved Voldemort’s body and laid it in achamber off the Hall, away from the bodies of Fred,Tonks, Lupin, Colin Creevey, and fifty others who haddied fighting him. McGonagall had replaced theHouse tables, but nobody was sitting according toHouse anymore: All were jumbled together, teachersand pupils, ghosts and parents, centaurs and house-elves, and Firenze lay recovering in a corner, andGrawp peered in through a smashed window, andpeople were throwing food into his laughing mouth.After a while, exhausted and drained, Harry foundhimself sitting on a bench beside Luna.

“I’d want some peace and quiet, if it were me,” shesaid.

“I’d love some,” he replied.

“I’ll distract them all,” she said. “Use your Cloak.”

And before he could say a word she had cried, “Oooh,look, a Blibbering Humdinger!” and pointed out of thewindow. Everyone who heard looked around, andHarry slid the Cloak up over himself, and got to hisfeet.

Now he could move through the Hall withoutinterference. He spotted Ginny two tables away; shewas sitting with her head on her mother’s shoulder:There would be time to talk later, hours and days and

Page | 843 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

maybe years in which to talk. He saw Neville, thesword of Gryffindor lying beside his plate as he ate,surrounded by a knot of fervent admirers. Along theaisle between the tables he walked, and he spottedthe three Malfoys, huddled together as though unsurewhether or not they were supposed to be there, butnobody was paying them any attention. Everywherehe looked he saw families reunited, and finally, hesaw the two whose company he craved most.

“It’s me,” he muttered, crouching down betweenthem. “Will you come with me?”

They stood up at once, and together he, Ron, andHermione left the Great Hall. Great chunks weremissing from the marble staircase, part of thebalustrade gone, and rubble and bloodstainsoccurred every few steps as they climbed.

Somewhere in the distance they could hear Peeveszooming through the corridors singing a victory songof his own composition:

We did it, we bashed them, wee Potter’s the one,

And Voldy’s gone moldy, so now let’s have fun!

“Really gives a feeling for the scope and tragedy of thething, doesn’t it?” said Ron, pushing open a door tolet Harry and Hermione through.

Happiness would come, Harry thought, but at themoment it was muffled by exhaustion, and the pain oflosing Fred and Lupin and Tonks pierced him like aphysical wound every few steps. Most of all he felt themost stupendous relief, and a longing to sleep. Butfirst he owed an explanation to Ron and Hermione,who had stuck with him for so long, and whodeserved the truth. Painstakingly he recounted whatPage | 844 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

he had seen in the Pensieve and what had happenedin the forest, and they had not even begun to expressall their shock and amazement when at last theyarrived at the place to which they had been walking,though none of them had mentioned theirdestination.

Since he had last seen it, the gargoyle guarding theentrance to the headmaster’s study had been knockedaside; it stood lopsided, looking a little punch-drunk,and Harry wondered whether it would be able todistinguish passwords anymore.

“Can we go up?” he asked the gargoyle.

“Feel free,” groaned the statue.

They clambered over him and onto the spiral stonestaircase that moved slowly upward like an escalator.Harry pushed open the door at the top.

He had one, brief glimpse of the stone Pensieve on thedesk where he had left it, and then an earsplittingnoise made him cry out, thinking of curses andreturning Death Eaters and the rebirth of Voldemort

But it was applause. All around the walls, theheadmasters and headmistresses of Hogwarts weregiving him a standing ovation; they waved their hatsand in some cases their wigs, they reached throughtheir frames to grip each other’s hands; they dancedup and down on the chairs in which they had beenpainted; Dilys Derwent sobbed unashamedly; DexterFortescue was waving his ear-trumpet; and PhineasNigellus called, in his high, reedy voice, “And let it benoted that Slytherin House played its part! Let ourcontribution not be forgotten!”

Page | 845 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

But Harry had eyes only for the man who stood in thelargest portrait directly behind the headmaster’schair. Tears were sliding down from behind the half-moon spectacles into the long silver beard, and thepride and the gratitude emanating from him filledHarry with the same balm as phoenix song.

At last, Harry held up his hands, and the portraits fellrespectfully silent, beaming and mopping their eyesand waiting eagerly for him to speak. He directed hiswords at Dumbledore, however, and chose them withenormous care. Exhausted and bleary-eyed though hewas, he must make one last effort, seeking one lastpiece of advice.

“The thing that was hidden in the Snitch,” he began,

“I dropped it in the forest. I don’t know exactly where,but I’m not going to go looking for it again. Do youagree?”

“My dear boy, I do,” said Dumbledore, while his fellowpictures looked confused and curious. “A wise andcourageous decision, but no less than I would haveexpected of you. Does anyone else know where it fell?”

“No one,” said Harry, and Dumbledore nodded hissatisfaction.

“I’m going to keep Ignotus’s present, though,” saidHarry, and Dumbledore beamed.

“But of course, Harry, it is yours forever, until youpass it on!”

“And then there’s this.”

Harry held up the Elder Wand, and Ron andHermione looked at it with a reverence that, even in

Page | 846 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

his befuddled and sleep-deprived state, Harry did notlike to see.

“I don’t want it,” said Harry.

“What?” said Ron loudly. “Are you mental?”

“I know it’s powerful,” said Harry wearily. “But I washappier with mine. So ...”

He rummaged in the pouch hung around his neck,and pulled out the two halves of holly still justconnected by the finest thread of phoenix feather.Hermione had said that they could not be repaired,that the damage was too severe. All he knew was thatif this did not work, nothing would.

He laid the broken wand upon the headmaster’s desk,touched it with the very tip of the Elder Wand, andsaid, “Reparo.”

As his wand resealed, red sparks flew out of its end.Harry knew that he had succeeded. He picked up theholly and phoenix wand and felt a sudden warmth inhis fingers, as though wand and hand were rejoicingat their reunion.

“I’m putting the Elder Wand,” he told Dumbledore,who was watching him with enormous affection andadmiration, “back where it came from. It can staythere. If I die a natural death like Ignotus, its powerwill be broken, won’t it? The previous master willnever have been defeated. That’ll be the end of it.”

Dumbledore nodded. They smiled at each other.

“Are you sure?” said Ron. There was the faintest traceof longing in his voice as he looked at the Elder Wand.

Page | 847 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I think Harry’s right,” said Hermione quietly.

“That wand’s more trouble than it’s worth,” saidHarry. “And quite honestly,” he turned away from thepainted portraits, thinking now only of the four-posterbed lying waiting for him in Gryffindor Tower, andwondering whether Kreacher might bring him asandwich there, “I’ve had enough trouble for alifetime.”

Page | 848 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

ayue



NINETEEN YEARS LATER

Autumn seemed to arrive suddenly that year. Themorning of the first of September was crisp andgolden as an apple, and as the little family bobbedacross the rumbling road toward the great sootystation, the fumes of car exhausts and the breath ofpedestrians sparkled like cobwebs in the cold air. Twolarge cages rattled on top of the laden trolleys theparents were pushing; the owls inside them hootedindignantly, and the redheaded girl trailed tearfullybehind her brothers, clutching her father’s arm.

“It won’t be long, and you’ll be going too,” Harry toldher.

“Two years,” sniffed Lily. “I want to go now\”

The commuters stared curiously at the owls as thefamily wove its way toward the barrier betweenplatforms nine and ten. Albus’s voice drifted back toHarry over the surrounding clamor; his sons hadresumed the argument they had started in the car.

Page | 849 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“I won’ti I won’t be in Slytherin!”

“James, give it a rest!” said Ginny.

“I only said he might be,” said James, grinning at hisyounger brother. “There’s nothing wrong with that. Hemight be in Slyth —”

But James caught his mother’s eye and fell silent.

The five Potters approached the barrier. With aslightly cocky look over his shoulder at his youngerbrother, James took the trolley from his mother andbroke into a run. A moment later, he had vanished.

“You’ll write to me, won’t you?” Albus asked hisparents immediately, capitalizing on the momentaryabsence of his brother.

“Every day, if you want us to,” said Ginny.

“Not every day,” said Albus quickly. “James says mostpeople only get letters from home about once amonth.”

“We wrote to James three times a week last year,”said Ginny.

“And you don’t want to believe everything he tells youabout Hogwarts,” Harry put in. “He likes a laugh,your brother.”

Side by side, they pushed the second trolley forward,gathering speed. As they reached the barrier, Albuswinced, but no collision came. Instead, the familyemerged onto platform nine and three-quarters,which was obscured by thick white steam that waspouring from the scarlet Hogwarts Express. Indistinctfigures were swarming through the mist, into whichJames had already disappeared.

Page | 850 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“Where are they?” asked Albus anxiously, peering atthe hazy forms they passed as they made their waydown the platform.

“Well find them,” said Ginny reassuringly.

But the vapor was dense, and it was difficult to makeout anybody’s faces. Detached from their owners,voices sounded unnaturally loud. Harry thought heheard Percy discoursing loudly on broomstickregulations, and was quite glad of the excuse not tostop and say hello. ...

“I think that’s them, Al,” said Ginny suddenly.

A group of four people emerged from the mist,standing alongside the very last carriage. Their facesonly came into focus when Harry, Ginny, Lily, andAlbus had drawn right up to them.

“Hi,” said Albus, sounding immensely relieved.

Rose, who was already wearing her brand-newHogwarts robes, beamed at him.

“Parked all right, then?” Ron asked Harry. “I did.Hermione didn’t believe I could pass a Muggle drivingtest, did you? She thought I’d have to Confund theexaminer.”

“No, I didn’t,” said Hermione, “I had complete faith inyou.”

“As a matter of fact, I did Confund him,” Ronwhispered to Harry, as together they lifted Albus’strunk and owl onto the train. “I only forgot to look inthe wing mirror, and let’s face it, I can use aSupersensory Charm for that.”

Page | 851 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Back on the platform, they found Lily and Hugo,Rose’s younger brother, having an animateddiscussion about which House they would be sortedinto when they finally went to Hogwarts.

“If you’re not in Gryffindor, we’ll disinherit you,” saidRon, “but no pressure.”

“Ron\”

Lily and Hugo laughed, but Albus and Rose lookedsolemn.

“He doesn’t mean it,” said Hermione and Ginny, butRon was no longer paying attention. Catching Harry’seye, he nodded covertly to a point some fifty yardsaway. The steam had thinned for a moment, andthree people stood in sharp relief against the shiftingmist.

“Look who it is.”

Draco Malfoy was standing there with his wife andson, a dark coat buttoned up to his throat. His hairwas receding somewhat, which emphasized thepointed chin. The new boy resembled Draco as muchas Albus resembled Harry. Draco caught sight ofHarry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny staring at him,nodded curtly, and turned away again.

“So that’s little Scorpius,” said Ron under his breath.“Make sure you beat him in every test, Rosie. ThankGod you inherited your mother’s brains.”

“Ron, for heaven’s sake,” said Hermione, half stern,half amused. “Don’t try to turn them against eachother before they’ve even started school!”

Page | 852 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“You’re right, sorry,” said Ron, but unable to helphimself, he added, “Don’t get too friendly with him,though, Rosie. Granddad Weasley would never forgiveyou if you married a pureblood.”

“Hey!”

James had reappeared; he had divested himself of histrunk, owl, and trolley, and was evidently burstingwith news.

“Teddy’s back there,” he said breathlessly, pointingback over his shoulder into the billowing clouds ofsteam. “Just seen him! And guess what he’s doing?Snogging Victoire\”

He gazed up at the adults, evidently disappointed bythe lack of reaction.

“Our Teddy! Teddy Lupin\ Snogging our Victoire! Ourcousin! And I asked Teddy what he was doing —”

“You interrupted them?” said Ginny. “You are so likeRon —”

“— and he said he’d come to see her off! And then hetold me to go away. He’s snogging her!” James addedas though worried he had not made himself clear.

“Oh, it would be lovely if they got married!” whisperedLily ecstatically. “Teddy would really be part of thefamily then!”

“He already comes round for dinner about four timesa week,” said Harry. “Why don’t we just invite him tolive with us and have done with it?”

“Yeah!” said James enthusiastically. “I don’t mindsharing with A1 — Teddy could have my room!”

Page | 853 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry firmly, “you and A1 will share a roomonly when I want the house demolished.”

He checked the battered old watch that had oncebeen Fabian Prewett’s.

“It’s nearly eleven, you’d better get on board.”

“Don’t forget to give Neville our love!” Ginny toldJames as she hugged him.

“Mum! I can’t give a professor love\”

“But you know Neville —”

James rolled his eyes.

“Outside, yeah, but at school he’s ProfessorLongbottom, isn’t he? I can’t walk into Herbology andgive him love. ...”

Shaking his head at his mother’s foolishness, hevented his feelings by aiming a kick at Albus.

“See you later, Al. Watch out for the thestrals.”

“I thought they were invisible? You said they wereinvisible!”

But James merely laughed, permitted his mother tokiss him, gave his father a fleeting hug, then leaptonto the rapidly filling train. They saw him wave, thensprint away up the corridor to find his friends.

“Thestrals are nothing to worry about,” Harry toldAlbus. “They’re gentle things, there’s nothing scaryabout them. Anyway, you won’t be going up to schoolin the carriages, you’ll be going in the boats.”

Page | 854 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

Ginny kissed Albus good-bye.

“See you at Christmas.”

“Bye, Al,” said Harry as his son hugged him. “Don’tforget Hagrid’s invited you to tea next Friday. Don’tmess with Peeves. Don’t duel anyone till you’velearned how. And don’t let James wind you up.”

“What if I’m in Slytherin?”

The whisper was for his father alone, and Harry knewthat only the moment of departure could have forcedAlbus to reveal how great and sincere that fear was.

Harry crouched down so that Albus’s face was slightlyabove his own. Alone of Harry’s three children, Albushad inherited Lily’s eyes.

“Albus Severus,” Harry said quietly, so that nobodybut Ginny could hear, and she was tactful enough topretend to be waving to Rose, who was now on thetrain, “you were named for two headmasters ofHogwarts. One of them was a Slytherin and he wasprobably the bravest man I ever knew.”

“But just say —”

“— then Slytherin House will have gained an excellentstudent, won’t it? It doesn’t matter to us, Al. But if itmatters to you, you’ll be able to choose Gryffindorover Slytherin. The Sorting Hat takes your choice intoaccount.”

“Really?”

“It did for me,” said Harry.

Page | 855 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling

He had never told any of his children that before, andhe saw the wonder in Albus’s face when he said it.

But now the doors were slamming all along thescarlet train, and the blurred outlines of parents wereswarming forward for final kisses, last-minutereminders. Albus jumped into the carriage and Ginnyclosed the door behind him. Students were hangingfrom the windows nearest them. A great number offaces, both on the train and off, seemed to be turnedtoward Harry.

“Why are they all staring?” demanded Albus as heand Rose craned around to look at the otherstudents.

“Don’t let it worry you,” said Ron. “It’s me. I’mextremely famous.”

Albus, Rose, Hugo, and Lily laughed. The train beganto move, and Harry walked alongside it, watching hisson’s thin face, already ablaze with excitement. Harrykept smiling and waving, even though it was like alittle bereavement, watching his son glide away fromhim. ...

The last trace of steam evaporated in the autumn air.The train rounded a corner. Harry’s hand was stillraised in farewell.

“He’ll be all right,” murmured Ginny.

As Harry looked at her, he lowered his handabsentmindedly and touched the lightning scar on hisforehead.

“I know he will.”

The scar had not pained Harry for nineteen years. Allwas well.

Page | 856 Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - J.K. Rowling





