Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


Harry Potter Series (PDFs)





Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


J.K. Rowling

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.1)



/



THE OTHER MINISTER

It was nearing midnight and the Prime Minister wassitting alone in his office, reading a long memo thatwas slipping through his brain without leaving theslightest trace of meaning behind. He was waiting fora call from the President of a far distant country, andbetween wondering when the wretched man wouldtelephone, and trying to suppress unpleasantmemories of what had been a very long, tiring, anddifficult week, there was not much space in his headfor anything else. The more he attempted to focus onthe print on the page before him, the more clearly thePrime Minister could see the gloating face of one ofhis political opponents. This particular opponent hadappeared on the news that very day, not only toenumerate all the terrible things that had happenedin the last week (as though anyone needed reminding)but also to explain why each and every one of themwas the government’s fault.

The Prime Minister’s pulse quickened at the verythought of these accusations, for they were neitherfair nor true. How on earth was his government

Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

supposed to have stopped that bridge collapsing? Itwas outrageous for anybody to suggest that they werenot spending enough on bridges. The bridge wasfewer than ten years old, and the best experts were ata loss to explain why it had snapped cleanly in two,sending a dozen cars into the watery depths of theriver below. And how dare anyone suggest that it waslack of policemen that had resulted in those two verynasty and well-publicized murders? Or that thegovernment should have somehow foreseen the freakhurricane in the West Country that had caused somuch damage to both people and property? And wasit his fault that one of his Junior Ministers, HerbertChorley, had chosen this week to act so peculiarlythat he was now going to be spending a lot more timewith his family?

“A grim mood has gripped the country,” the opponenthad concluded, barely concealing his own broad grin.

And unfortunately, this was perfectly true. The PrimeMinister felt it himself; people really did seem moremiserable than usual. Even the weather was dismal;all this chilly mist in the middle of July. ... It wasn’tright, it wasn’t normal. ...

He turned over the second page of the memo, sawhow much longer it went on, and gave it up as a badjob. Stretching his arms above his head he lookedaround his office mournfully. It was a handsomeroom, with a fine marble fireplace facing the long sashwindows, firmly closed against the unseasonablechill. With a slight shiver, the Prime Minister got upand moved over to the window, looking out at the thinmist that was pressing itself against the glass. It wasthen, as he stood with his back to the room, that heheard a soft cough behind him.

Page | 3

Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He froze, nose to nose with his own scared-lookingreflection in the dark glass. He knew that cough. Hehad heard it before. He turned very slowly to face theempty room.

“Hello?” he said, trying to sound braver than he felt.

For a brief moment he allowed himself the impossiblehope that nobody would answer him. However, avoice responded at once, a crisp, decisive voice thatsounded as though it were reading a preparedstatement. It was coming — as the Prime Ministerhad known at the first cough — from the froglike littleman wearing a long silver wig who was depicted in asmall, dirty oil painting in the far corner of the room.

“To the Prime Minister of Muggles. Urgent we meet.Kindly respond immediately. Sincerely, Fudge.”

The man in the painting looked inquiringly at thePrime Minister.

“Er,” said the Prime Minister, “listen. ... It’s not a verygood time for me. ... I’m waiting for a telephone call,you see ... from the President of —”

“That can be rearranged,” said the portrait at once.The Prime Minister’s heart sank. He had been afraidof that.

“But I really was rather hoping to speak —”

“We shall arrange for the President to forget to call.

He will telephone tomorrow night instead,” said thelittle man. “Kindly respond immediately to Mr.

Fudge.”

“I ... oh ... very well,” said the Prime Minister weakly.“Yes, I’ll see Fudge.”

Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

He hurried back to his desk, straightening his tie ashe went. He had barely resumed his seat, andarranged his face into what he hoped was a relaxedand unfazed expression, when bright green flamesburst into life in the empty grate beneath his marblemantelpiece. He watched, trying not to betray a flickerof surprise or alarm, as a portly man appeared withinthe flames, spinning as fast as a top. Seconds later,he had climbed out onto a rather fine antique rug,brushing ash from the sleeves of his long pin-stripedcloak, a lime-green bowler hat in his hand.

“Ah ... Prime Minister,” said Cornelius Fudge, stridingforward with his hand outstretched. “Good to see youagain.”

The Prime Minister could not honestly return thiscompliment, so said nothing at all. He was notremotely pleased to see Fudge, whose occasionalappearances, apart from being downright alarming inthemselves, generally meant that he was about tohear some very bad news. Furthermore, Fudge waslooking distinctly careworn. He was thinner, balder,and grayer, and his face had a crumpled look. ThePrime Minister had seen that kind of look inpoliticians before, and it never boded well.

“How can I help you?” he said, shaking Fudge’s handvery briefly and gesturing toward the hardest of thechairs in front of the desk.

“Difficult to know where to begin,” muttered Fudge,pulling up the chair, sitting down, and placing hisgreen bowler upon his knees. “What a week, what aweek ...”

“Had a bad one too, have you?” asked the PrimeMinister stiffly, hoping to convey by this that he had

Page | 5

Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

quite enough on his plate already without any extrahelpings from Fudge.

“Yes, of course,” said Fudge, rubbing his eyes wearilyand looking morosely at the Prime Minister. “I’ve beenhaving the same week you have, Prime Minister. TheBrockdale Bridge ... the Bones and Vance murders ...not to mention the ruckus in the West Country ...”

“You — er — your — I mean to say, some of yourpeople were — were involved in those — those things,were they?”

Fudge fixed the Prime Minister with a rather sternlook. “Of course they were,” he said. “Surely you’verealized what’s going on?”

“I ...” hesitated the Prime Minister.

It was precisely this sort of behavior that made himdislike Fudge’s visits so much. He was, after all, thePrime Minister and did not appreciate being made tofeel like an ignorant schoolboy. But of course, it hadbeen like this from his very first meeting with Fudgeon his very first evening as Prime Minister. Heremembered it as though it were yesterday and knewit would haunt him until his dying day.

He had been standing alone in this very office,savoring the triumph that was his after so manyyears of dreaming and scheming, when he had hearda cough behind him, just like tonight, and turned tofind that ugly little portrait talking to him,announcing that the Minister of Magic was about toarrive and introduce himself.

Naturally, he had thought that the long campaign andthe strain of the election had caused him to go mad.He had been utterly terrified to find a portrait talking

Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

to him, though this had been nothing to how he feltwhen a self-proclaimed wizard had bounced out of thefireplace and shaken his hand. He had remainedspeechless throughout Fudge’s kindly explanationthat there were witches and wizards still living insecret all over the world and his reassurances that hewas not to bother his head about them as theMinistry of Magic took responsibility for the wholeWizarding community and prevented the non-magicalpopulation from getting wind of them. It was, saidFudge, a difficult job that encompassed everythingfrom regulations on responsible use of broomsticks tokeeping the dragon population under control (thePrime Minister remembered clutching the desk forsupport at this point). Fudge had then patted theshoulder of the still-dumbstruck Prime Minister in afatherly sort of way.

“Not to worry,” he had said, “it’s odds-on you’ll neversee me again. I’ll only bother you if there’s somethingreally serious going on our end, something that’slikely to affect the Muggles — the non-magicalpopulation, I should say. Otherwise, it’s live and letlive. And I must say, you’re taking it a lot better thanyour predecessor. He tried to throw me out thewindow, thought I was a hoax planned by theopposition.”

At this, the Prime Minister had found his voice at last.“You’re — you’re not a hoax, then?”

It had been his last, desperate hope.

“No,” said Fudge gently. “No, I’m afraid I’m not. Look.”

And he had turned the Prime Minister’s teacup into agerbil.

Page | 7

Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But,” said the Prime Minister breathlessly, watchinghis teacup chewing on the corner of his next speech,“but why — why has nobody told me — ?”

“The Minister of Magic only reveals him- or herself tothe Muggle Prime Minister of the day,” said Fudge,poking his wand back inside his jacket. “We find itthe best way to maintain secrecy.”

“But then,” bleated the Prime Minister, “why hasn’t aformer Prime Minister warned me — ?”

At this, Fudge had actually laughed.

“My dear Prime Minister, are you ever going to tellanybody?”

Still chortling, Fudge had thrown some powder intothe fireplace, stepped into the emerald flames, andvanished with a whooshing sound. The PrimeMinister had stood there, quite motionless, andrealized that he would never, as long as he lived, daremention this encounter to a living soul, for who in thewide world would believe him?

The shock had taken a little while to wear off. For atime, he had tried to convince himself that Fudge hadindeed been a hallucination brought on by lack ofsleep during his grueling election campaign. In a vainattempt to rid himself of all reminders of thisuncomfortable encounter, he had given the gerbil tohis delighted niece and instructed his privatesecretary to take down the portrait of the ugly littleman who had announced Fudge’s arrival. To thePrime Minister’s dismay, however, the portrait hadproved impossible to remove. When severalcarpenters, a builder or two, an art historian, and theChancellor of the Exchequer had all triedunsuccessfully to prise it from the wall, the PrimePage | 8 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Minister had abandoned the attempt and simplyresolved to hope that the thing remained motionlessand silent for the rest of his term in office.Occasionally he could have sworn he saw out of thecorner of his eye the occupant of the paintingyawning, or else scratching his nose; even, once ortwice, simply walking out of his frame and leavingnothing but a stretch of muddy-brown canvas behind.However, he had trained himself not to look at thepicture very much, and always to tell himself firmlythat his eyes were playing tricks on him whenanything like this happened.

Then, three years ago, on a night very like tonight, thePrime Minister had been alone in his office when theportrait had once again announced the imminentarrival of Fudge, who had burst out of the fireplace,sopping wet and in a state of considerable panic.Before the Prime Minister could ask why he wasdripping all over the Axminster, Fudge had startedranting about a prison the Prime Minister had neverheard of, a man named “Serious” Black, somethingthat sounded like “Hogwarts,” and a boy called HarryPotter, none of which made the remotest sense to thePrime Minister.

"... Fve just come from Azkaban,” Fudge had panted,tipping a large amount of water out of the rim of hisbowler hat into his pocket. “Middle of the North Sea,you know, nasty flight ... the dementors are inuproar” — he shuddered — “they’ve never had abreakout before. Anyway, I had to come to you, PrimeMinister. Black’s a known Muggle killer and may beplanning to rejoin You-Know-Who. ... But of course,you don’t even know who You-Know-Who is!” He hadgazed hopelessly at the Prime Minister for a moment,then said, “Well, sit down, sit down, I’d better fill youin. ... Have a whiskey ...”

Page | 9

Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The Prime Minister rather resented being told to sitdown in his own office, let alone offered his ownwhiskey, but he sat nevertheless. Fudge pulled outhis wand, conjured two large glasses full of amberliquid out of thin air, pushed one of them into thePrime Minister’s hand, and drew up a chair.

Fudge had talked for more than an hour. At onepoint, he had refused to say a certain name aloud andwrote it instead on a piece of parchment, which hehad thrust into the Prime Minister’s whiskey-freehand. When at last Fudge had stood up to leave, thePrime Minister had stood up too.

“So you think that ...” He had squinted down at thename in his left hand. “Lord Vol —”

“He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named\” snarled Fudge.

“I’m sorry. ... You think that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is still alive, then?”

“Well, Dumbledore says he is,” said Fudge, as he hadfastened his pin-striped cloak under his chin, “butwe’ve never found him. If you ask me, he’s notdangerous unless he’s got support, so it’s Black weought to be worrying about. You’ll put out thatwarning, then? Excellent. Well, I hope we don’t seeeach other again, Prime Minister! Good night.”

But they had seen each other again. Less than a yearlater a harassed-looking Fudge had appeared out ofthin air in the cabinet room to inform the PrimeMinister that there had been a spot of bother at theKwidditch (or that was what it had sounded like)World Cup and that several Muggles had been“involved,” but that the Prime Minister was not toworry, the fact that You-Know-Who’s Mark had beenseen again meant nothing; Fudge was sure it was anPage | 10 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

isolated incident, and the Muggle Liaison Office wasdealing with all memory modifications as they spoke.

“Oh, and I almost forgot,” Fudge had added. “We’reimporting three foreign dragons and a sphinx for theTriwizard Tournament, quite routine, but theDepartment for the Regulation and Control of MagicalCreatures tells me that it’s down in the rule book thatwe have to notify you if we’re bringing highlydangerous creatures into the country.”

“I — what — dragons?” spluttered the Prime Minister.

“Yes, three,” said Fudge. “And a sphinx. Well, goodday to you.”

The Prime Minister had hoped beyond hope thatdragons and sphinxes would be the worst of it, butno. Less than two years later, Fudge had erupted outof the fire yet again, this time with the news thatthere had been a mass breakout from Azkaban.

“A mass breakout?” repeated the Prime Ministerhoarsely.

“No need to worry, no need to worry!” shouted Fudge,already with one foot in the flames. “We’ll have themrounded up in no time —just thought you ought toknow!”

And before the Prime Minister could shout, “Now, waitjust one moment!” Fudge had vanished in a shower ofgreen sparks.

Whatever the press and the opposition might say, thePrime Minister was not a foolish man. It had notescaped his notice that, despite Fudge’s assurancesat their first meeting, they were now seeing rather alot of each other, nor that Fudge was becoming morePage | 11 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

flustered with each visit. Little though he liked tothink about the Minister of Magic (or, as he alwayscalled Fudge in his head, the Other Minister), thePrime Minister could not help but fear that the nexttime Fudge appeared it would be with graver newsstill. The sight, therefore, of Fudge stepping out of thefire once more, looking disheveled and fretful andsternly surprised that the Prime Minister did notknow exactly why he was there, was about the worstthing that had happened in the course of thisextremely gloomy week.

“How should I know what’s going on in the — er —Wizarding community?” snapped the Prime Ministernow. “I have a country to run and quite enoughconcerns at the moment without —”

“We have the same concerns,” Fudge interrupted.

“The Brockdale Bridge didn’t wear out. That wasn’treally a hurricane. Those murders were not the workof Muggles. And Herbert Chorley’s family would besafer without him. We are currently makingarrangements to have him transferred to St. Mungo’sHospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries. The moveshould be effected tonight.”

“What do you ... I’m afraid I ... What?” blustered thePrime Minister.

Fudge took a great, deep breath and said, “PrimeMinister, I am very sorry to have to tell you that he’sback. He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back.”

“Back? When you say ‘back’ ... he’s alive? I mean —”

The Prime Minister groped in his memory for thedetails of that horrible conversation of three yearspreviously, when Fudge had told him about thewizard who was feared above all others, the wizard

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

who had committed a thousand terrible crimes beforehis mysterious disappearance fifteen years earlier.

“Yes, alive,” said Fudge. “That is — I don’t know — isa man alive if he can’t be killed? I don’t reallyunderstand it, and Dumbledore won’t explainproperly — but anyway, he’s certainly got a body andis walking and talking and killing, so I suppose, forthe purposes of our discussion, yes, he’s alive.”

The Prime Minister did not know what to say to this,but a persistent habit of wishing to appear well-informed on any subject that came up made him castaround for any details he could remember of theirprevious conversations.

“Is Serious Black with — er — He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named?”

“Black? Black?” said Fudge distractedly, turning hisbowler rapidly in his fingers. “Sirius Black, youmean? Merlin’s beard, no. Black’s dead. Turns out wewere — er — mistaken about Black. He was innocentafter all. And he wasn’t in league with He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named either. I mean,” he added defensively,spinning the bowler hat still faster, “all the evidencepointed — we had more than fifty eyewitnesses — butanyway, as I say, he’s dead. Murdered, as a matter offact. On Ministry of Magic premises. There’s going tobe an inquiry, actually. ...”

To his great surprise, the Prime Minister felt a fleetingstab of pity for Fudge at this point. It was, however,eclipsed almost immediately by a glow of smugness atthe thought that, deficient though he himself mightbe in the area of materializing out of fireplaces, therehad never been a murder in any of the governmentdepartments under his charge. ... Not yet, anyway ...

Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

While the Prime Minister surreptitiously touched thewood of his desk, Fudge continued, “But Black’s by-the-by now. The point is, we’re at war, Prime Minister,and steps must be taken.”

“At war?” repeated the Prime Minister nervously.“Surely that’s a little bit of an overstatement?”

“He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named has now been joined bythose of his followers who broke out of Azkaban inJanuary,” said Fudge, speaking more and morerapidly and twirling his bowler so fast that it was alime-green blur. “Since they have moved into theopen, they have been wreaking havoc. The BrockdaleBridge — he did it, Prime Minister, he threatened amass Muggle killing unless I stood aside for him and

“Good grief, so it’s your fault those people were killedand I’m having to answer questions about rustedrigging and corroded expansion joints and I don’tknow what else!” said the Prime Minister furiously.

“My fault!” said Fudge, coloring up. “Are you sayingyou would have caved in to blackmail like that?”

“Maybe not,” said the Prime Minister, standing upand striding about the room, “but I would have put allmy efforts into catching the blackmailer before hecommitted any such atrocity!”

“Do you really think I wasn’t already making everyeffort?” demanded Fudge heatedly. “Every Auror inthe Ministry was — and is — trying to find him andround up his followers, but we happen to be talkingabout one of the most powerful wizards of all time, awizard who has eluded capture for almost threedecades!”

Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“So I suppose you’re going to tell me he caused thehurricane in the West Country too?” said the PrimeMinister, his temper rising with every pace he took. Itwas infuriating to discover the reason for all theseterrible disasters and not to be able to tell the public,almost worse than it being the government’s faultafter all.

“That was no hurricane,” said Fudge miserably.

“Excuse me!” barked the Prime Minister, nowpositively stamping up and down. “Trees uprooted,roofs ripped off, lampposts bent, horrible injuries —”

“It was the Death Eaters,” said Fudge. “He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named’s followers. And ... and we suspectgiant involvement.”

The Prime Minister stopped in his tracks as thoughhe had hit an invisible wall. “ What involvement?”

Fudge grimaced. “He used giants last time, when hewanted to go for the grand effect,” he said. “The Officeof Misinformation has been working around the clock,we’ve had teams of Obliviators out trying to modifythe memories of all the Muggles who saw what reallyhappened, we’ve got most of the Department for theRegulation and Control of Magical Creatures runningaround Somerset, but we can’t find the giant — it’sbeen a disaster.”

“You don’t say!” said the Prime Minister furiously.

“I won’t deny that morale is pretty low at theMinistry,” said Fudge. “What with all that, and thenlosing Amelia Bones.”

“Losing who?”

Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Amelia Bones. Head of the Department of MagicalLaw Enforcement. We think He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named may have murdered her in person, becauseshe was a very gifted witch and — and all theevidence was that she put up a real fight.”

Fudge cleared his throat and, with an effort, itseemed, stopped spinning his bowler hat.

“But that murder was in the newspapers,” said thePrime Minister, momentarily diverted from his anger.“Our newspapers. Amelia Bones ... it just said shewas a middle-aged woman who lived alone. It was a —a nasty killing, wasn’t it? It’s had rather a lot ofpublicity. The police are baffled, you see.”

Fudge sighed. “Well, of course they are,” he said.“Killed in a room that was locked from the inside,wasn’t she? We, on the other hand, know exactly whodid it, not that that gets us any further towardcatching him. And then there was Emmeline Vance,maybe you didn’t hear about that one —”

“Oh yes I did!” said the Prime Minister. “It happenedjust around the corner from here, as a matter of fact.The papers had a field day with it, ‘breakdown of lawand order in the Prime Minister’s backyard —’ ”

“And as if all that wasn’t enough,” said Fudge, barelylistening to the Prime Minister, “we’ve got dementorsswarming all over the place, attacking people left,right, and center. ...”

Once upon a happier time this sentence would havebeen unintelligible to the Prime Minister, but he waswiser now.

“I thought dementors guard the prisoners inAzkaban,” he said cautiously.

Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“They did,” said Fudge wearily. “But not anymore.They’ve deserted the prison and joined He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. I won’t pretend that wasn’t a blow.”

“But,” said the Prime Minister, with a sense ofdawning horror, “didn’t you tell me they’re thecreatures that drain hope and happiness out ofpeople?”

“That’s right. And they’re breeding. That’s what’scausing all this mist.”

The Prime Minister sank, weak-kneed, into thenearest chair. The idea of invisible creatures swoopingthrough the towns and countryside, spreadingdespair and hopelessness in his voters, made him feelquite faint.

“Now see here, Fudge — you’ve got to do something!It’s your responsibility as Minister of Magic!”

“My dear Prime Minister, you can’t honestly think I’mstill Minister of Magic after all this? I was sackedthree days ago! The whole Wizarding community hasbeen screaming for my resignation for a fortnight. I’venever known them so united in my whole term ofoffice!” said Fudge, with a brave attempt at a smile.

The Prime Minister was momentarily lost for words.Despite his indignation at the position into which hehad been placed, he still rather felt for the shrunken-looking man sitting opposite him.

“I’m very sorry,” he said finally. “If there’s anything Ican do?”

“It’s very kind of you, Prime Minister, but there isnothing. I was sent here tonight to bring you up todate on recent events and to introduce you to my

Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There were streaks of gray in his mane of tawny hairand his bushy eyebrows; he had keen yellowish eyesbehind a pair of wire-rimmed spectacles and a certainrangy, loping grace even though he walked with aslight limp. There was an immediate impression ofshrewdness and toughness; the Prime Ministerthought he understood why the Wizarding communitypreferred Scrimgeour to Fudge as a leader in thesedangerous times.

“How do you do?” said the Prime Minister politely,holding out his hand.

Scrimgeour grasped it briefly, his eyes scanning theroom, then pulled out a wand from under his robes.

“Fudge told you everything?” he asked, striding overto the door and tapping the keyhole with his wand.The Prime Minister heard the lock click.

“Er — yes,” said the Prime Minister. “And if you don’tmind, I’d rather that door remained unlocked.”

“I’d rather not be interrupted,” said Scrimgeourshortly, “or watched,” he added, pointing his wand atthe windows, so that the curtains swept across them.“Right, well, I’m a busy man, so let’s get down tobusiness. First of all, we need to discuss yoursecurity.”

The Prime Minister drew himself up to his fullestheight and replied, “I am perfectly happy with thesecurity I’ve already got, thank you very —”

“Well, we’re not,” Scrimgeour cut in. “It’ll be a poorlookout for the Muggles if their Prime Minister getsput under the Imperius Curse. The new secretary inyour outer office —”

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm not getting rid of Kingsley Shacklebolt, if that’swhat you’re suggesting!” said the Prime Ministerhotly. “He’s highly efficient, gets through twice thework the rest of them —”

“That’s because he’s a wizard,” said Scrimgeour,without a flicker of a smile. “A highly trained Auror,who has been assigned to you for your protection.”

“Now, wait a moment!” declared the Prime Minister.“You can’t just put your people into my office, I decidewho works for me —”

“I thought you were happy with Shacklebolt?” saidScrimgeour coldly.

“I am — that’s to say, I was —”

“Then there’s no problem, is there?” said Scrimgeour.

“I ... well, as long as Shacklebolt’s work continues tobe ... er ... excellent,” said the Prime Minister lamely,but Scrimgeour barely seemed to hear him.

“Now, about Herbert Chorley, your Junior Minister,”he continued. “The one who has been entertaining thepublic by impersonating a duck.”

“What about him?” asked the Prime Minister.

“He has clearly reacted to a poorly performedImperius Curse,” said Scrimgeour. “It’s addled hisbrains, but he could still be dangerous.”

“He’s only quacking!” said the Prime Minister weakly.“Surely a bit of a rest ... Maybe go easy on the drink

Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“A team of Healers from St. Mungo’s Hospital forMagical Maladies and Injuries are examining him aswe speak. So far he has attempted to strangle three ofthem,” said Scrimgeour. “I think it best that weremove him from Muggle society for a while.”

“I ... well ... He’ll be all right, won’t he?” said thePrime Minister anxiously.

Scrimgeour merely shrugged, already moving backtoward the fireplace.

“Well, that’s really all I had to say. I will keep youposted of developments, Prime Minister — or, at least,I shall probably be too busy to come personally, inwhich case I shall send Fudge here. He has consentedto stay on in an advisory capacity.”

Fudge attempted to smile, but was unsuccessful; hemerely looked as though he had a toothache.Scrimgeour was already rummaging in his pocket forthe mysterious powder that turned the fire green. ThePrime Minister gazed hopelessly at the pair of themfor a moment, then the words he had fought tosuppress all evening burst from him at last.

“But for heaven’s sake — you’re wizards'. You can domagic! Surely you can sort out — well — anything!”

Scrimgeour turned slowly on the spot and exchangedan incredulous look with Fudge, who really didmanage a smile this time as he said kindly, “Thetrouble is, the other side can do magic too, PrimeMinister.”

And with that, the two wizards stepped one after theother into the bright green fire and vanished.

Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





SPINNER’S END

Many miles away the chilly mist that had pressedagainst the Prime Minister’s windows drifted over adirty river that wound between overgrown, rubbish-strewn banks. An immense chimney, relic of adisused mill, reared up, shadowy and ominous. Therewas no sound apart from the whisper of the blackwater and no sign of life apart from a scrawny fox thathad slunk down the bank to nose hopefully at someold fish-and-chip wrappings in the tall grass.

But then, with a very faint pop, a slim, hooded figureappeared out of thin air on the edge of the river. Thefox froze, wary eyes fixed upon this strange newphenomenon. The figure seemed to take its bearingsfor a few moments, then set off with light, quickstrides, its long cloak rustling over the grass.

With a second and louder pop, another hooded figurematerialized.

“Wait!”

Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The harsh cry startled the fox, now crouching almostflat in the undergrowth. It leapt from its hiding placeand up the bank. There was a flash of green light, ayelp, and the fox fell back to the ground, dead.

The second figure turned over the animal with its toe.

“Just a fox,” said a woman’s voice dismissively fromunder the hood. “I thought perhaps an Auror —

Cissy, wait!”

But her quarry, who had paused and looked back atthe flash of light, was already scrambling up the bankthe fox had just fallen down.

“Cissy — Narcissa — listen to me —”

The second woman caught the first and seized herarm, but the other wrenched it away.

“Go back, Bella!”

“You must listen to me!”

“I’ve listened already. I’ve made my decision. Leave mealone!”

The woman named Narcissa gained the top of thebank, where a line of old railings separated the riverfrom a narrow, cobbled street. The other woman,

Bella, followed at once. Side by side they stoodlooking across the road at the rows and rows ofdilapidated brick houses, their windows dull andblind in the darkness.

“He lives here?” asked Bella in a voice of contempt.“Here? In this Muggle dunghill? We must be the firstof our kind ever to set foot —”

Page | 23 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

But Narcissa was not listening; she had slippedthrough a gap in the rusty railings and was alreadyhurrying across the road.

“Cissy, wait\”

Bella followed, her cloak streaming behind, and sawNarcissa darting through an alley between the housesinto a second, almost identical street. Some of thestreetlamps were broken; the two women wererunning between patches of light and deep darkness.The pursuer caught up with her prey just as sheturned another corner, this time succeeding incatching hold of her arm and swinging her around sothat they faced each other.

“Cissy, you must not do this, you can’t trust him —”

“The Dark Lord trusts him, doesn’t he?”

“The Dark Lord is ... I believe ... mistaken,” Bellapanted, and her eyes gleamed momentarily under herhood as she looked around to check that they wereindeed alone. “In any case, we were told not to speakof the plan to anyone. This is a betrayal of the DarkLord’s —”

“Let go, Bella!” snarled Narcissa, and she drew awand from beneath her cloak, holding it threateninglyin the other’s face. Bella merely laughed.

“Cissy, your own sister? You wouldn’t —”

“There is nothing I wouldn’t do anymore!” Narcissabreathed, a note of hysteria in her voice, and as shebrought down the wand like a knife, there wasanother flash of light. Bella let go of her sister’s armas though burned.

Page | 24 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Narcisscd”

But Narcissa had rushed ahead. Rubbing her hand,her pursuer followed again, keeping her distance now,as they moved deeper into the deserted labyrinth ofbrick houses. At last, Narcissa hurried up a streetnamed Spinner’s End, over which the towering millchimney seemed to hover like a giant admonitoryfinger. Her footsteps echoed on the cobbles as shepassed boarded and broken windows, until shereached the very last house, where a dim lightglimmered through the curtains in a downstairsroom.

She had knocked on the door before Bella, cursingunder her breath, had caught up. Together they stoodwaiting, panting slightly, breathing in the smell of thedirty river that was carried to them on the nightbreeze. After a few seconds, they heard movementbehind the door and it opened a crack. A sliver of aman could be seen looking out at them, a man withlong black hair parted in curtains around a sallowface and black eyes.

Narcissa threw back her hood. She was so pale thatshe seemed to shine in the darkness; the long blondehair streaming down her back gave her the look of adrowned person.

“Narcissa!” said the man, opening the door a littlewider, so that the light fell upon her and her sistertoo. “What a pleasant surprise!”

“Severus,” she said in a strained whisper. “May Ispeak to you? It’s urgent.”

“But of course.”

Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He stood back to allow her to pass him into thehouse. Her still-hooded sister followed withoutinvitation.

“Snape,” she said curtly as she passed him.

“Bellatrix,” he replied, his thin mouth curling into aslightly mocking smile as he closed the door with asnap behind them.

They had stepped directly into a tiny sitting room,which had the feeling of a dark, padded cell. The wallswere completely covered in books, most of thembound in old black or brown leather; a threadbaresofa, an old armchair, and a rickety table stoodgrouped together in a pool of dim light cast by acandle-filled lamp hung from the ceiling. The placehad an air of neglect, as though it was not usuallyinhabited.

Snape gestured Narcissa to the sofa. She threw offher cloak, cast it aside, and sat down, staring at herwhite and trembling hands clasped in her lap.

Bellatrix lowered her hood more slowly. Dark as hersister was fair, with heavily lidded eyes and a strongjaw, she did not take her gaze from Snape as shemoved to stand behind Narcissa.

“So, what can I do for you?” Snape asked, settlinghimself in the armchair opposite the two sisters.

“We ... we are alone, aren’t we?” Narcissa askedquietly.

“Yes, of course. Well, Wormtail’s here, but we’re notcounting vermin, are we?”

He pointed his wand at the wall of books behind himand with a bang, a hidden door flew open, revealing a

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

narrow staircase upon which a small man stoodfrozen.

“As you have clearly realized, Wormtail, we haveguests,” said Snape lazily.

The man crept, hunchbacked, down the last few stepsand moved into the room. He had small, watery eyes,a pointed nose, and wore an unpleasant simper. Hisleft hand was caressing his right, which looked asthough it was encased in a bright silver glove.

“Narcissa!” he said, in a squeaky voice. “And Bellatrix!How charming —”

“Wormtail will get us drinks, if you’d like them,” saidSnape. “And then he will return to his bedroom.”

Wormtail winced as though Snape had thrownsomething at him.

“I am not your servant!” he squeaked, avoidingSnape’s eye.

“Really? I was under the impression that the DarkLord placed you here to assist me.”

“To assist, yes — but not to make you drinks and —and clean your house!”

“I had no idea, Wormtail, that you were craving moredangerous assignments,” said Snape silkily. “This canbe easily arranged: I shall speak to the Dark Lord —”

“I can speak to him myself if I want to!”

“Of course you can,” said Snape, sneering. “But in themeantime, bring us drinks. Some of the elf-made winewill do.”

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Wormtail hesitated for a moment, looking as thoughhe might argue, but then turned and headed througha second hidden door. They heard banging and aclinking of glasses. Within seconds he was back,bearing a dusty bottle and three glasses upon a tray.He dropped these on the rickety table and scurriedfrom their presence, slamming the book-covered doorbehind him.

Snape poured out three glasses of bloodred wine andhanded two of them to the sisters. Narcissamurmured a word of thanks, whilst Bellatrix saidnothing, but continued to glower at Snape. This didnot seem to discompose him; on the contrary, helooked rather amused.

“The Dark Lord,” he said, raising his glass anddraining it.

The sisters copied him. Snape refilled their glasses.

As Narcissa took her second drink she said in a rush,“Severus, I’m sorry to come here like this, but I had tosee you. I think you are the only one who can help me

Snape held up a hand to stop her, then pointed hiswand again at the concealed staircase door. Therewas a loud bang and a squeal, followed by the soundof Wormtail scurrying back up the stairs.

“My apologies,” said Snape. “He has lately taken tolistening at doors, I don’t know what he means by it.

... You were saying, Narcissa?”

She took a great, shuddering breath and startedagain.

“Severus, I know I ought not to be here, I have beentold to say nothing to anyone, but —”

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Then you ought to hold your tongue!” snarledBellatrix. “Particularly in present company!”

“ ‘Present company’?” repeated Snape sardonically.“And what am I to understand by that, Bellatrix?”

“That I don’t trust you, Snape, as you very wellknow!”

Narcissa let out a noise that might have been a drysob and covered her face with her hands. Snape sethis glass down upon the table and sat back again, hishands upon the arms of his chair, smiling intoBellatrix’s glowering face.

“Narcissa, I think we ought to hear what Bellatrix isbursting to say; it will save tedious interruptions.

Well, continue, Bellatrix,” said Snape. “Why is it thatyou do not trust me?”

“A hundred reasons!” she said loudly, striding outfrom behind the sofa to slam her glass upon the table.“Where to start! Where were you when the Dark Lordfell? Why did you never make any attempt to find himwhen he vanished? What have you been doing allthese years that you’ve lived in Dumbledore’s pocket?Why did you stop the Dark Lord procuring theSorcerer’s Stone? Why did you not return at oncewhen the Dark Lord was reborn? Where were you afew weeks ago when we battled to retrieve theprophecy for the Dark Lord? And why, Snape, isHarry Potter still alive, when you have had him atyour mercy for five years?”

She paused, her chest rising and falling rapidly, thecolor high in her cheeks. Behind her, Narcissa satmotionless, her face still hidden in her hands.

Snape smiled.

Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Before I answer you — oh yes, Bellatrix, I am goingto answer! You can carry my words back to the otherswho whisper behind my back, and carry false tales ofmy treachery to the Dark Lord! Before I answer you, Isay, let me ask a question in turn. Do you really thinkthat the Dark Lord has not asked me each and everyone of those questions? And do you really think that,had I not been able to give satisfactory answers, Iwould be sitting here talking to you?”

She hesitated.

“I know he believes you, but ...”

“You think he is mistaken? Or that I have somehowhoodwinked him? Fooled the Dark Lord, the greatestwizard, the most accomplished Legilimens the worldhas ever seen?”

Bellatrix said nothing, but looked, for the first time, alittle discomfited. Snape did not press the point. Hepicked up his drink again, sipped it, and continued,“You ask where I was when the Dark Lord fell. I waswhere he had ordered me to be, at Hogwarts School ofWitchcraft and Wizardry, because he wished me tospy upon Albus Dumbledore. You know, I presume,that it was on the Dark Lord’s orders that I took upthe post?”

She nodded almost imperceptibly and then openedher mouth, but Snape forestalled her.

“You ask why I did not attempt to find him when hevanished. For the same reason that Avery, Yaxley, theCarrows, Greyback, Lucius” — he inclined his headslightly to Narcissa — “and many others did notattempt to find him. I believed him finished. I am notproud of it, I was wrong, but there it is. ... If he had

Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

not forgiven we who lost faith at that time, he wouldhave very few followers left.”

“He’d have me!” said Bellatrix passionately. “I, whospent many years in Azkaban for him!”

“Yes, indeed, most admirable,” said Snape in a boredvoice. “Of course, you weren’t a lot of use to him inprison, but the gesture was undoubtedly fine —”

“Gesture!” she shrieked; in her fury she lookedslightly mad. “While I endured the dementors, youremained at Hogwarts, comfortably playingDumbledore’s pet!”

“Not quite,” said Snape calmly. “He wouldn’t give methe Defense Against the Dark Arts job, you know.Seemed to think it might, ah, bring about a relapse ...tempt me into my old ways.”

“This was your sacrifice for the Dark Lord, not toteach your favorite subject?” she jeered. “Why did youstay there all that time, Snape? Still spying onDumbledore for a master you believed dead?”

“Hardly,” said Snape, “although the Dark Lord ispleased that I never deserted my post: I had sixteenyears of information on Dumbledore to give him whenhe returned, a rather more useful welcome-backpresent than endless reminiscences of howunpleasant Azkaban is. ...”

“But you stayed —”

“Yes, Bellatrix, I stayed,” said Snape, betraying a hintof impatience for the first time. “I had a comfortablejob that I preferred to a stint in Azkaban. They wererounding up the Death Eaters, you know.Dumbledore’s protection kept me out of jail; it wasPage | 31 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

most convenient and I used it. I repeat: The DarkLord does not complain that I stayed, so I do not seewhy you do.

“I think you next wanted to know,” he pressed on, alittle more loudly, for Bellatrix showed every sign ofinterrupting, “why I stood between the Dark Lord andthe Sorcerer’s Stone. That is easily answered. He didnot know whether he could trust me. He thought, likeyou, that I had turned from faithful Death Eater toDumbledore’s stooge. He was in a pitiable condition,very weak, sharing the body of a mediocre wizard. Hedid not dare reveal himself to a former ally if that allymight turn him over to Dumbledore or the Ministry. Ideeply regret that he did not trust me. He would havereturned to power three years sooner. As it was, I sawonly greedy and unworthy Quirrell attempting to stealthe stone and, I admit, I did all I could to thwart him.”

Bellatrix’s mouth twisted as though she had taken anunpleasant dose of medicine.

“But you didn’t return when he came back, you didn’tfly back to him at once when you felt the Dark Markburn —”

“Correct. I returned two hours later. I returned onDumbledore’s orders.”

“On Dumbledore’s — ?” she began, in tones ofoutrage.

“Think!” said Snape, impatient again. “Think! Bywaiting two hours, just two hours, I ensured that Icould remain at Hogwarts as a spy! By allowingDumbledore to think that I was only returning to theDark Lord’s side because I was ordered to, I havebeen able to pass information on Dumbledore and theOrder of the Phoenix ever since! Consider, Bellatrix:Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The Dark Mark had been growing stronger formonths. I knew he must be about to return, all theDeath Eaters knew! I had plenty of time to thinkabout what I wanted to do, to plan my next move, toescape like Karkaroff, didn’t I?

“The Dark Lord’s initial displeasure at my latenessvanished entirely, I assure you, when I explained thatI remained faithful, although Dumbledore thought Iwas his man. Yes, the Dark Lord thought that I hadleft him forever, but he was wrong.”

“But what use have you been?” sneered Bellatrix.“What useful information have we had from you?”

“My information has been conveyed directly to theDark Lord,” said Snape. “If he chooses not to share itwith you —”

“He shares everything with me!” said Bellatrix, firingup at once. “He calls me his most loyal, his mostfaithful —”

“Does he?” said Snape, his voice delicately inflected tosuggest his disbelief. “Does he still, after the fiasco atthe Ministry?”

“That was not my fault!” said Bellatrix, flushing. “TheDark Lord has, in the past, entrusted me with hismost precious — if Lucius hadn’t —”

“Don’t you dare — don’t you dare blame myhusband!” said Narcissa, in a low and deadly voice,looking up at her sister.

“There is no point apportioning blame,” said Snapesmoothly. “What is done, is done.”

Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But not by you!” said Bellatrix furiously. “No, youwere once again absent while the rest of us randangers, were you not, Snape?”

“My orders were to remain behind,” said Snape.“Perhaps you disagree with the Dark Lord, perhapsyou think that Dumbledore would not have noticed ifI had joined forces with the Death Eaters to fight theOrder of the Phoenix? And — forgive me — you speakof dangers ... you were facing six teenagers, were younot?”

“They were joined, as you very well know, by half ofthe Order before long!” snarled Bellatrix. “And, whilewe are on the subject of the Order, you still claim youcannot reveal the whereabouts of their headquarters,don’t you?”

“I am not the Secret-Keeper; I cannot speak the nameof the place. You understand how the enchantmentworks, I think? The Dark Lord is satisfied with theinformation I have passed him on the Order. It led, asperhaps you have guessed, to the recent capture andmurder of Emmeline Vance, and it certainly helpeddispose of Sirius Black, though I give you full creditfor finishing him off.”

He inclined his head and toasted her. Her expressiondid not soften.

“You are avoiding my last question, Snape. HarryPotter. You could have killed him at any point in thepast five years. You have not done it. Why?”

“Have you discussed this matter with the Dark Lord?”asked Snape.

“He ... lately, we ... I am asking you, Snape!”

Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“If I had murdered Harry Potter, the Dark Lord couldnot have used his blood to regenerate, making himinvincible —”

“You claim you foresaw his use of the boy!” shejeered.

“I do not claim it; I had no idea of his plans; I havealready confessed that I thought the Dark Lord dead.

I am merely trying to explain why the Dark Lord isnot sorry that Potter survived, at least until a yearago. ...”

“But why did you keep him alive?”

“Have you not understood me? It was onlyDumbledore’s protection that was keeping me out ofAzkaban! Do you disagree that murdering his favoritestudent might have turned him against me? But therewas more to it than that. I should remind you thatwhen Potter first arrived at Hogwarts there were stillmany stories circulating about him, rumors that hehimself was a great Dark wizard, which was how hehad survived the Dark Lord’s attack. Indeed, many ofthe Dark Lord’s old followers thought Potter might bea standard around which we could all rally oncemore. I was curious, I admit it, and not at all inclinedto murder him the moment he set foot in the castle.

“Of course, it became apparent to me very quicklythat he had no extraordinary talent at all. He hasfought his way out of a number of tight corners by asimple combination of sheer luck and more talentedfriends. He is mediocre to the last degree, though asobnoxious and self-satisfied as was his father beforehim. I have done my utmost to have him thrown outof Hogwarts, where I believe he scarcely belongs, butkill him, or allow him to be killed in front of me? I

Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

would have been a fool to risk it with Dumbledoreclose at hand.”

“And through all this we are supposed to believeDumbledore has never suspected you?” askedBellatrix. “He has no idea of your true allegiance, hetrusts you implicitly still?”

“I have played my part well,” said Snape. “And youoverlook Dumbledore’s greatest weakness: He has tobelieve the best of people. I spun him a tale of deepestremorse when I joined his staff, fresh from my DeathEater days, and he embraced me with open arms —though, as I say, never allowing me nearer the DarkArts than he could help. Dumbledore has been agreat wizard — oh yes, he has,” (for Bellatrix hadmade a scathing noise), “the Dark Lord acknowledgesit. I am pleased to say, however, that Dumbledore isgrowing old. The duel with the Dark Lord last monthshook him. He has since sustained a serious injurybecause his reactions are slower than they once were.But through all these years, he has never stoppedtrusting Severus Snape, and therein lies my greatvalue to the Dark Lord.”

Bellatrix still looked unhappy, though she appearedunsure how best to attack Snape next. Takingadvantage of her silence, Snape turned to her sister.

“Now ... you came to ask me for help, Narcissa?”

Narcissa looked up at him, her face eloquent withdespair.

“Yes, Severus. I — I think you are the only one whocan help me, I have nowhere else to turn. Lucius is injail and ...”

Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She closed her eyes and two large tears seeped frombeneath her eyelids.

“The Dark Lord has forbidden me to speak of it,”Narcissa continued, her eyes still closed. “He wishesnone to know of the plan. It is ... very secret. But —”

“If he has forbidden it, you ought not to speak,” saidSnape at once. “The Dark Lord’s word is law.”

Narcissa gasped as though he had doused her withcold water. Bellatrix looked satisfied for the first timesince she had entered the house.

“There!” she said triumphantly to her sister. “EvenSnape says so: You were told not to talk, so hold yoursilence!”

But Snape had gotten to his feet and strode to thesmall window, peered through the curtains at thedeserted street, then closed them again with a jerk.

He turned around to face Narcissa, frowning.

“It so happens that I know of the plan,” he said in alow voice. “I am one of the few the Dark Lord has told.Nevertheless, had I not been in on the secret,

Narcissa, you would have been guilty of greattreachery to the Dark Lord.”

“I thought you must know about it!” said Narcissa,breathing more freely. “He trusts you so, Severus. ...”

“You know about the plan?” said Bellatrix, her fleetingexpression of satisfaction replaced by a look ofoutrage. “ You know?”

“Certainly,” said Snape. “But what help do yourequire, Narcissa? If you are imagining I can persuade

Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

the Dark Lord to change his mind, I am afraid there isno hope, none at all.”

“Severus,” she whispered, tears sliding down her palecheeks. “My son ... my only son ...”

“Draco should be proud,” said Bellatrix indifferently.“The Dark Lord is granting him a great honor. And Iwill say this for Draco: He isn’t shrinking away fromhis duty, he seems glad of a chance to prove himself,excited at the prospect —”

Narcissa began to cry in earnest, gazing beseechinglyall the while at Snape.

“That’s because he is sixteen and has no idea whatlies in store! Why, Severus? Why my son? It is toodangerous! This is vengeance for Lucius’s mistake, Iknow it!”

Snape said nothing. He looked away from the sight ofher tears as though they were indecent, but he couldnot pretend not to hear her.

“That’s why he’s chosen Draco, isn’t it?” shepersisted. “To punish Lucius?”

“If Draco succeeds,” said Snape, still looking awayfrom her, “he will be honored above all others.”

“But he won’t succeed!” sobbed Narcissa. “How canhe, when the Dark Lord himself— ?”

Bellatrix gasped; Narcissa seemed to lose her nerve.

“I only meant ... that nobody has yet succeeded. ...Severus ... please ... You are, you have always been,Draco’s favorite teacher. ... You are Lucius’s oldfriend. ... I beg you. ... You are the Dark Lord’s

Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

favorite, his most trusted advisor. ... Will you speak tohim, persuade him — ?”

“The Dark Lord will not be persuaded, and I am notstupid enough to attempt it,” said Snape flatly. “Icannot pretend that the Dark Lord is not angry withLucius. Lucius was supposed to be in charge. He gothimself captured, along with how many others, andfailed to retrieve the prophecy into the bargain. Yes,the Dark Lord is angry, Narcissa, very angry indeed.”

“Then I am right, he has chosen Draco in revenge!”choked Narcissa. “He does not mean him to succeed,he wants him to be killed trying!”

When Snape said nothing, Narcissa seemed to losewhat little self-restraint she still possessed. Standingup, she staggered to Snape and seized the front of hisrobes. Her face close to his, her tears falling onto hischest, she gasped, “You could do it. You could do itinstead of Draco, Severus. You would succeed, ofcourse you would, and he would reward you beyondall of us —”

Snape caught hold of her wrists and removed herclutching hands. Looking down into her tearstainedface, he said slowly, “He intends me to do it in theend, I think. But he is determined that Draco shouldtry first. You see, in the unlikely event that Dracosucceeds, I shall be able to remain at Hogwarts a littlelonger, fulfilling my useful role as spy.”

“In other words, it doesn’t matter to him if Draco iskilled!”

“The Dark Lord is very angry,” repeated Snapequietly. “He failed to hear the prophecy. You know aswell as I do, Narcissa, that he does not forgive easily.”

Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She crumpled, falling at his feet, sobbing andmoaning on the floor.

“My only son ... my only son ...”

“You should be proud!” said Bellatrix ruthlessly. “If Ihad sons, I would be glad to give them up to theservice of the Dark Lord!”

Narcissa gave a little scream of despair and clutchedat her long blonde hair. Snape stooped, seized her bythe arms, lifted her up, and steered her back onto thesofa. He then poured her more wine and forced theglass into her hand.

“Narcissa, that’s enough. Drink this. Listen to me.”

She quieted a little; slopping wine down herself, shetook a shaky sip.

“It might be possible ... for me to help Draco.”

She sat up, her face paper-white, her eyes huge.

“Severus — oh, Severus — you would help him?

Would you look after him, see he comes to no harm?”

“I can try.”

She flung away her glass; it skidded across the tableas she slid off the sofa into a kneeling position atSnape’s feet, seized his hand in both of hers, andpressed her lips to it.

“If you are there to protect him ... Severus, will youswear it? Will you make the Unbreakable Vow?”

“The Unbreakable Vow?”

Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

Snape’s expression was blank, unreadable. Bellatrix,however, let out a cackle of triumphant laughter.

“Aren’t you listening, Narcissa? Oh, he’ll try, I’m sure.... The usual empty words, the usual slithering out ofaction ... oh, on the Dark Lord’s orders, of course!”

Snape did not look at Bellatrix. His black eyes werefixed upon Narcissa’s tear-filled blue ones as shecontinued to clutch his hand.

“Certainly, Narcissa, I shall make the UnbreakableVow,” he said quietly. “Perhaps your sister willconsent to be our Bonder.”

Bellatrix’s mouth fell open. Snape lowered himself sothat he was kneeling opposite Narcissa. BeneathBellatrix’s astonished gaze, they grasped right hands.

“You will need your wand, Bellatrix,” said Snapecoldly.

She drew it, still looking astonished.

“And you will need to move a little closer,” he said.

She stepped forward so that she stood over them, andplaced the tip of her wand on their linked hands.

Narcissa spoke.

“Will you, Severus, watch over my son, Draco, as heattempts to fulfill the Dark Lord’s wishes?”

“I will,” said Snape.

A thin tongue of brilliant flame issued from the wandand wound its way around their hands like a red-hotwire.

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“And will you, to the best of your ability, protect himfrom harm?”

“I will,” said Snape.

A second tongue of flame shot from the wand andinterlinked with the first, making a fine, glowingchain.

“And, should it prove necessary ... if it seems Dracowill fail ...” whispered Narcissa (Snape’s handtwitched within hers, but he did not draw away), “willyou carry out the deed that the Dark Lord hasordered Draco to perform?”

There was a moment’s silence. Bellatrix watched, herwand upon their clasped hands, her eyes wide.

“I will,” said Snape.

Bellatrix’s astounded face glowed red in the blaze of athird tongue of flame, which shot from the wand,twisted with the others, and bound itself thicklyaround their clasped hands, like a rope, like a fierysnake.

Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling



WILL AND WON’T

Harry Potter was snoring loudly. He had been sittingin a chair beside his bedroom window for the bestpart of four hours, staring out at the darkening street,and had finally fallen asleep with one side of his facepressed against the cold windowpane, his glassesaskew and his mouth wide open. The misty fug hisbreath had left on the window sparkled in the orangeglare of the streetlamp outside, and the artificial lightdrained his face of all color, so that he looked ghostlybeneath his shock of untidy black hair.

The room was strewn with various possessions and agood smattering of rubbish. Owl feathers, apple cores,and sweet wrappers littered the floor, a number ofspellbooks lay higgledy-piggledy among the tangledrobes on his bed, and a mess of newspapers sat in apuddle of light on his desk. The headline of oneblared:

HARRY POTTER: THE CHOSEN ONE?

Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Rumors continue to fly about the mysterious recentdisturbance at the Ministry of Magic, during whichHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named was sighted once more.

“We’re not allowed to talk about it, don’t ask meanything,” said one agitated Obliviator, who refusedto give his name as he left the Ministry last night.

Nevertheless, highly placed sources within theMinistry have confirmed that the disturbancecentered on the fabled Hall of Prophecy.

Though Ministry spokeswizards have hitherto refusedeven to confirm the existence of such a place, agrowing number of the Wizarding community believethat the Death Eaters now serving sentences inAzkaban for trespass and attempted theft wereattempting to steal a prophecy. The nature of thatprophecy is unknown, although speculation is rifethat it concerns Harry Potter, the only person everknown to have survived the Killing Curse, and who isalso known to have been at the Ministry on the nightin question. Some are going so far as to call Potter“the Chosen One,” believing that the prophecy nameshim as the only one who will be able to rid us of He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named.

The current whereabouts of the prophecy, if it exists,are unknown, although (ctd. page 2, column 5)

A second newspaper lay beside the first. This one borethe headline:

SCRIMGEOUR SUCCEEDS FUDGE

Most of this front page was taken up with a largeblack-and-white picture of a man with a lionlike maneof thick hair and a rather ravaged face. The picturewas moving — the man was waving at the ceiling.

Page | 44 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Rufus Scrimgeour, previously Head of the Auror officein the Department of Magical Law Enforcement, hassucceeded Cornelius Fudge as Minister of Magic. Theappointment has largely been greeted withenthusiasm by the Wizarding community, thoughrumors of a rift between the new Minister and AlbusDumbledore, newly reinstated Chief Warlock of theWizengamot, surfaced within hours of Scrimgeourtaking office.

Scrimgeour’s representatives admitted that he had metwith Dumbledore at once upon taking possession of thetop job, but refused to comment on the topics underdiscussion. Albus Dumbledore is known to (ctd. page3, column 2)

To the left of this paper sat another, which had beenfolded so that a story bearing the title MINISTRYGUARANTEES STUDENTS’ SAFETY was visible.

Newly appointed Minister of Magic, RufusScrimgeour, spoke today of the tough new measurestaken by his Ministry to ensure the safety of studentsreturning to Hogwarts School of Witchcraft andWizardry this autumn.

“For obvious reasons, the Ministry will not be goinginto detail about its stringent new security plans,”said the Minister, although an insider confirmed thatmeasures include defensive spells and charms, acomplex array of countercurses, and a small taskforce of Aurors dedicated solely to the protection ofHogwarts School.

Most seem reassured by the new Minister’s toughstand on student safety. Said Mrs. AugustaLongbottom, “My grandson, Neville — a good friend ofHarry Potter’s, incidentally, who fought the DeathEaters alongside him at the Ministry in June and —Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

But the rest of this story was obscured by the largebirdcage standing on top of it. Inside it was amagnificent snowy owl. Her amber eyes surveyed theroom imperiously, her head swiveling occasionally togaze at her snoring master. Once or twice she clickedher beak impatiently, but Harry was too deeply asleepto hear her.

A large trunk stood in the very middle of the room. Itslid was open; it looked expectant; yet it was almostempty but for a residue of old underwear, sweets,empty ink bottles, and broken quills that coated thevery bottom. Nearby, on the floor, lay a purple leafletemblazoned with the words:

— ISSUED ON BEHALF OF —

THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC

PROTECTING YOUR HOME AND FAMILY

AGAINST DARK FORCES

The Wizarding community is currently under threatfrom an organization calling itself the Death Eaters.Observing the following simple security guidelines willhelp protect you, your family, and your home fromattack.

1. You are advised not to leave the house alone.

2. Particular care should be taken during thehours of darkness. Wherever possible, arrange tocomplete journeys before night has fallen.

3. Review the security arrangements around yourhouse, making sure that all family members areaware of emergency measures such as Shield and

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Disillusionment Charms, and, in the case of underagefamily members, Side-Along-Apparition.

4. Agree on security questions with close friendsand family so as to detect Death Eaters masqueradingas others by use of the Polyjuice Potion (see page 2).

5. Should you feel that a family member,colleague, friend, or neighbor is acting in a strangemanner, contact the Magical Law Enforcement Squadat once. They may have been put under the ImperiusCurse (see page 4).

6. Should the Dark Mark appear over any dwellingplace or other building, DO NOT ENTER, but contactthe Auror office immediately.

7. Unconfirmed sightings suggest that the DeathEaters may now be using Inferi (see page 10). Anysighting of an Inferius, or encounter with same,should be reported to the Ministry IMMEDIATELY.

Harry grunted in his sleep and his face slid down thewindow an inch or so, making his glasses still morelopsided, but he did not wake up. An alarm clock,repaired by Harry several years ago, ticked loudly onthe sill, showing one minute to eleven. Beside it, heldin place by Harry’s relaxed hand, was a piece ofparchment covered in thin, slanting writing. Harryhad read this letter so often since its arrival threedays ago that although it had been delivered in atightly furled scroll, it now lay quite flat.

Dear Harry,

If it is convenient to you, I shall call at number four,Privet Drive this coming Friday at eleven p.m. to escortyou to the Burrow, where you have been invited tospend the remainder of your school holidays.

Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

If you are agreeable, I should also be glad of yourassistance in a matter to which I hope to attend on theway to the Burrow. I shall explain this more fully whenI see you.

Kindly send your answer by return of this owl. Hopingto see you this Friday,

I am, yours most sincerely,

Albus Dumbledore

Though he already knew it by heart, Harry had beenstealing glances at this missive every few minutessince seven o’clock that evening, when he had firsttaken up his position beside his bedroom window,which had a reasonable view of both ends of PrivetDrive. He knew it was pointless to keep rereadingDumbledore’s words; Harry had sent back his “yes”with the delivering owl, as requested, and all he coulddo now was wait: Either Dumbledore was going tocome, or he was not.

But Harry had not packed. It just seemed too good tobe true that he was going to be rescued from theDursleys after a mere fortnight of their company. Hecould not shrug off the feeling that something wasgoing to go wrong — his reply to Dumbledore’s lettermight have gone astray; Dumbledore could beprevented from collecting him; the letter might turnout not to be from Dumbledore at all, but a trick orjoke or trap. Harry had not been able to face packingand then being let down and having to unpack again.The only gesture he had made to the possibility of ajourney was to shut his snowy owl, Hedwig, safely inher cage.

Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The minute hand on the alarm clock reached thenumber twelve and, at that precise moment, thestreetlamp outside the window went out.

Harry awoke as though the sudden darkness were analarm. Hastily straightening his glasses andunsticking his cheek from the glass, he pressed hisnose against the window instead and squinted downat the pavement. A tall figure in a long, billowingcloak was walking up the garden path.

Harry jumped up as though he had received anelectric shock, knocked over his chair, and startedsnatching anything and everything within reach fromthe floor and throwing it into the trunk. Even as helobbed a set of robes, two spellbooks, and a packet ofcrisps across the room, the doorbell rang. Downstairsin the living room his Uncle Vernon shouted, “Whothe blazes is calling at this time of night?”

Harry froze with a brass telescope in one hand and apair of trainers in the other. He had completelyforgotten to warn the Dursleys that Dumbledoremight be coming. Feeling both panicky and close tolaughter, he clambered over the trunk and wrenchedopen his bedroom door in time to hear a deep voicesay, “Good evening. You must be Mr. Dursley. Idaresay Harry has told you I would be coming forhim?”

Harry ran down the stairs two at a time, coming to anabrupt halt several steps from the bottom, as longexperience had taught him to remain out of arm’sreach of his uncle whenever possible. There in thedoorway stood a tall, thin man with waist-lengthsilver hair and beard. Half-moon spectacles wereperched on his crooked nose, and he was wearing along black traveling cloak and a pointed hat. VernonDursley, whose mustache was quite as bushy asPage | 49 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore’s, though black, and who was wearing apuce dressing gown, was staring at the visitor asthough he could not believe his tiny eyes.

“Judging by your look of stunned disbelief, Harry didnot warn you that I was coming,” said Dumbledorepleasantly. “However, let us assume that you haveinvited me warmly into your house. It is unwise tolinger overlong on doorsteps in these troubled times.”

He stepped smartly over the threshold and closed thefront door behind him.

“It is a long time since my last visit,” saidDumbledore, peering down his crooked nose at UncleVernon. “I must say, your agapanthus areflourishing.”

Vernon Dursley said nothing at all. Harry did notdoubt that speech would return to him, and soon —the vein pulsing in his uncle’s temple was reachingdanger point — but something about Dumbledoreseemed to have robbed him temporarily of breath. Itmight have been the blatant wizardishness of hisappearance, but it might, too, have been that evenUncle Vernon could sense that here was a man whomit would be very difficult to bully.

“Ah, good evening Harry,” said Dumbledore, lookingup at him through his half-moon glasses with a mostsatisfied expression. “Excellent, excellent.”

These words seemed to rouse Uncle Vernon. It wasclear that as far as he was concerned, any man whocould look at Harry and say “excellent” was a manwith whom he could never see eye to eye.

“I don’t mean to be rude —” he began, in a tone thatthreatened rudeness in every syllable.

Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“— yet, sadly, accidental rudeness occurs alarminglyoften,” Dumbledore finished the sentence gravely.“Best to say nothing at all, my dear man. Ah, and thismust be Petunia.”

The kitchen door had opened, and there stood Harry’saunt, wearing rubber gloves and a housecoat over hernightdress, clearly halfway through her usual pre-bedtime wipe-down of all the kitchen surfaces. Herrather horsey face registered nothing but shock.

“Albus Dumbledore,” said Dumbledore, when UncleVernon failed to effect an introduction. “We havecorresponded, of course.” Harry thought this an oddway of reminding Aunt Petunia that he had once senther an exploding letter, but Aunt Petunia did notchallenge the term. “And this must be your son,Dudley?”

Dudley had that moment peered round the livingroom door. His large, blond head rising out of thestripy collar of his pajamas looked oddly disembodied,his mouth gaping in astonishment and fear.Dumbledore waited a moment or two, apparently tosee whether any of the Dursleys were going to sayanything, but as the silence stretched on he smiled.

“Shall we assume that you have invited me into yoursitting room?

Dudley scrambled out of the way as Dumbledorepassed him. Harry, still clutching the telescope andtrainers, jumped the last few stairs and followedDumbledore, who had settled himself in the armchairnearest the fire and was taking in the surroundingswith an expression of benign interest. He looked quiteextraordinarily out of place.

Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Aren’t — aren’t we leaving, sir?” Harry askedanxiously.

“Yes, indeed we are, but there are a few matters weneed to discuss first,” said Dumbledore. “And I wouldprefer not to do so in the open. We shall trespassupon your aunt and uncle’s hospitality only a littlelonger.”

“You will, will you?”

Vernon Dursley had entered the room, Petunia at hisshoulder, and Dudley skulking behind them both.

“Yes,” said Dumbledore simply, “I shall.”

He drew his wand so rapidly that Harry barely saw it;with a casual flick, the sofa zoomed forward andknocked the knees out from under all three of theDursleys so that they collapsed upon it in a heap.Another flick of the wand and the sofa zoomed backto its original position.

“We may as well be comfortable,” said Dumbledorepleasantly.

As he replaced his wand in his pocket, Harry saw thathis hand was blackened and shriveled; it looked asthough his flesh had been burned away.

“Sir — what happened to your — ?”

“Later, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Please sit down.”

Harry took the remaining armchair, choosing not tolook at the Dursleys, who seemed stunned intosilence.

Page | 52 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I would assume that you were going to offer merefreshment,” Dumbledore said to Uncle Vernon, “butthe evidence so far suggests that that would beoptimistic to the point of foolishness.”

A third twitch of the wand, and a dusty bottle and fiveglasses appeared in midair. The bottle tipped andpoured a generous measure of honey-colored liquidinto each of the glasses, which then floated to eachperson in the room.

“Madam Rosmerta’s finest oak-matured mead,” saidDumbledore, raising his glass to Harry, who caughthold of his own and sipped. He had never tastedanything like it before, but enjoyed it immensely. TheDursleys, after quick, scared looks at one another,tried to ignore their glasses completely, a difficult feat,as they were nudging them gently on the sides of theirheads. Harry could not suppress a suspicion thatDumbledore was rather enjoying himself.

“Well, Harry,” said Dumbledore, turning toward him,“a difficulty has arisen which I hope you will be ableto solve for us. By us, I mean the Order of thePhoenix. But first of all I must tell you that Sirius’swill was discovered a week ago and that he left youeverything he owned.”

Over on the sofa, Uncle Vernon’s head turned, butHarry did not look at him, nor could he think ofanything to say except, “Oh. Right.”

“This is, in the main, fairly straightforward,”Dumbledore went on. “You add a reasonable amountof gold to your account at Gringotts, and you inheritall of Sirius’s personal possessions. The slightlyproblematic part of the legacy —”

Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“His godfather’s dead?” said Uncle Vernon loudly fromthe sofa. Dumbledore and Harry both turned to lookat him. The glass of mead was now knocking quiteinsistently on the side of Vernon’s head; he attemptedto beat it away. “He’s dead? His godfather?”

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. He did not ask Harry why hehad not confided in the Dursleys. “Our problem,” hecontinued to Harry, as if there had been nointerruption, “is that Sirius also left you numbertwelve, Grimmauld Place.”

“He’s been left a house?” said Uncle Vernon greedily,his small eyes narrowing, but nobody answered him.

“You can keep using it as headquarters,” said Harry.

“I don’t care. You can have it, I don’t really want it.”Harry never wanted to set foot in number twelve,Grimmauld Place again if he could help it. He thoughthe would be haunted forever by the memory of Siriusprowling its dark musty rooms alone, imprisonedwithin the place he had wanted so desperately toleave.

“That is generous,” said Dumbledore. “We have,however, vacated the building temporarily.”

“Why?”

“Well,” said Dumbledore, ignoring the mutterings ofUncle Vernon, who was now being rapped smartlyover the head by the persistent glass of mead, “Blackfamily tradition decreed that the house was handeddown the direct line, to the next male with the nameof ‘Black. ’ Sirius was the very last of the line as hisyounger brother, Regulus, predeceased him and bothwere childless. While his will makes it perfectly plainthat he wants you to have the house, it isnevertheless possible that some spell or enchantmentPage | 54 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

has been set upon the place to ensure that it cannotbe owned by anyone other than a pureblood.”

A vivid image of the shrieking, spitting portrait ofSirius’s mother that hung in the hall of numbertwelve, Grimmauld Place flashed into Harry’s mind. “Ibet there has,” he said.

“Quite,” said Dumbledore. “And if such anenchantment exists, then the ownership of the houseis most likely to pass to the eldest of Sirius’s livingrelatives, which would mean his cousin, BellatrixLestrange.”

Without realizing what he was doing, Harry sprang tohis feet; the telescope and trainers in his lap rolledacross the floor. Bellatrix Lestrange, Sirius’s killer,inherit his house?

“No,” he said.

“Well, obviously we would prefer that she didn’t get iteither,” said Dumbledore calmly. “The situation isfraught with complications. We do not know whetherthe enchantments we ourselves have placed upon it,for example, making it Unplottable, will hold now thatownership has passed from Sirius’s hands. It mightbe that Bellatrix will arrive on the doorstep at anymoment. Naturally we had to move out until suchtime as we have clarified the position.”

“But how are you going to find out if I’m allowed toown it?”

“Fortunately,” said Dumbledore, “there is a simpletest.”

He placed his empty glass on a small table beside hischair, but before he could do anything else, Uncle

Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Vernon shouted, “ Will you get these ruddy things offus?”

Harry looked around; all three of the Dursleys werecowering with their arms over their heads as theirglasses bounced up and down on their skulls, theircontents flying everywhere.

“Oh, I’m so sorry,” said Dumbledore politely, and heraised his wand again. All three glasses vanished.

“But it would have been better manners to drink it,you know.”

It looked as though Uncle Vernon was bursting withany number of unpleasant retorts, but he merelyshrank back into the cushions with Aunt Petunia andDudley and said nothing, keeping his small piggy eyeson Dumbledore’s wand.

“You see,” Dumbledore said, turning back to Harryand again speaking as though Uncle Vernon had notuttered, “if you have indeed inherited the house, youhave also inherited —”

He flicked his wand for a fifth time. There was a loudcrack, and a house-elf appeared, with a snout for anose, giant bat’s ears, and enormous bloodshot eyes,crouching on the Dursleys’ shag carpet and coveredin grimy rags. Aunt Petunia let out a hair-raisingshriek; nothing this filthy had entered her house inliving memory. Dudley drew his large, bare, pink feetoff the floor and sat with them raised almost abovehis head, as though he thought the creature mightrun up his pajama trousers, and Uncle Vernonbellowed, “What the hell is that?”

“Kreacher,” finished Dumbledore.

Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Kreacher won’t, Kreacher won’t, Kreacher won’t!”croaked the house-elf, quite as loudly as UncleVernon, stamping his long, gnarled feet and pullinghis ears. “Kreacher belongs to Miss Bellatrix, oh yes,Kreacher belongs to the Blacks, Kreacher wants hisnew mistress, Kreacher won’t go to the Potter brat,Kreacher won’t, won’t, won’t —”

“As you can see, Harry,” said Dumbledore loudly, overKreacher’s continued croaks of “won’t, won’t, won’t,”“Kreacher is showing a certain reluctance to pass intoyour ownership.”

“I don’t care,” said Harry again, looking with disgustat the writhing, stamping house-elf. “I don’t wanthim.”

“Won’t, won’t, won’t, won’t—”

“You would prefer him to pass into the ownership ofBellatrix Lestrange? Bearing in mind that he has livedat the headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix forthe past year?”

“Won’t, won’t, won’t, won’t—”

Harry stared at Dumbledore. He knew that Kreachercould not be permitted to go and live with BellatrixLestrange, but the idea of owning him, of havingresponsibility for the creature that had betrayedSirius, was repugnant.

“Give him an order,” said Dumbledore. “If he haspassed into your ownership, he will have to obey. Ifnot, then we shall have to think of some other meansof keeping him from his rightful mistress.”

“Won’t, won’t, won’t, WON’T.”

Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Kreacher’s voice had risen to a scream. Harry couldthink of nothing to say, except, “Kreacher, shut up!”

It looked for a moment as though Kreacher was goingto choke. He grabbed his throat, his mouth stillworking furiously, his eyes bulging. After a fewseconds of frantic gulping, he threw himself faceforward onto the carpet (Aunt Petunia whimpered)and beat the floor with his hands and feet, givinghimself over to a violent, but entirely silent, tantrum.

“Well, that simplifies matters,” said Dumbledorecheerfully. “It seems that Sirius knew what he wasdoing. You are the rightful owner of number twelve,Grimmauld Place and of Kreacher.”

“Do I — do I have to keep him with me?” Harry asked,aghast, as Kreacher thrashed around at his feet.

“Not if you don’t want to,” said Dumbledore. “If Imight make a suggestion, you could send him toHogwarts to work in the kitchen there. In that way,the other house-elves could keep an eye on him.”

“Yeah,” said Harry in relief, “yeah, I’ll do that. Er —Kreacher — I want you to go to Hogwarts and work inthe kitchens there with the other house-elves.”

Kreacher, who was now lying flat on his back with hisarms and legs in the air, gave Harry one upside-downlook of deepest loathing and, with another loud crack,vanished.

“Good,” said Dumbledore. “There is also the matter ofthe hippogriff, Buckbeak. Hagrid has been lookingafter him since Sirius died, but Buckbeak is yoursnow, so if you would prefer to make differentarrangements —”

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry at once, “he can stay with Hagrid. Ithink Buckbeak would prefer that.”

“Hagrid will be delighted,” said Dumbledore, smiling.“He was thrilled to see Buckbeak again. Incidentally,we have decided, in the interests of Buckbeak’ssafety, to rechristen him ‘Witherwings’ for the timebeing, though I doubt that the Ministry would everguess he is the hippogriff they once sentenced todeath. Now, Harry, is your trunk packed?”

“Erm ...”

“Doubtful that I would turn up?” Dumbledoresuggested shrewdly.

“I’ll just go and — er — finish off,” said Harry hastily,hurrying to pick up his fallen telescope and trainers.

It took him a little over ten minutes to track downeverything he needed; at last he had managed toextract his Invisibility Cloak from under the bed,screwed the top back on his jar of color-change ink,and forced the lid of his trunk shut on his cauldron.Then, heaving his trunk in one hand and holdingHedwig’s cage in the other, he made his way backdownstairs.

He was disappointed to discover that Dumbledore wasnot waiting in the hall, which meant that he had toreturn to the living room.

Nobody was talking. Dumbledore was hummingquietly, apparently quite at his ease, but theatmosphere was thicker than cold custard, and Harrydid not dare look at the Dursleys as he said,

“Professor — I’m ready now.”

Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Good,” said Dumbledore. “Just one last thing, then.”And he turned to speak to the Dursleys once more.

“As you will no doubt be aware, Harry comes of age ina year’s time —”

“No,” said Aunt Petunia, speaking for the first timesince Dumbledore’s arrival.

“I’m sorry?” said Dumbledore politely.

“No, he doesn’t. He’s a month younger than Dudley,and Dudders doesn’t turn eighteen until the year afternext.”

“Ah,” said Dumbledore pleasantly, “but in theWizarding world, we come of age at seventeen.”

Uncle Vernon muttered, “Preposterous,” butDumbledore ignored him.

“Now, as you already know, the wizard called LordVoldemort has returned to this country. TheWizarding community is currently in a state of openwarfare. Harry, whom Lord Voldemort has alreadyattempted to kill on a number of occasions, is in evengreater danger now than the day when I left him uponyour doorstep fifteen years ago, with a letterexplaining about his parents’ murder and expressingthe hope that you would care for him as though hewere your own.”

Dumbledore paused, and although his voice remainedlight and calm, and he gave no obvious sign of anger,Harry felt a kind of chill emanating from him andnoticed that the Dursleys drew very slightly closertogether.

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You did not do as I asked. You have never treatedHarry as a son. He has known nothing but neglectand often cruelty at your hands. The best that can besaid is that he has at least escaped the appallingdamage you have inflicted upon the unfortunate boysitting between you.”

Both Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon looked aroundinstinctively, as though expecting to see someoneother than Dudley squeezed between them.

“Us — mistreat Dudders? What d’you — ?” beganUncle Vernon furiously, but Dumbledore raised hisfinger for silence, a silence which fell as though hehad struck Uncle Vernon dumb.

“The magic I evoked fifteen years ago means thatHarry has powerful protection while he can still callthis house ‘home.’ However miserable he has beenhere, however unwelcome, however badly treated, youhave at least, grudgingly, allowed him houseroom.This magic will cease to operate the moment thatHarry turns seventeen; in other words, at the momenthe becomes a man. I ask only this: that you allowHarry to return, once more, to this house, before hisseventeenth birthday, which will ensure that theprotection continues until that time.”

None of the Dursleys said anything. Dudley wasfrowning slightly, as though he was still trying towork out when he had ever been mistreated. UncleVernon looked as though he had something stuck inhis throat; Aunt Petunia, however, was oddly flushed.

“Well, Harry ... time for us to be off,” said Dumbledoreat last, standing up and straightening his long blackcloak. “Until we meet again,” he said to the Dursleys,who looked as though that moment could wait forever

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

as far as they were concerned, and after doffing hishat, he swept from the room.

“Bye,” said Harry hastily to the Dursleys, and followedDumbledore, who paused beside Harry’s trunk, uponwhich Hedwig’s cage was perched.

“We do not want to be encumbered by these justnow,” he said, pulling out his wand again. “I shallsend them to the Burrow to await us there. However, Iwould like you to bring your Invisibility Cloak ... justin case.”

Harry extracted his cloak from his trunk with somedifficulty, trying not to show Dumbledore the messwithin. When he had stuffed it into an inside pocketof his jacket, Dumbledore waved his wand and thetrunk, cage, and Hedwig vanished. Dumbledore thenwaved his wand again, and the front door openedonto cool, misty darkness.

“And now, Harry, let us step out into the night andpursue that flighty temptress, adventure.”

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





HORACE SLUGHORN

Despite the fact that he had spent every wakingmoment of the past few days hoping desperately thatDumbledore would indeed come to fetch him, Harryfelt distinctly awkward as they set off down PrivetDrive together. He had never had a properconversation with the headmaster outside ofHogwarts before; there was usually a desk betweenthem. The memory of their last face-to-face encounterkept intruding too, and it rather heightened Harry’ssense of embarrassment; he had shouted a lot on thatoccasion, not to mention done his best to smashseveral of Dumbledore’s most prized possessions.

Dumbledore, however, seemed completely relaxed.

“Keep your wand at the ready, Harry,” he saidbrightly.

“But I thought I’m not allowed to use magic outsideschool, sir?”

Page | 63 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“If there is an attack,” said Dumbledore, “I give youpermission to use any counterjinx or curse that mightoccur to you. However, I do not think you need worryabout being attacked tonight.”

“Why not, sir?”

“You are with me,” said Dumbledore simply. “This willdo, Harry.”

He came to an abrupt halt at the end of Privet Drive.

“You have not, of course, passed your ApparitionTest,” he said.

“No,” said Harry. “I thought you had to be seventeen?”

“You do,” said Dumbledore. “So you will need to holdon to my arm very tightly. My left, if you don’t mind —as you have noticed, my wand arm is a little fragile atthe moment.”

Harry gripped Dumbledore’s proffered forearm.

“Very good,” said Dumbledore. “Well, here we go.”

Harry felt Dumbledore’s arm twist away from him andredoubled his grip; the next thing he knew, everythingwent black; he was being pressed very hard from alldirections; he could not breathe, there were ironbands tightening around his chest; his eyeballs werebeing forced back into his head; his eardrums werebeing pushed deeper into his skull and then —

He gulped great lungfuls of cold night air and openedhis streaming eyes. He felt as though he had justbeen forced through a very tight rubber tube. It was afew seconds before he realized that Privet Drive hadvanished. He and Dumbledore were now standing inPage | 64 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

what appeared to be a deserted village square, in thecenter of which stood an old war memorial and a fewbenches. His comprehension catching up with hissenses, Harry realized that he had just Apparated forthe first time in his life.

“Are you all right?” asked Dumbledore, looking downat him solicitously. “The sensation does take somegetting used to.”

“I’m fine,” said Harry, rubbing his ears, which felt asthough they had left Privet Drive rather reluctantly.“But I think I might prefer brooms. ...”

Dumbledore smiled, drew his traveling cloak a littlemore tightly around his neck, and said, “This way.”

He set off at a brisk pace, past an empty inn and afew houses. According to a clock on a nearby church,it was almost midnight.

“So tell me, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Your scar ...has it been hurting at all?”

Harry raised a hand unconsciously to his foreheadand rubbed the lightning-shaped mark.

“No,” he said, “and IVe been wondering about that. Ithought it would be burning all the time nowVoldemort’s getting so powerful again.”

He glanced up at Dumbledore and saw that he waswearing a satisfied expression.

“I, on the other hand, thought otherwise,” saidDumbledore. “Lord Voldemort has finally realized thedangerous access to his thoughts and feelings youhave been enjoying. It appears that he is nowemploying Occlumency against you.”

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, I’m not complaining,” said Harry, who missedneither the disturbing dreams nor the startlingflashes of insight into Voldemort’s mind.

They turned a corner, passing a telephone box and abus shelter. Harry looked sideways at Dumbledoreagain. “Professor?”

“Harry?”

“Er — where exactly are we?”

“This, Harry, is the charming village of BudleighBabberton.”

“And what are we doing here?”

“Ah yes, of course, I haven’t told you,” saidDumbledore. “Well, I have lost count of the number oftimes I have said this in recent years, but we are,once again, one member of staff short. We are here topersuade an old colleague of mine to come out ofretirement and return to Hogwarts.”

“How can I help with that, sir?”

“Oh, I think we’ll find a use for you,” said Dumbledorevaguely. “Left here, Harry.”

They proceeded up a steep, narrow street lined withhouses. All the windows were dark. The odd chill thathad lain over Privet Drive for two weeks persisted heretoo. Thinking of dementors, Harry cast a look over hisshoulder and grasped his wand reassuringly in hispocket.

“Professor, why couldn’t we just Apparate directly intoyour old colleague’s house?”

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Because it would be quite as rude as kicking downthe front door,” said Dumbledore. “Courtesy dictatesthat we offer fellow wizards the opportunity of denyingus entry. In any case, most Wizarding dwellings aremagically protected from unwanted Apparators. AtHogwarts, for instance —”

“— you can’t Apparate anywhere inside the buildingsor grounds,” said Harry quickly. “Hermione Grangertold me.”

“And she is quite right. We turn left again.”

The church clock chimed midnight behind them.

Harry wondered why Dumbledore did not consider itrude to call on his old colleague so late, but now thatconversation had been established, he had morepressing questions to ask.

“Sir, I saw in the Daily Prophet that Fudge has beensacked. ...”

“Correct,” said Dumbledore, now turning up a steepside street. “He has been replaced, as I am sure youalso saw, by Rufus Scrimgeour, who used to be Headof the Auror office.”

“Is he ... Do you think he’s good?” asked Harry.

“An interesting question,” said Dumbledore. “He isable, certainly. A more decisive and forcefulpersonality than Cornelius.”

“Yes, but I meant —”

“I know what you meant. Rufus is a man of actionand, having fought Dark wizards for most of hisworking life, does not underestimate Lord Voldemort.”

Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry waited, but Dumbledore did not say anythingabout the disagreement with Scrimgeour that theDaily Prophet had reported, and he did not have thenerve to pursue the subject, so he changed it. “And ...sir ... I saw about Madam Bones.”

“Yes,” said Dumbledore quietly. “A terrible loss. Shewas a great witch. Just up here, I think — ouch.”

He had pointed with his injured hand.

“Professor, what happened to your — ?”

“I have no time to explain now,” said Dumbledore. “Itis a thrilling tale, I wish to do it justice.”

He smiled at Harry, who understood that he was notbeing snubbed, and that he had permission to keepasking questions.

“Sir — I got a Ministry of Magic leaflet by owl, aboutsecurity measures we should all take against theDeath Eaters. ...”

“Yes, I received one myself,” said Dumbledore, stillsmiling. “Did you find it useful?”

“Not really.”

“No, I thought not. You have not asked me, forinstance, what is my favorite flavor of jam, to checkthat I am indeed Professor Dumbledore and not animpostor.”

“I didn’t ...” Harry began, not entirely sure whether hewas being reprimanded or not.

“For future reference, Harry, it is raspberry ...although of course, if I were a Death Eater, I would

Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

have been sure to research my own jam preferencesbefore impersonating myself.”

“Er ... right,” said Harry. “Well, on that leaflet, it saidsomething about Inferi. What exactly are they? Theleaflet wasn’t very clear.”

“They are corpses,” said Dumbledore calmly. “Deadbodies that have been bewitched to do a Darkwizard’s bidding. Inferi have not been seen for a longtime, however, not since Voldemort was last powerful.

... He killed enough people to make an army of them,of course. This is the place, Harry, just here. ...”

They were nearing a small, neat stone house set in itsown garden. Harry was too busy digesting the horribleidea of Inferi to have much attention left for anythingelse, but as they reached the front gate, Dumbledorestopped dead and Harry walked into him.

“Oh dear. Oh dear, dear, dear.”

Harry followed his gaze up the carefully tended frontpath and felt his heart sink. The front door washanging off its hinges.

Dumbledore glanced up and down the street. Itseemed quite deserted.

“Wand out and follow me, Harry,” he said quietly.

He opened the gate and walked swiftly and silently upthe garden path, Harry at his heels, then pushed thefront door very slowly, his wand raised and at theready.

“Lumos.”

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore’s wand tip ignited, casting its light up anarrow hallway. To the left, another door stood open.Holding his illuminated wand aloft, Dumbledorewalked into the sitting room with Harry right behindhim.

A scene of total devastation met their eyes. Agrandfather clock lay splintered at their feet, its facecracked, its pendulum lying a little farther away like adropped sword. A piano was on its side, its keysstrewn across the floor. The wreckage of a fallenchandelier glittered nearby. Cushions lay deflated,feathers oozing from slashes in their sides; fragmentsof glass and china lay like powder over everything.Dumbledore raised his wand even higher, so that itslight was thrown upon the walls, where somethingdarkly red and glutinous was spattered over thewallpaper. Harry’s small intake of breath madeDumbledore look around.

“Not pretty, is it?” he said heavily. “Yes, somethinghorrible has happened here.”

Dumbledore moved carefully into the middle of theroom, scrutinizing the wreckage at his feet. Harryfollowed, gazing around, half-scared of what he mightsee hidden behind the wreck of the piano or theoverturned sofa, but there was no sign of a body.

“Maybe there was a fight and — and they dragged himoff, Professor?” Harry suggested, trying not to imaginehow badly wounded a man would have to be to leavethose stains spattered halfway up the walls.

“I don’t think so,” said Dumbledore quietly, peeringbehind an overstuffed armchair lying on its side.

“You mean he’s — ?”

Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Still here somewhere? Yes.”

And without warning, Dumbledore swooped, plungingthe tip of his wand into the seat of the overstuffedarmchair, which yelled, “Ouch!”

“Good evening, Horace,” said Dumbledore,straightening up again.

Harry’s jaw dropped. Where a split second beforethere had been an armchair, there now crouched anenormously fat, bald, old man who was massaging hislower belly and squinting up at Dumbledore with anaggrieved and watery eye.

“There was no need to stick the wand in that hard,”he said gruffly, clambering to his feet. “It hurt.”

The wandlight sparkled on his shiny pate, hisprominent eyes, his enormous, silver, walruslikemustache, and the highly polished buttons on themaroon velvet jacket he was wearing over a pair oflilac silk pajamas. The top of his head barely reachedDumbledore’s chin.

“What gave it away?” he grunted as he staggered tohis feet, still rubbing his lower belly. He seemedremarkably unabashed for a man who had just beendiscovered pretending to be an armchair.

“My dear Horace,” said Dumbledore, looking amused,“if the Death Eaters really had come to call, the DarkMark would have been set over the house.”

The wizard clapped a pudgy hand to his vastforehead.

“The Dark Mark,” he muttered. “Knew there wassomething ... ah well. Wouldn’t have had time

Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

anyway, I’d only just put the finishing touches to myupholstery when you entered the room.”

He heaved a great sigh that made the ends of hismustache flutter.

“Would you like my assistance clearing up?” askedDumbledore politely.

“Please,” said the other.

They stood back to back, the tall thin wizard and theshort round one, and waved their wands in oneidentical sweeping motion.

The furniture flew back to its original places;ornaments reformed in midair, feathers zoomed intotheir cushions; torn books repaired themselves asthey landed upon their shelves; oil lanterns soaredonto side tables and reignited; a vast collection ofsplintered silver picture frames flew glittering acrossthe room and alighted, whole and untarnished, upona desk; rips, cracks, and holes healed everywhere,and the walls wiped themselves clean.

“What kind of blood was that, incidentally?” askedDumbledore loudly over the chiming of the newlyunsmashed grandfather clock.

“On the walls? Dragon,” shouted the wizard calledHorace, as, with a deafening grinding and tinkling,the chandelier screwed itself back into the ceiling.

There was a final plunk from the piano, and silence.

“Yes, dragon,” repeated the wizard conversationally.“My last bottle, and prices are sky-high at themoment. Still, it might be reusable.”

Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He stumped over to a small crystal bottle standing ontop of a sideboard and held it up to the light,examining the thick liquid within.

“Hmm. Bit dusty.”

He set the bottle back on the sideboard and sighed. Itwas then that his gaze fell upon Harry.

“Oho,” he said, his large round eyes flying to Harry’sforehead and the lightning-shaped scar it bore. “Ohol”

“This,” said Dumbledore, moving forward to make theintroduction, “is Harry Potter. Harry, this is an oldfriend and colleague of mine, Horace Slughorn.”

Slughorn turned on Dumbledore, his expressionshrewd. “So that’s how you thought you’d persuademe, is it? Well, the answer’s no, Albus.”

He pushed past Harry, his face turned resolutelyaway with the air of a man trying to resist temptation.

“I suppose we can have a drink, at least?” askedDumbledore. “For old time’s sake?”

Slughorn hesitated.

“All right then, one drink,” he said ungraciously.

Dumbledore smiled at Harry and directed him towarda chair not unlike the one that Slughorn had sorecently impersonated, which stood right beside thenewly burning fire and a brightly glowing oil lamp.Harry took the seat with the distinct impression thatDumbledore, for some reason, wanted to keep him asvisible as possible. Certainly when Slughorn, who hadbeen busy with decanters and glasses, turned to facethe room again, his eyes fell immediately upon Harry.Page | 73 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Hmpf,” he said, looking away quickly as thoughfrightened of hurting his eyes. “Here —” He gave adrink to Dumbledore, who had sat down withoutinvitation, thrust the tray at Harry, and then sankinto the cushions of the repaired sofa and adisgruntled silence. His legs were so short they didnot touch the floor.

“Well, how have you been keeping, Horace?”Dumbledore asked.

“Not so well,” said Slughorn at once. “Weak chest.Wheezy. Rheumatism too. Can’t move like I used to.Well, that’s to be expected. Old age. Fatigue.”

“And yet you must have moved fairly quickly toprepare such a welcome for us at such short notice,”said Dumbledore. “You can’t have had more thanthree minutes’ warning?”

Slughorn said, half irritably, half proudly, “Two.

Didn’t hear my Intruder Charm go off, I was taking abath. Still,” he added sternly, seeming to pull himselfback together again, “the fact remains that I’m an oldman, Albus. A tired old man who’s earned the right toa quiet life and a few creature comforts.”

He certainly had those, thought Harry, lookingaround the room. It was stuffy and cluttered, yetnobody could say it was uncomfortable; there weresoft chairs and footstools, drinks and books, boxes ofchocolates and plump cushions. If Harry had notknown who lived there, he would have guessed at arich, fussy old lady.

“You’re not yet as old as I am, Horace,” saidDumbledore.

Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, maybe you ought to think about retirementyourself,” said Slughorn bluntly. His pale gooseberryeyes had found Dumbledore’s injured hand.

“Reactions not what they were, I see.”

“You’re quite right,” said Dumbledore serenely,shaking back his sleeve to reveal the tips of thoseburned and blackened fingers; the sight of them madethe back of Harry’s neck prickle unpleasantly. “I amundoubtedly slower than I was. But on the otherhand ...”

He shrugged and spread his hands wide, as though tosay that age had its compensations, and Harrynoticed a ring on his uninjured hand that he hadnever seen Dumbledore wear before: It was large,rather clumsily made of what looked like gold, andwas set with a heavy black stone that had crackeddown the middle. Slughorn’s eyes lingered for amoment on the ring too, and Harry saw a tiny frownmomentarily crease his wide forehead.

“So, all these precautions against intruders, Horace... are they for the Death Eaters’ benefit, or mine?”asked Dumbledore.

“What would the Death Eaters want with a poorbroken-down old buffer like me?” demandedSlughorn.

“I imagine that they would want you to turn yourconsiderable talents to coercion, torture, andmurder,” said Dumbledore. “Are you really telling methat they haven’t come recruiting yet?”

Slughorn eyed Dumbledore balefully for a moment,then muttered, “I haven’t given them the chance. I’vebeen on the move for a year. Never stay in one placemore than a week. Move from Muggle house to

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Muggle house — the owners of this place are onholiday in the Canary Islands — it’s been verypleasant, I’ll be sorry to leave. It’s quite easy once youknow how, one simple Freezing Charm on theseabsurd burglar alarms they use instead ofSneakoscopes and make sure the neighbors don’tspot you bringing in the piano.”

“Ingenious,” said Dumbledore. “But it sounds a rathertiring existence for a broken-down old buffer insearch of a quiet life. Now, if you were to return toHogwarts —”

“If you’re going to tell me my life would be morepeaceful at that pestilential school, you can save yourbreath, Albus! I might have been in hiding, but somefunny rumors have reached me since DoloresUmbridge left! If that’s how you treat teachers thesedays —”

“Professor Umbridge ran afoul of our centaur herd,”said Dumbledore. “I think you, Horace, would haveknown better than to stride into the forest and call ahorde of angry centaurs ‘filthy half-breeds.’ ”

“That’s what she did, did she?” said Slughorn. “Idioticwoman. Never liked her.”

Harry chuckled and both Dumbledore and Slughornlooked round at him.

“Sorry,” Harry said hastily. “It’s just — I didn’t likeher either.”

Dumbledore stood up rather suddenly.

“Are you leaving?” asked Slughorn at once, lookinghopeful.

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No, I was wondering whether I might use yourbathroom,” said Dumbledore.

“Oh,” said Slughorn, clearly disappointed. “Second onthe left down the hall.”

Dumbledore strode from the room. Once the door hadclosed behind him, there was silence. After a fewmoments, Slughorn got to his feet but seemeduncertain what to do with himself. He shot a furtivelook at Harry, then crossed to the fire and turned hisback on it, warming his wide behind.

“Don’t think I don’t know why he’s brought you,” hesaid abruptly.

Harry merely looked at Slughorn. Slughorn’s wateryeyes slid over Harry’s scar, this time taking in the restof his face.

“You look very like your father.”

“Yeah, I’ve been told,” said Harry.

“Except for your eyes. You’ve got —”

“My mother’s eyes, yeah.” Harry had heard it so oftenhe found it a bit wearing.

“Hmpf. Yes, well. You shouldn’t have favorites as ateacher, of course, but she was one of mine. Yourmother,” Slughorn added, in answer to Harry’squestioning look. “Lily Evans. One of the brightest Iever taught. Vivacious, you know. Charming girl. Iused to tell her she ought to have been in my House.Very cheeky answers I used to get back too.”

“Which was your House?”

Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I was Head of Slytherin,” said Slughorn. “Oh, now,”he went on quickly, seeing the expression on Harry’sface and wagging a stubby finger at him, “don’t goholding that against me! You’ll be Gryffindor like her,

I suppose? Yes, it usually goes in families. Notalways, though. Ever heard of Sirius Black? You musthave done — been in the papers for the last couple ofyears — died a few weeks ago —”

It was as though an invisible hand had twistedHarry’s intestines and held them tight.

“Well, anyway, he was a big pal of your father’s atschool. The whole Black family had been in myHouse, but Sirius ended up in Gryffindor! Shame —he was a talented boy. I got his brother, Regulus,when he came along, but I’d have liked the set.”

He sounded like an enthusiastic collector who hadbeen outbid at auction. Apparently lost in memories,he gazed at the opposite wall, turning idly on the spotto ensure an even heat on his backside.

“Your mother was Muggle-born, of course. Couldn’tbelieve it when I found out. Thought she must havebeen pure-blood, she was so good.”

“One of my best friends is Muggle-born,” said Harry,“and she’s the best in our year.”

“Funny how that sometimes happens, isn’t it?” saidSlughorn.

“Not really,” said Harry coldly.

Slughorn looked down at him in surprise. “Youmustn’t think I’m prejudiced!” he said. “No, no, no!Haven’t I just said your mother was one of my all-timefavorite students? And there was Dirk Cresswell in

Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

the year after her too — now Head of the GoblinLiaison Office, of course — another Muggle-born, avery gifted student, and still gives me excellent insideinformation on the goings-on at Gringotts!”

He bounced up and down a little, smiling in a self-satisfied way, and pointed at the many glitteringphotograph frames on the dresser, each peopled withtiny moving occupants.

“All ex-students, all signed. You’ll notice BarnabasCuffe, editor of the Daily Prophet, he’s alwaysinterested to hear my take on the day’s news. AndAmbrosius Flume, of Honeydukes — a hamper everybirthday, and all because I was able to give him anintroduction to Ciceron Harkiss, who gave him hisfirst job! And at the back — you’ll see her if you justcrane your neck — that’s Gwenog Jones, who ofcourse captains the Holyhead Harpies. ... People arealways astonished to hear I’m on first-name termswith the Harpies, and free tickets whenever I wantthem!”

This thought seemed to cheer him up enormously.

“And all these people know where to find you, to sendyou stuff?” asked Harry, who could not helpwondering why the Death Eaters had not yet trackeddown Slughorn if hampers of sweets, Quidditchtickets, and visitors craving his advice and opinionscould find him.

The smile slid from Slughorn’s face as quickly as theblood from his walls.

“Of course not,” he said, looking down at Harry. “Ihave been out of touch with everybody for a year.”

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry had the impression that the words shockedSlughorn himself; he looked quite unsettled for amoment. Then he shrugged.

“Still ... the prudent wizard keeps his head down insuch times. All very well for Dumbledore to talk, buttaking up a post at Hogwarts just now would betantamount to declaring my public allegiance to theOrder of the Phoenix! And while I’m sure they’re veryadmirable and brave and all the rest of it, I don’tpersonally fancy the mortality rate —”

“You don’t have to join the Order to teach atHogwarts,” said Harry, who could not quite keep anote of derision out of his voice: It was hard tosympathize with Slughorn’s cosseted existence whenhe remembered Sirius, crouching in a cave and livingon rats. “Most of the teachers aren’t in it, and none ofthem has ever been killed — well, unless you countQuirrell, and he got what he deserved seeing as hewas working with Voldemort.”

Harry had been sure Slughorn would be one of thosewizards who could not bear to hear Voldemort’s namespoken aloud, and was not disappointed: Slughorngave a shudder and a squawk of protest, which Harryignored.

“I reckon the staff are safer than most people whileDumbledore’s headmaster; he’s supposed to be theonly one Voldemort ever feared, isn’t he?” Harry wenton.

Slughorn gazed into space for a moment or two: Heseemed to be thinking over Harry’s words.

“Well, yes, it is true that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Namedhas never sought a fight with Dumbledore,” hemuttered grudgingly. “And I suppose one could argue

Page | 80 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

that as I have not joined the Death Eaters, He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named can hardly count me a friend ...in which case, I might well be safer a little closer toAlbus. ... I cannot pretend that Amelia Bones’s deathdid not shake me. ... If she, with all her Ministrycontacts and protection ...”

Dumbledore reentered the room and Slughornjumped as though he had forgotten he was in thehouse.

“Oh, there you are, Albus,” he said. “You’ve been avery long time. Upset stomach?”

“No, I was merely reading the Muggle magazines,”said Dumbledore. “I do love knitting patterns. Well,Harry, we have trespassed upon Horace’s hospitalityquite long enough; I think it is time for us to leave.”

Not at all reluctant to obey, Harry jumped to his feet.Slughorn seemed taken aback.

“You’re leaving?”

“Yes, indeed. I think I know a lost cause when I seeone.”

“Lost... ?”

Slughorn seemed agitated. He twiddled his fatthumbs and fidgeted as he watched Dumbledorefasten his traveling cloak, and Harry zip up his jacket.

“Well, I’m sorry you don’t want the job, Horace,” saidDumbledore, raising his uninjured hand in a farewellsalute. “Hogwarts would have been glad to see youback again. Our greatly increased securitynotwithstanding, you will always be welcome to visit,should you wish to.”

Page | 81 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“Yes ... well ... very gracious ... as I say ...”

“Good-bye, then.”

“Bye,” said Harry.

They were at the front door when there was a shoutfrom behind them.

“All right, all right, 111 do it!”

Dumbledore turned to see Slughorn standingbreathless in the doorway to the sitting room.

“You will come out of retirement?”

“Yes, yes,” said Slughorn impatiently. “I must be mad,but yes.”

“Wonderful,” said Dumbledore, beaming. “Then,Horace, we shall see you on the first of September.”

“Yes, I daresay you will,” grunted Slughorn.

As they set off down the garden path, Slughorn’s voicefloated after them, “111 want a pay rise, Dumbledore!”

Dumbledore chuckled. The garden gate swung shutbehind them, and they set off back down the hillthrough the dark and the swirling mist.

“Well done, Harry,” said Dumbledore.

“I didn’t do anything,” said Harry in surprise.

“Oh yes you did. You showed Horace exactly howmuch he stands to gain by returning to Hogwarts. Didyou like him?”

Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Er ...”

Harry wasn’t sure whether he liked Slughorn or not.He supposed he had been pleasant in his way, but hehad also seemed vain and, whatever he said to thecontrary, much too surprised that a Muggle-bornshould make a good witch.

“Horace,” said Dumbledore, relieving Harry of theresponsibility to say any of this, “likes his comfort. Healso likes the company of the famous, the successful,and the powerful. He enjoys the feeling that heinfluences these people. He has never wanted tooccupy the throne himself; he prefers the backseat —more room to spread out, you see. He used tohandpick favorites at Hogwarts, sometimes for theirambition or their brains, sometimes for their charmor their talent, and he had an uncanny knack forchoosing those who would go on to becomeoutstanding in their various fields. Horace formed akind of club of his favorites with himself at the center,making introductions, forging useful contactsbetween members, and always reaping some kind ofbenefit in return, whether a free box of his favoritecrystalized pineapple or the chance to recommend thenext junior member of the Goblin Liaison Office.”

Harry had a sudden and vivid mental image of a greatswollen spider, spinning a web around it, twitching athread here and there to bring its large and juicy fliesa little closer.

“I tell you all this,” Dumbledore continued, “not toturn you against Horace — or, as we must now callhim, Professor Slughorn — but to put you on yourguard. He will undoubtedly try to collect you, Harry.You would be the jewel of his collection; ‘the Boy WhoLived’ ... or, as they call you these days, ‘the ChosenOne.’”

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

At these words, a chill that had nothing to do with thesurrounding mist stole over Harry. He was remindedof words he had heard a few weeks ago, words thathad a horrible and particular meaning to him: Neithercan live while the other survives ...

Dumbledore had stopped walking, level with thechurch they had passed earlier.

“This will do, Harry. If you will grasp my arm.”

Braced this time, Harry was ready for the Apparition,but still found it unpleasant. When the pressuredisappeared and he found himself able to breatheagain, he was standing in a country lane besideDumbledore and looking ahead to the crookedsilhouette of his second favorite building in the world:the Burrow. In spite of the feeling of dread that hadjust swept through him, his spirits could not help butlift at the sight of it. Ron was in there ... and so wasMrs. Weasley, who could cook better than anyone heknew. ...

“If you don’t mind, Harry,” said Dumbledore, as theypassed through the gate, “I’d like a few words withyou before we part. In private. Perhaps in here?”

Dumbledore pointed toward a run-down stoneouthouse where the Weasleys kept their broomsticks.A little puzzled, Harry followed Dumbledore throughthe creaking door into a space a little smaller than theaverage cupboard. Dumbledore illuminated the tip ofhis wand, so that it glowed like a torch, and smileddown at Harry.

“I hope you will forgive me for mentioning it, Harry,but I am pleased and a little proud at how well youseem to be coping after everything that happened at

Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

the Ministry. Permit me to say that I think Siriuswould have been proud of you.”

Harry swallowed; his voice seemed to have desertedhim. He did not think he could stand to discussSirius; it had been painful enough to hear UncleVernon say “His godfather’s dead?” and even worse tohear Sirius’s name thrown out casually by Slughorn.

“It was cruel,” said Dumbledore softly, “that you andSirius had such a short time together. A brutalending to what should have been a long and happyrelationship.”

Harry nodded, his eyes fixed resolutely on the spidernow climbing Dumbledore’s hat. He could tell thatDumbledore understood, that he might even suspectthat until his letter arrived, Harry had spent nearly allhis time at the Dursleys’ lying on his bed, refusingmeals, and staring at the misted window, full of thechill emptiness that he had come to associate withdementors.

“It’s just hard,” Harry said finally, in a low voice, “torealize he won’t write to me again.”

His eyes burned suddenly and he blinked. He feltstupid for admitting it, but the fact that he had hadsomeone outside Hogwarts who cared what happenedto him, almost like a parent, had been one of the bestthings about discovering his godfather ... and now thepost owls would never bring him that comfort again.

“Sirius represented much to you that you had neverknown before,” said Dumbledore gently. “Naturally,the loss is devastating. ...”

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But while I was at the Dursleys’ ...” interruptedHarry, his voice growing stronger, “I realized I can’tshut myself away or — or crack up. Sirius wouldn’thave wanted that, would he? And anyway, life’s tooshort. ... Look at Madam Bones, look at EmmelineVance. ... It could be me next, couldn’t it? But if it is,”he said fiercely, now looking straight intoDumbledore’s blue eyes gleaming in the wandlight,

“I’ll make sure I take as many Death Eaters with meas I can, and Voldemort too if I can manage it.”

“Spoken both like your mother and father’s son andSirius’s true godson!” said Dumbledore, with anapproving pat on Harry’s back. “I take my hat off toyou — or I would, if I were not afraid of showering youin spiders.

“And now, Harry, on a closely related subject ... Igather that you have been taking the Daily Prophetover the last two weeks?”

“Yes,” said Harry, and his heart beat a little faster.

“Then you will have seen that there have been not somuch leaks as floods concerning your adventure inthe Hall of Prophecy?”

“Yes,” said Harry again. “And now everyone knowsthat I’m the one —”

“No, they do not,” interrupted Dumbledore. “There areonly two people in the whole world who know the fullcontents of the prophecy made about you and LordVoldemort, and they are both standing in this smelly,spidery broom shed. It is true, however, that manyhave guessed, correctly, that Voldemort sent hisDeath Eaters to steal a prophecy, and that theprophecy concerned you.

Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Now, I think I am correct in saying that you have nottold anybody that you know what the prophecy said?”

“No,” said Harry.

“A wise decision, on the whole,” said Dumbledore.“Although I think you ought to relax it in favor of yourfriends, Mr. Ronald Weasley and Miss HermioneGranger. Yes,” he continued, when Harry lookedstartled, “I think they ought to know. You do them adisservice by not confiding something this importantto them.”

“I didn’t want —”

“— to worry or frighten them?” said Dumbledore,surveying Harry over the top of his half-moonspectacles. “Or perhaps, to confess that you yourselfare worried and frightened? You need your friends,Harry. As you so rightly said, Sirius would not havewanted you to shut yourself away.”

Harry said nothing, but Dumbledore did not seem torequire an answer. He continued, “On a different,though related, subject, it is my wish that you takeprivate lessons with me this year.”

“Private — with you?” said Harry, surprised out of hispreoccupied silence.

“Yes. I think it is time that I took a greater hand inyour education.”

“What will you be teaching me, sir?”

“Oh, a little of this, a little of that,” said Dumbledoreairily.

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry waited hopefully, but Dumbledore did notelaborate, so he asked something else that had beenbothering him slightly.

“If I’m having lessons with you, I won’t have to doOcclumency lessons with Snape, will I?”

“Professor Snape, Harry — and no, you will not.”

“Good,” said Harry in relief, “because they were a —”

He stopped, careful not to say what he really thought.

“I think the word ‘fiasco’ would be a good one here,”said Dumbledore, nodding.

Harry laughed.

“Well, that means I won’t see much of ProfessorSnape from now on,” he said, “because he won’t letme carry on Potions unless I get ‘Outstanding’ in myO.W.L., which I know I haven’t.”

“Don’t count your owls before they are delivered,” saidDumbledore gravely. “Which, now I think of it, oughtto be some time later today. Now, two more things,Harry, before we part.

“Firstly, I wish you to keep your Invisibility Cloak withyou at all times from this moment onward. Evenwithin Hogwarts itself. Just in case, you understandme?”

Harry nodded.

“And lastly, while you stay here, the Burrow has beengiven the highest security the Ministry of Magic canprovide. These measures have caused a certainamount of inconvenience to Arthur and Molly — all

Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

their post, for instance, is being searched at theMinistry before being sent on. They do not mind inthe slightest, for their only concern is your safety.However, it would be poor repayment if you riskedyour neck while staying with them.”

“I understand,” said Harry quickly.

“Very well, then,” said Dumbledore, pushing open thebroom shed door and stepping out into the yard. “Isee a light in the kitchen. Let us not deprive Mollyany longer of the chance to deplore how thin you are.”

Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





AN EXCESS OF PHLEGM

Harry and Dumbledore approached the back door ofthe Burrow, which was surrounded by the familiarlitter of old Wellington boots and rusty cauldrons;Harry could hear the soft clucking of sleepy chickenscoming from a distant shed. Dumbledore knockedthree times and Harry saw sudden movement behindthe kitchen window.

“Who’s there?” said a nervous voice he recognized asMrs. Weasley’s. “Declare yourself!”

“It is I, Dumbledore, bringing Harry.”

The door opened at once. There stood Mrs. Weasley,short, plump, and wearing an old green dressinggown.

“Harry, dear! Gracious, Albus, you gave me a fright,you said not to expect you before morning!”

“We were lucky,” said Dumbledore, ushering Harryover the threshold. “Slughorn proved much more

Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

persuadable than I had expected. Harry’s doing, ofcourse. Ah, hello, Nymphadora!”

Harry looked around and saw that Mrs. Weasley wasnot alone, despite the lateness of the hour. A youngwitch with a pale, heart-shaped face and mousybrown hair was sitting at the table clutching a largemug between her hands.

“Hello, Professor,” she said. “Wotcher, Harry.”

“Hi, Tonks.”

Harry thought she looked drawn, even ill, and therewas something forced in her smile. Certainly herappearance was less colorful than usual without hercustomary shade of bubble-gum-pink hair.

“I’d better be off,” she said quickly, standing up andpulling her cloak around her shoulders. “Thanks forthe tea and sympathy, Molly.”

“Please don’t leave on my account,” said Dumbledorecourteously, “I cannot stay, I have urgent matters todiscuss with Rufus Scrimgeour.”

“No, no, I need to get going,” said Tonks, not meetingDumbledore’s eyes. “ ’Night —”

“Dear, why not come to dinner at the weekend,

Remus and Mad-Eye are coming — ?”

“No, really, Molly ... thanks anyway ... Good night,everyone.”

Tonks hurried past Dumbledore and Harry into theyard; a few paces beyond the doorstep, she turned onthe spot and vanished into thin air. Harry noticedthat Mrs. Weasley looked troubled.

Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“Well, I shall see you at Hogwarts, Harry,” saidDumbledore. “Take care of yourself. Molly, yourservant.”

He made Mrs. Weasley a bow and followed Tonks,vanishing at precisely the same spot. Mrs. Weasleyclosed the door on the empty yard and then steeredHarry by the shoulders into the full glow of thelantern on the table to examine his appearance.

“You’re like Ron,” she sighed, looking him up anddown. “Both of you look as though you’ve hadStretching Jinxes put on you. I swear Ron’s grownfour inches since I last bought him school robes. Areyou hungry, Harry?”

“Yeah, I am,” said Harry, suddenly realizing just howhungry he was.

“Sit down, dear, I’ll knock something up.”

As Harry sat down, a furry ginger cat with a squashedface jumped onto his knees and settled there,purring.

“So Hermione’s here?” he asked happily as he tickledCrookshanks behind the ears.

“Oh yes, she arrived the day before yesterday,” saidMrs. Weasley, rapping a large iron pot with her wand.It bounced onto the stove with a loud clang and beganto bubble at once. “Everyone’s in bed, of course, wedidn’t expect you for hours. Here you are —”

She tapped the pot again; it rose into the air, flewtoward Harry, and tipped over; Mrs. Weasley slid abowl neatly beneath it just in time to catch thestream of thick, steaming onion soup.

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Bread, dear?”

“Thanks, Mrs. Weasley.”

She waved her wand over her shoulder; a loaf ofbread and a knife soared gracefully onto the table; asthe loaf sliced itself and the soup pot dropped backonto the stove, Mrs. Weasley sat down opposite him.

“So you persuaded Horace Slughorn to take the job?”

Harry nodded, his mouth so full of hot soup that hecould not speak.

“He taught Arthur and me,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Hewas at Hogwarts for ages, started around the sametime as Dumbledore, I think. Did you like him?”

His mouth now full of bread, Harry shrugged andgave a noncommittal jerk of the head.

“I know what you mean,” said Mrs. Weasley, noddingwisely. “Of course he can be charming when he wantsto be, but Arthur’s never liked him much. TheMinistry’s littered with Slughorn’s old favorites, hewas always good at giving leg ups, but he never hadmuch time for Arthur — didn’t seem to think he wasenough of a highflier. Well, that just shows you, evenSlughorn makes mistakes. I don’t know whetherRon’s told you in any of his letters — it’s only justhappened — but Arthur’s been promoted!”

It could not have been clearer that Mrs. Weasley hadbeen bursting to say this.

Harry swallowed a large amount of very hot soup andthought he could feel his throat blistering. “That’sgreat!” he gasped.

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You are sweet,” beamed Mrs. Weasley, possiblytaking his watering eyes for emotion at the news.

“Yes, Rufus Scrimgeour has set up several new officesin response to the present situation, and Arthur’sheading the Office for the Detection and Confiscationof Counterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objects.It’s a big job, he’s got ten people reporting to himnow!”

“What exactly — ?”

“Well, you see, in all the panic about You-Know-Who,odd things have been cropping up for saleeverywhere, things that are supposed to guardagainst You-Know-Who and the Death Eaters. Youcan imagine the kind of thing — so-called protectivepotions that are really gravy with a bit of bubotuberpus added, or instructions for defensive jinxes thatactually make your ears fall off. ... Well, in the mainthe perpetrators are just people like MundungusFletcher, who’ve never done an honest day’s work intheir lives and are taking advantage of how frightenedeverybody is, but every now and then somethingreally nasty turns up. The other day Arthurconfiscated a box of cursed Sneakoscopes that werealmost certainly planted by a Death Eater. So yousee, it’s a very important job, and I tell him it’s justsilly to miss dealing with spark plugs and toastersand all the rest of that Muggle rubbish.” Mrs. Weasleyended her speech with a stern look, as if it had beenHarry suggesting that it was natural to miss sparkplugs.

“Is Mr. Weasley still at work?” Harry asked.

“Yes, he is. As a matter of fact, he’s a tiny bit late. ...He said he’d be back around midnight. ...”

Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She turned to look at a large clock that was perchedawkwardly on top of a pile of sheets in the washingbasket at the end of the table. Harry recognized it atonce: It had nine hands, each inscribed with thename of a family member, and usually hung on theWeasleys’ sitting room wall, though its currentposition suggested that Mrs. Weasley had taken tocarrying it around the house with her. Every singleone of its nine hands was now pointing at “mortalperil.”

“It’s been like that for a while now,” said Mrs.

Weasley, in an unconvincingly casual voice, “eversince You-Know-Who came back into the open. Isuppose everybody’s in mortal danger now. ... I don’tthink it can be just our family ... but I don’t knowanyone else who’s got a clock like this, so I can’tcheck. Oh!”

With a sudden exclamation she pointed at the clock’sface. Mr. Weasley’s hand had switched to “traveling.”

“He’s coming!”

And sure enough, a moment later there was a knockon the back door. Mrs. Weasley jumped up andhurried to it; with one hand on the doorknob and herface pressed against the wood she called softly,“Arthur, is that you?”

“Yes,” came Mr. Weasley’s weary voice. “But I wouldsay that even if I were a Death Eater, dear. Ask thequestion!”

“Oh, honestly ...”

“Molly!”

“All right, all right ... What is your dearest ambition?”

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“To find out how airplanes stay up.”

Mrs. Weasley nodded and turned the doorknob, butapparently Mr. Weasley was holding tight to it on theother side, because the door remained firmly shut.

“Molly! I’ve got to ask you your question first!”

“Arthur, really, this is just silly. ...”

“What do you like me to call you when we’re alonetogether?”

Even by the dim light of the lantern Harry could tellthat Mrs. Weasley had turned bright red; he himselffelt suddenly warm around the ears and neck, andhastily gulped soup, clattering his spoon as loudly ashe could against the bowl.

“Mollywobbles,” whispered a mortified Mrs. Weasleyinto the crack at the edge of the door.

“Correct,” said Mr. Weasley. “Now you can let me in.”

Mrs. Weasley opened the door to reveal her husband,a thin, balding, red-haired wizard wearing horn-rimmed spectacles and a long and dusty travelingcloak.

“I still don’t see why we have to go through that everytime you come home,” said Mrs. Weasley, still pink inthe face as she helped her husband out of his cloak.

“I mean, a Death Eater might have forced the answerout of you before impersonating you!”

“I know, dear, but it’s Ministry procedure, and I haveto set an example. Something smells good — onionsoup?”

Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Mr. Weasley turned hopefully in the direction of thetable.

“Harry! We didn’t expect you until morning!”

They shook hands, and Mr. Weasley dropped into thechair beside Harry as Mrs. Weasley set a bowl of soupin front of him too.

“Thanks, Molly. It’s been a tough night. Some idiot’sstarted selling Metamorph-Medals. Just sling themaround your neck and you’ll be able to change yourappearance at will. A hundred thousand disguises, allfor ten Galleons!”

“And what really happens when you put them on?”

“Mostly you just turn a fairly unpleasant orange color,but a couple of people have also sprouted tentaclelikewarts all over their bodies. As if St. Mungo’s didn’thave enough to do already!”

“It sounds like the sort of thing Fred and Georgewould find funny,” said Mrs. Weasley hesitantly. “Areyou sure — ?”

“Of course I am!” said Mr. Weasley. “The boyswouldn’t do anything like that now, not when peopleare desperate for protection!”

“So is that why you’re late, Metamorph-Medals?”

“No, we got wind of a nasty backfiring jinx down inElephant and Castle, but luckily the Magical LawEnforcement Squad had sorted it out by the time wegot there. ...”

Harry stifled a yawn behind his hand.

Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Bed,” said an undeceived Mrs. Weasley at once. “I’vegot Fred and George’s room all ready for you, you’llhave it to yourself.”

“Why, where are they?”

“Oh, they’re in Diagon Alley, sleeping in the little flatover their joke shop as they’re so busy,” said Mrs.Weasley. “I must say, I didn’t approve at first, butthey do seem to have a bit of a flair for business!

Come on, dear, your trunk’s already up there.”

“ ’Night, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry, pushing back hischair. Crookshanks leapt lightly from his lap andslunk out of the room.

“G’night, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley.

Harry saw Mrs. Weasley glance at the clock in thewashing basket as they left the kitchen. All the handswere once again at “mortal peril.”

Fred and George’s bedroom was on the second floor.Mrs. Weasley pointed her wand at a lamp on thebedside table and it ignited at once, bathing the roomin a pleasant golden glow. Though a large vase offlowers had been placed on a desk in front of thesmall window, their perfume could not disguise thelingering smell of what Harry thought wasgunpowder. A considerable amount of floor space wasdevoted to a vast number of unmarked, sealedcardboard boxes, amongst which stood Harry’s schooltrunk. The room looked as though it was being usedas a temporary warehouse.

Hedwig hooted happily at Harry from her perch on topof a large wardrobe, then took off through thewindow; Harry knew she had been waiting to see himbefore going hunting. Harry bade Mrs. Weasley good

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

night, put on pajamas, and got into one of the beds.There was something hard inside the pillowcase. Hegroped inside it and pulled out a sticky purple-and-orange sweet, which he recognized as a PukingPastille. Smiling to himself, he rolled over and wasinstantly asleep.

Seconds later, or so it seemed to Harry, he wasawakened by what sounded like cannon fire as thedoor burst open. Sitting bolt upright, he heard therasp of the curtains being pulled back: The dazzlingsunlight seemed to poke him hard in both eyes.Shielding them with one hand, he groped hopelesslyfor his glasses with the other.

“Wuzzgoinon?”

“We didn’t know you were here already!” said a loudand excited voice, and he received a sharp blow to thetop of the head.

“Ron, don’t hit him!” said a girl’s voice reproachfully.

Harry’s hand found his glasses and he shoved themon, though the light was so bright he could hardly seeanyway. A long, looming shadow quivered in front ofhim for a moment; he blinked and Ron Weasley cameinto focus, grinning down at him.

“All right?”

“Never been better,” said Harry, rubbing the top of hishead and slumping back onto his pillows. “You?”

“Not bad,” said Ron, pulling over a cardboard box andsitting on it. “When did you get here? Mum’s only justtold us!”

“About one o’clock this morning.”

Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“Were the Muggles all right? Did they treat you okay?”

“Same as usual,” said Harry, as Hermione perchedherself on the edge of his bed, “they didn’t talk to memuch, but I like it better that way. How’re you,Hermione?”

“Oh, I’m fine,” said Hermione, who was scrutinizingHarry as though he was sickening for something. Hethought he knew what was behind this, and as hehad no wish to discuss Sirius’s death or any othermiserable subject at the moment, he said, “What’s thetime? Have I missed breakfast?”

“Don’t worry about that, Mum’s bringing you up atray; she reckons you look underfed,” said Ron,rolling his eyes. “So, what’s been going on?”

“Nothing much, I’ve just been stuck at my aunt anduncle’s, haven’t I?”

“Come off it!” said Ron. “You’ve been off withDumbledore!”

“It wasn’t that exciting. He just wanted me to helphim persuade this old teacher to come out ofretirement. His name’s Horace Slughorn.”

“Oh,” said Ron, looking disappointed. “We thought —”

Hermione flashed a warning look at Ron, and Ronchanged tack at top speed.

“— we thought it’d be something like that.”

“You did?” said Harry, amused.

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah ... yeah, now Umbridge has left, obviously weneed a new Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher,don’t we? So, er, what’s he like?”

“He looks a bit like a walrus, and he used to be Headof Slytherin,” said Harry. “Something wrong,Hermione?”

She was watching him as though expecting strangesymptoms to manifest themselves at any moment.

She rearranged her features hastily in anunconvincing smile.

“No, of course not! So, um, did Slughorn seem likehe’ll be a good teacher?”

“Dunno,” said Harry. “He can’t be worse thanUmbridge, can he?”

“I know someone who’s worse than Umbridge,” said avoice from the doorway. Ron’s younger sister slouchedinto the room, looking irritable. “Hi, Harry.”

“What’s up with you?” Ron asked.

“It’s her,” said Ginny, plonking herself down onHarry’s bed. “She’s driving me mad.”

“What’s she done now?” asked Hermionesympathetically.

“It’s the way she talks to me — you’d think I wasabout three!”

“I know,” said Hermione, dropping her voice. “She’s sofull of herself.”

Harry was astonished to hear Hermione talking aboutMrs. Weasley like this and could not blame Ron for

Page | 101 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

saying angrily, “Can’t you two lay off her for fiveseconds?”

“Oh, that’s right, defend her,” snapped Ginny. “We allknow you can’t get enough of her.”

This seemed an odd comment to make about Ron’smother. Starting to feel that he was missingsomething, Harry said, “Who are you — ?”

But his question was answered before he could finishit. The bedroom door flew open again, and Harryinstinctively yanked the bedcovers up to his chin sohard that Hermione and Ginny slid off the bed ontothe floor.

A young woman was standing in the doorway, awoman of such breathtaking beauty that the roomseemed to have become strangely airless. She was talland willowy with long blonde hair and appeared toemanate a faint, silvery glow. To complete this visionof perfection, she was carrying a heavily ladenbreakfast tray.

“ ’Arry,” she said in a throaty voice. “Eet ’as been toolong!”

As she swept over the threshold toward him, Mrs.Weasley was revealed, bobbing along in her wake,looking rather cross.

“There was no need to bring up the tray, I was justabout to do it myself!”

“Eet was no trouble,” said Fleur Delacour, setting thetray across Harry’s knees and then swooping to kisshim on each cheek: He felt the places where hermouth had touched him burn. “I ’ave been longing tosee ’im. You remember my seester, Gabrielle? ShePage | 102 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

never stops talking about ’Ariy Potter. She will bedelighted to see you again.”

“Oh ... is she here too?” Harry croaked.

“No, no, silly boy,” said Fleur with a tinkling laugh, “Imean next summer, when we — but do you notknow?”

Her great blue eyes widened and she lookedreproachfully at Mrs. Weasley, who said, “We hadn’tgot around to telling him yet.”

Fleur turned back to Harry, swinging her silvery sheetof hair so that it whipped Mrs. Weasley across theface.

“Bill and I are going to be married!”

“Oh,” said Harry blankly. He could not help noticinghow Mrs. Weasley, Hermione, and Ginny were alldeterminedly avoiding one another’s gaze. “Wow. Er— congratulations!”

She swooped down upon him and kissed him again.

“Bill is very busy at ze moment, working very ’ard,and I only work part-time at Gringotts for myEenglish, so he brought me ’ere for a few days to getto know ’is family properly. I was so pleased to ’earyou would be coming — zere isn’t much to do ’ere,unless you like cooking and chickens! Well — enjoyyour breakfast, ’Arry!”

With these words she turned gracefully and seemed tofloat out of the room, closing the door quietly behindher.

Mrs. Weasley made a noise that sounded like “tchah!”

Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Mum hates her,” said Ginny quietly.

“I do not hate her!” said Mrs. Weasley in a crosswhisper. “I just think they’ve hurried into thisengagement, that’s all!”

“They’ve known each other a year,” said Ron, wholooked oddly groggy and was staring at the closeddoor.

“Well, that’s not very long! I know why it’s happened,of course. It’s all this uncertainty with You-Know-Whocoming back, people think they might be deadtomorrow, so they’re rushing all sorts of decisionsthey’d normally take time over. It was the same lasttime he was powerful, people eloping left, right, andcenter —”

“Including you and Dad,” said Ginny slyly.

“Yes, well, your father and I were made for each other,what was the point in waiting?” said Mrs. Weasley.“Whereas Bill and Fleur ... well ... what have theyreally got in common? He’s a hardworking, down-to-earth sort of person, whereas she’s —”

“A cow,” said Ginny, nodding. “But Bill’s not thatdown-to-earth. He’s a Curse-Breaker, isn’t he, helikes a bit of adventure, a bit of glamour. ... I expectthat’s why he’s gone for Phlegm.”

“Stop calling her that, Ginny,” said Mrs. Weasleysharply, as Harry and Hermione laughed. “Well, I’dbetter get on. ... Eat your eggs while they’re warm,Harry.”

Looking careworn, she left the room. Ron still seemedslightly punch-drunk; he was shaking his head

Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

experimentally like a dog trying to rid its ears ofwater.

“Don’t you get used to her if she’s staying in the samehouse?” Harry asked.

“Well, you do,” said Ron, “but if she jumps out at youunexpectedly, like then ...”

“It’s pathetic,” said Hermione furiously, striding awayfrom Ron as far as she could go and turning to facehim with her arms folded once she had reached thewall.

“You don’t really want her around forever?” Ginnyasked Ron incredulously. When he merely shrugged,she said, “Well, Mum’s going to put a stop to it if shecan, I bet you anything.”

“How’s she going to manage that?” asked Harry.

“She keeps trying to get Tonks round for dinner. Ithink she’s hoping Bill will fall for Tonks instead. Ihope he does, I’d much rather have her in the family.”

“Yeah, that’ll work,” said Ron sarcastically. “Listen,no bloke in his right mind’s going to fancy Tonkswhen Fleur’s around. I mean, Tonks is okay-lookingwhen she isn’t doing stupid things to her hair and hernose, but —”

“She’s a damn sight nicer than Phlegm,” said Ginny

“And she’s more intelligent, she’s an Auror!” saidHermione from the corner.

“Fleur’s not stupid, she was good enough to enter theTriwizard Tournament,” said Harry.

Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Not you as well!” said Hermione bitterly.

“I suppose you like the way Phlegm says ‘’Arry,’ doyou?” asked Ginny scornfully.

“No,” said Harry, wishing he hadn’t spoken, “I wasjust saying, Phlegm — I mean, Fleur —”

“I’d much rather have Tonks in the family,” saidGinny. “At least she’s a laugh.”

“She hasn’t been much of a laugh lately,” said Ron.“Every time I’ve seen her she’s looked more likeMoaning Myrtle.”

“That’s not fair,” snapped Hermione. “She still hasn’tgot over what happened ... you know ... I mean, hewas her cousin!”

Harry’s heart sank. They had arrived at Sirius. Hepicked up a fork and began shoveling scrambled eggsinto his mouth, hoping to deflect any invitation to joinin this part of the conversation.

“Tonks and Sirius barely knew each other!” said Ron.“Sirius was in Azkaban half her life and before thattheir families never met —”

“That’s not the point,” said Hermione. “She thinks itwas her fault he died!”

“How does she work that one out?” asked Harry, inspite of himself.

“Well, she was fighting Bellatrix Lestrange, wasn’tshe? I think she feels that if only she had finished heroff, Bellatrix couldn’t have killed Sirius.”

“That’s stupid,” said Ron.

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It’s survivor’s guilt,” said Hermione. “I know Lupin’stried to talk her round, but she’s still really down.She’s actually having trouble with herMetamorphosing! ”

“With her — ?”

“She can’t change her appearance like she used to,”explained Hermione. “I think her powers must havebeen affected by shock, or something.”

“I didn’t know that could happen,” said Harry.

“Nor did I,” said Hermione, “but I suppose if you’rereally depressed ...”

The door opened again and Mrs. Weasley popped herhead in. “Ginny,” she whispered, “come downstairsand help me with the lunch.”

“I’m talking to this lot!” said Ginny, outraged.

“Now!” said Mrs. Weasley, and withdrew.

“She only wants me there so she doesn’t have to bealone with Phlegm!” said Ginny crossly. She swungher long red hair around in a very good imitation ofFleur and pranced across the room with her armsheld aloft like a ballerina.

“You lot had better come down quickly too,” she saidas she left.

Harry took advantage of the temporary silence to eatmore breakfast. Hermione was peering into Fred andGeorge’s boxes, though every now and then she castsideways looks at Harry. Ron, who was now helpinghimself to Harry’s toast, was still gazing dreamily atthe door.

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What’s this?” Hermione asked eventually, holding upwhat looked like a small telescope.

“Dunno,” said Ron, “but if Fred and George’ve left ithere, it’s probably not ready for the joke shop yet, sobe careful.”

“Your mum said the shop’s going well,” said Harry.“Said Fred and George have got a real flair forbusiness.”

“That’s an understatement,” said Ron. “They’re rakingin the Galleons! I can’t wait to see the place, wehaven’t been to Diagon Alley yet, because Mum saysDad’s got to be there for extra security and he’s beenreally busy at work, but it sounds excellent.”

“And what about Percy?” asked Harry; the third-eldest Weasley brother had fallen out with the rest ofthe family. “Is he talking to your mum and dadagain?”

“Nope,” said Ron.

“But he knows your dad was right all along nowabout Voldemort being back —”

“Dumbledore says people find it far easier to forgiveothers for being wrong than being right,” saidHermione. “I heard him telling your mum, Ron.”

“Sounds like the sort of mental thing Dumbledorewould say,” said Ron.

“He’s going to be giving me private lessons this year,”said Harry conversationally.

Ron choked on his bit of toast, and Hermione gasped.

Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You kept that quiet!” said Ron.

“I only just remembered,” said Harry honestly. “Hetold me last night in your broom shed.”

“Blimey ... private lessons with Dumbledore!” saidRon, looking impressed. “I wonder why he’s ... ?”

His voice tailed away. Harry saw him and Hermioneexchange looks. Harry laid down his knife and fork,his heart beating rather fast considering that all hewas doing was sitting in bed. Dumbledore had said todo it. ... Why not now? He fixed his eyes on his fork,which was gleaming in the sunlight streaming into hislap, and said, “I don’t know exactly why he’s going tobe giving me lessons, but I think it must be becauseof the prophecy.”

Neither Ron nor Hermione spoke. Harry had theimpression that both had frozen. He continued, stillspeaking to his fork, “You know, the one they weretrying to steal at the Ministry.”

“Nobody knows what it said, though,” said Hermionequickly. “It got smashed.”

“Although the Prophet says —” began Ron, butHermione said, “Shh!”

“The Prophet’s got it right,” said Harry, looking up atthem both with a great effort: Hermione seemedfrightened and Ron amazed. “That glass ball thatsmashed wasn’t the only record of the prophecy. Iheard the whole thing in Dumbledore’s office, he wasthe one the prophecy was made to, so he could tellme. From what it said,” Harry took a deep breath, “itlooks like I’m the one who’s got to finish offVoldemort. ... At least, it said neither of us could livewhile the other survives.”

Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The three of them gazed at one another in silence fora moment. Then there was a loud bang and Hermionevanished behind a puff of black smoke.

“Hermione!” shouted Harry and Ron; the breakfasttray slid to the floor with a crash.

Hermione emerged, coughing, out of the smoke,clutching the telescope and sporting a brilliantlypurple black eye.

“I squeezed it and it — it punched me!” she gasped.

And sure enough, they now saw a tiny fist on a longspring protruding from the end of the telescope.

“Don’t worry,” said Ron, who was plainly trying not tolaugh, “Mumll fix that, she’s good at healing minorinjuries —”

“Oh well, never mind that now!” said Hermionehastily. “Harry, oh, Harry ...”

She sat down on the edge of his bed again.

“We wondered, after we got back from the Ministry ...Obviously, we didn’t want to say anything to you, butfrom what Lucius Malfoy said about the prophecy,how it was about you and Voldemort, well, wethought it might be something like this. ... Oh, Harry...” She stared at him, then whispered, “Are youscared?”

“Not as much as I was,” said Harry. “When I firstheard it, I was ... but now, it seems as though Ialways knew I’d have to face him in the end. ...”

“When we heard Dumbledore was collecting you inperson, we thought he might be telling you something

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

or showing you something to do with the prophecy,”said Ron eagerly. “And we were kind of right, weren’twe? He wouldn’t be giving you lessons if he thoughtyou were a goner, wouldn’t waste his time — he mustthink you’ve got a chance!”

“That’s true,” said Hermione. “I wonder what he’llteach you, Harry? Really advanced defensive magic,probably ... powerful countercurses ... anti-jinxes ...”

Harry did not really listen. A warmth was spreadingthrough him that had nothing to do with the sunlight;a tight obstruction in his chest seemed to bedissolving. He knew that Ron and Hermione weremore shocked than they were letting on, but the merefact that they were still there on either side of him,speaking bracing words of comfort, not shrinkingfrom him as though he were contaminated ordangerous, was worth more than he could ever tellthem.

"... and evasive enchantments generally,” concludedHermione. “Well, at least you know one lesson you’llbe having this year, that’s one more than Ron andme. I wonder when our O.W.L. results will come?”

“Can’t be long now, it’s been a month,” said Ron.

“Hang on,” said Harry, as another part of last night’sconversation came back to him. “I think Dumbledoresaid our O.W.L. results would be arriving today!”

“Today?” shrieked Hermione. “Today? But why didn’tyou — oh my God — you should have said —”

She leapt to her feet.

“I’m going to see whether any owls have come. ...”

Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

But when Harry arrived downstairs ten minutes later,fully dressed and carrying his empty breakfast tray, itwas to find Hermione sitting at the kitchen table ingreat agitation, while Mrs. Weasley tried to lessen herresemblance to half a panda.

“It just won’t budge,” Mrs. Weasley was sayinganxiously, standing over Hermione with her wand inher hand and a copy of The Healer’s Helpmate open at“Bruises, Cuts, and Abrasions.” “This has alwaysworked before, I just can’t understand it.”

“It’ll be Fred and George’s idea of a funny joke,making sure it can’t come off,” said Ginny

“But it’s got to come off!” squeaked Hermione. “I can’tgo around looking like this forever!”

“You won’t, dear, we’ll find an antidote, don’t worry,”said Mrs. Weasley soothingly.

“Bill told me ’ow Fred and George are very amusing!”said Fleur, smiling serenely.

“Yes, I can hardly breathe for laughing,” snappedHermione.

She jumped up and started walking round and roundthe kitchen, twisting her fingers together.

“Mrs. Weasley, you’re quite, quite sure no owls havearrived this morning?”

“Yes, dear, I’d have noticed,” said Mrs. Weasleypatiently. “But it’s barely nine, there’s still plenty oftime. ...”

“I know I messed up Ancient Runes,” mutteredHermione feverishly, “I definitely made at least one

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

serious mistranslation. And the Defense Against theDark Arts practical was no good at all. I thoughtTransfiguration went all right at the time, but lookingback —”

“Hermione, will you shut up, you’re not the only onewho’s nervous!” barked Ron. “And when you’ve gotyour eleven ‘Outstanding’ O.W.L.s ...”

“Don’t, don’t, don’t!” said Hermione, flapping herhands hysterically. “I know I’ve failed everything!”

“What happens if we fail?” Harry asked the room atlarge, but it was again Hermione who answered.

“We discuss our options with our Head of House, Iasked Professor McGonagall at the end of last term.”

Harry’s stomach squirmed. He wished he had eatenless breakfast.

“At Beauxbatons,” said Fleur complacently, “we ’ad adifferent way of doing things. I think eet was better.We sat our examinations after six years of study, notfive, and then —”

Fleur’s words were drowned in a scream. Hermionewas pointing through the kitchen window. Threeblack specks were clearly visible in the sky, growinglarger all the time.

“They’re definitely owls,” said Ron hoarsely, jumpingup to join Hermione at the window.

“And there are three of them,” said Harry, hasteningto her other side.

“One for each of us,” said Hermione in a terrifiedwhisper. “Oh no ... oh no ... oh no ...”

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She gripped both Harry and Ron tightly around theelbows.

The owls were flying directly at the Burrow, threehandsome tawnies, each of which, it became clear asthey flew lower over the path leading up to the house,was carrying a large square envelope.

“Oh no\” squealed Hermione.

Mrs. Weasley squeezed past them and opened thekitchen window. One, two, three, the owls soaredthrough it and landed on the table in a neat line. Allthree of them lifted their right legs.

Harry moved forward. The letter addressed to himwas tied to the leg of the owl in the middle. He untiedit with fumbling fingers. To his left, Ron was trying todetach his own results; to his right, Hermione’shands were shaking so much she was making herwhole owl tremble.

Nobody in the kitchen spoke. At last, Harry managedto detach the envelope. He slit it open quickly andunfolded the parchment inside.

ORDINARY WIZARDING LEVEL RESULTS

Pass Grades Fail Grades

Outstanding (O) Poor (P)

Exceeds Expectations (E) Dreadful (D)

Acceptable (A) Troll (T)

Harry James Potter has achieved:

Astronomy A

Care of Magical Creatures E

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Charms E

Defense Against the Dark ArtsODivination P

Herbology E

History of Magic D

Potions E

Transfiguration E

Harry read the parchment through several times, hisbreathing becoming easier with each reading. It wasall right: He had always known that he would failDivination, and he had had no chance of passingHistory of Magic, given that he had collapsed halfwaythrough the examination, but he had passedeverything else! He ran his finger down the grades ...he had passed well in Transfiguration and Herbology,he had even exceeded expectations at Potions! Andbest of all, he had achieved “Outstanding” at DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts!

He looked around. Hermione had her back to him andher head bent, but Ron was looking delighted.

“Only failed Divination and History of Magic, and whocares about them?” he said happily to Harry. “Here —swap —”

Harry glanced down Ron’s grades: There were no“Outstandings” there. ...

“Knew you’d be top at Defense Against the Dark Arts,”said Ron, punching Harry on the shoulder. “We’vedone all right, haven’t we?”

“Well done!” said Mrs. Weasley proudly, ruffling Ron’shair. “Seven O.W.L.s, that’s more than Fred andGeorge got together!”

Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Hermione?” said Ginny tentatively, for Hermione stillhadn’t turned around. “How did you do?”

“I — not bad,” said Hermione in a small voice.

“Oh, come off it,” said Ron, striding over to her andwhipping her results out of her hand. “Yep — nine‘Outstandings’ and one ‘Exceeds Expectations’ atDefense Against the Dark Arts.” He looked down ather, half-amused, half-exasperated. “You’re actuallydisappointed, aren’t you?”

Hermione shook her head, but Harry laughed.

“Well, we’re N.E.W.T. students now!” grinned Ron.“Mum, are there any more sausages?”

Harry looked back down at his results. They were asgood as he could have hoped for. He felt just one tinytwinge of regret. ... This was the end of his ambitionto become an Auror. He had not secured the requiredPotions grade. He had known all along that hewouldn’t, but he still felt a sinking in his stomach ashe looked again at that small black E.

It was odd, really, seeing that it had been a DeathEater in disguise who had first told Harry he wouldmake a good Auror, but somehow the idea had takenhold of him, and he couldn’t really think of anythingelse he would like to be. Moreover, it had seemed theright destiny for him since he had heard the prophecya few weeks ago. ... Neither can live while the othersurvives. ... Wouldn’t he be living up to the prophecy,and giving himself the best chance of survival, if hejoined those highly trained wizards whose job it wasto find and kill Voldemort?

Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling



DRACO’S DETOUR

Harry remained within the confines of the Burrow’sgarden over the next few weeks. He spent most of hisdays playing two-a-side Quidditch in the Weasleys’orchard (he and Hermione against Ron and Ginny;Hermione was dreadful and Ginny good, so they werereasonably well matched) and his evenings eatingtriple helpings of everything Mrs. Weasley put in frontof him.

It would have been a happy, peaceful holiday had itnot been for the stories of disappearances, oddaccidents, even of deaths now appearing almost dailyin the Prophet Sometimes Bill and Mr. Weasleybrought home news before it even reached the paper.To Mrs. Weasley’s displeasure, Harry’s sixteenthbirthday celebrations were marred by grisly tidingsbrought to the party by Remus Lupin, who waslooking gaunt and grim, his brown hair streakedliberally with gray, his clothes more ragged andpatched than ever.

Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“There have been another couple of dementorattacks,” he announced, as Mrs. Weasley passed hima large slice of birthday cake. “And they’ve found IgorKarkaroff’s body in a shack up north. The Dark Markhad been set over it — well, frankly, I’m surprised hestayed alive for even a year after deserting the DeathEaters; Sirius’s brother, Regulus, only managed a fewdays as far as I can remember.”

“Yes, well,” said Mrs. Weasley, frowning, “perhaps weshould talk about something diff —”

“Did you hear about Florean Fortescue, Remus?”asked Bill, who was being plied with wine by Fleur.“The man who ran —”

“— the ice-cream place in Diagon Alley?” Harryinterrupted, with an unpleasant, hollow sensation inthe pit of his stomach. “He used to give me free icecreams. What’s happened to him?”

“Dragged off, by the look of his place.”

“Why?” asked Ron, while Mrs. Weasley pointedlyglared at Bill.

“Who knows? He must’ve upset them somehow. Hewas a good man, Florean.”

“Talking of Diagon Alley,” said Mr. Weasley, “lookslike Ollivander’s gone too.”

“The wandmaker?” said Ginny, looking startled.

“That’s the one. Shop’s empty. No sign of a struggle.No one knows whether he left voluntarily or waskidnapped.”

“But wands — what’ll people do for wands?”

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“They’ll make do with other makers,” said Lupin. “ButOllivander was the best, and if the other side have gothim it’s not so good for us.”

The day after this rather gloomy birthday tea, theirletters and booklists arrived from Hogwarts. Harry’sincluded a surprise: He had been made QuidditchCaptain.

“That gives you equal status with prefects!” criedHermione happily. “You can use our special bathroomnow and everything!”

“Wow, I remember when Charlie wore one of these,”said Ron, examining the badge with glee. “Harry, thisis so cool, you’re my Captain — if you let me back onthe team, I suppose, ha ha. ...”

“Well, I don’t suppose we can put off a trip to DiagonAlley much longer now you’ve got these,” sighed Mrs.Weasley, looking down Ron’s booklist. “We’ll go onSaturday as long as your father doesn’t have to gointo work again. I’m not going there without him.”

“Mum, d’you honestly think You-Know-Who’s going tobe hiding behind a bookshelf in Flourish and Blotts?”sniggered Ron.

“Fortescue and Ollivander went on holiday, did they?”said Mrs. Weasley, firing up at once. “If you thinksecurity’s a laughing matter you can stay behind andI’ll get your things myself—”

“No, I wanna come, I want to see Fred and George’sshop!” said Ron hastily.

“Then you just buck up your ideas, young man,before I decide you’re too immature to come with us!”said Mrs. Weasley angrily, snatching up her clock, all

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

nine hands of which were still pointing at “mortalperil,” and balancing it on top of a pile of just-laundered towels. “And that goes for returning toHogwarts as well!”

Ron turned to stare incredulously at Harry as hismother hoisted the laundry basket and the teeteringclock into her arms and stormed out of the room.

“Blimey ... you can’t even make a joke round hereanymore. ...”

But Ron was careful not to be flippant aboutVoldemort over the next few days. Saturday dawnedwithout any more outbursts from Mrs. Weasley,though she seemed very tense at breakfast. Bill, whowould be staying at home with Fleur (much toHermione and Ginny’s pleasure), passed a full moneybag across the table to Harry.

“Where’s mine?” demanded Ron at once, his eyeswide.

“That’s already Harry’s, idiot,” said Bill. “I got it out ofyour vault for you, Harry, because it’s taking aboutfive hours for the public to get to their gold at themoment, the goblins have tightened security somuch. Two days ago Arkie Philpott had a ProbityProbe stuck up his ... Well, trust me, this way’seasier.”

“Thanks, Bill,” said Harry, pocketing his gold.

“ ’E is always so thoughtful,” purred Fleur adoringly,stroking Bill’s nose. Ginny mimed vomiting into hercereal behind Fleur. Harry choked over hiscornflakes, and Ron thumped him on the back.

Page | 120 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

It was an overcast, murky day. One of the specialMinistry of Magic cars, in which Harry had riddenonce before, was awaiting them in the front yardwhen they emerged from the house, pulling on theircloaks.

“It’s good Dad can get us these again,” said Ronappreciatively, stretching luxuriously as the carmoved smoothly away from the Burrow, Bill and Fleurwaving from the kitchen window. He, Harry,

Hermione, and Ginny were all sitting in roomycomfort in the wide backseat.

“Don’t get used to it, it’s only because of Harry,” saidMr. Weasley over his shoulder. He and Mrs. Weasleywere in front with the Ministry driver; the frontpassenger seat had obligingly stretched into whatresembled a two-seater sofa. “He’s been given top-grade security status. And we’ll be joining up withadditional security at the Leaky Cauldron too.”

Harry said nothing; he did not much fancy doing hisshopping while surrounded by a battalion of Aurors.He had stowed his Invisibility Cloak in his backpackand felt that, if that was good enough forDumbledore, it ought to be good enough for theMinistry, though now he came to think of it, he wasnot sure the Ministry knew about his cloak.

“Here you are, then,” said the driver, a surprisinglyshort while later, speaking for the first time as heslowed in Charing Cross Road and stopped outsidethe Leaky Cauldron. “I’m to wait for you, any ideahow long you 11 be?”

“A couple of hours, I expect,” said Mr. Weasley. “Ah,good, he’s here!”

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry imitated Mr. Weasley and peered through thewindow; his heart leapt. There were no Aurors waitingoutside the inn, but instead the gigantic, black-bearded form of Rubeus Hagrid, the Hogwartsgamekeeper, wearing a long beaverskin coat, beamingat the sight of Harry’s face and oblivious to thestartled stares of passing Muggles.

“Harry!” he boomed, sweeping Harry into a bone-crushing hug the moment Harry had stepped out ofthe car. “Buckbeak — Witherwings, I mean — yehshould see him, Harry, he’s so happy ter be back inthe open air —”

“Glad he’s pleased,” said Harry, grinning as hemassaged his ribs. “We didn’t know ‘security’ meantyou!”

“I know, jus’ like old times, innit? See, the Ministrywanted ter send a bunch o’ Aurors, but Dumbledoresaid I’d do,” said Hagrid proudly, throwing out hischest and tucking his thumbs into his pockets. “Let’sget goin’ then — after yeh, Molly, Arthur —”

The Leaky Cauldron was, for the first time in Harry’smemory, completely empty. Only Tom the landlord,wizened and toothless, remained of the old crowd. Helooked up hopefully as they entered, but before hecould speak, Hagrid said importantly, “Jus’ passin’through today, Tom, sure yeh understand, Hogwartsbusiness, yeh know.”

Tom nodded gloomily and returned to wiping glasses;Harry, Hermione, Hagrid, and the Weasleys walkedthrough the bar and out into the chilly little courtyardat the back where the dustbins stood. Hagrid raisedhis pink umbrella and rapped a certain brick in thewall, which opened at once to form an archway onto a

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

winding cobbled street. They stepped through theentrance and paused, looking around.

Diagon Alley had changed. The colorful, glitteringwindow displays of spellbooks, potion ingredients,and cauldrons were lost to view, hidden behind thelarge Ministry of Magic posters that had been pastedover them. Most of these somber purple posterscarried blown-up versions of the security advice onthe Ministry pamphlets that had been sent out overthe summer, but others bore moving black-and-whitephotographs of Death Eaters known to be on theloose. Bellatrix Lestrange was sneering from the frontof the nearest apothecary. A few windows wereboarded up, including those of Florean Fortescue’s IceCream Parlor. On the other hand, a number ofshabby-looking stalls had sprung up along the street.The nearest one, which had been erected outsideFlourish and Blotts, under a striped, stained awning,had a cardboard sign pinned to its front:

AMULETS

Effective Against Werewolves, Dementors, and Inferi

A seedy-looking little wizard was rattling armfuls ofsilver symbols on chains at passersby.

“One for your little girl, madam?” he called at Mrs.Weasley as they passed, leering at Ginny. “Protect herpretty neck?”

“If I were on duty ...” said Mr. Weasley, glaring angrilyat the amulet seller.

“Yes, but don’t go arresting anyone now, dear, we’rein a hurry,” said Mrs. Weasley, nervously consulting alist. “I think we’d better do Madam Malkin’s first,Hermione wants new dress robes, and Ron’s showing

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

much too much ankle in his school robes, and youmust need new ones too, Harry, you’ve grown somuch — come on, everyone —”

“Molly, it doesn’t make sense for all of us to go toMadam Malkin’s,” said Mr. Weasley. “Why don’t thosethree go with Hagrid, and we can go to Flourish andBlotts and get everyone’s schoolbooks?”

“I don’t know,” said Mrs. Weasley anxiously, clearlytorn between a desire to finish the shopping quicklyand the wish to stick together in a pack. “Hagrid, doyou think — ?”

“Don’ fret, they’ll be fine with me, Molly,” said Hagridsoothingly, waving an airy hand the size of a dustbinlid. Mrs. Weasley did not look entirely convinced, butallowed the separation, scurrying off toward Flourishand Blotts with her husband and Ginny while Harry,Ron, Hermione, and Hagrid set off for MadamMalkin’s.

Harry noticed that many of the people who passedthem had the same harried, anxious look as Mrs.Weasley, and that nobody was stopping to talkanymore; the shoppers stayed together in their owntightly knit groups, moving intently about theirbusiness. Nobody seemed to be shopping alone.

“Migh’ be a bit of a squeeze in there with all of us,”said Hagrid, stopping outside Madam Malkin’s andbending down to peer through the window. “I’ll standguard outside, all right?”

So Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered the little shoptogether. It appeared, at first glance, to be empty, butno sooner had the door swung shut behind them thanthey heard a familiar voice issuing from behind a rackof dress robes in spangled green and blue.

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

"... not a child, in case you haven’t noticed, Mother. Iam perfectly capable of doing my shopping alone.”

There was a clucking noise and a voice Harryrecognized as that of Madam Malkin, the owner, said,“Now, dear, your mother’s quite right, none of us issupposed to go wandering around on our ownanymore, it’s nothing to do with being a child —”

“Watch where you’re sticking that pin, will you!”

A teenage boy with a pale, pointed face and white-blond hair appeared from behind the rack, wearing ahandsome set of dark green robes that glittered withpins around the hem and the edges of the sleeves. Hestrode to the mirror and examined himself; it was afew moments before he noticed Harry, Ron, andHermione reflected over his shoulder. His light grayeyes narrowed.

“If you’re wondering what the smell is, Mother, aMudblood just walked in,” said Draco Malfoy.

“I don’t think there’s any need for language like that!”said Madam Malkin, scurrying out from behind theclothes rack holding a tape measure and a wand.“And I don’t want wands drawn in my shop either!”she added hastily, for a glance toward the door hadshown her Harry and Ron both standing there withtheir wands out and pointing at Malfoy. Hermione,who was standing slightly behind them, whispered,“No, don’t, honestly, it’s not worth it. ...”

“Yeah, like you’d dare do magic out of school,”sneered Malfoy. “Who blacked your eye, Granger? Iwant to send them flowers.”

Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“That’s quite enough!” said Madam Malkin sharply,looking over her shoulder for support. “Madam —please —”

Narcissa Malfoy strolled out from behind the clothesrack.

“Put those away,” she said coldly to Harry and Ron.

“If you attack my son again, I shall ensure that it isthe last thing you ever do.”

“Really?” said Harry, taking a step forward and gazinginto the smoothly arrogant face that, for all its pallor,still resembled her sister’s. He was as tall as she wasnow. “Going to get a few Death Eater pals to do us in,are you?”

Madam Malkin squealed and clutched at her heart.

“Really, you shouldn’t accuse — dangerous thing tosay — wands away, please!”

But Harry did not lower his wand. Narcissa Malfoysmiled unpleasantly.

“I see that being Dumbledore’s favorite has given youa false sense of security, Harry Potter. ButDumbledore won’t always be there to protect you.”

Harry looked mockingly all around the shop. “Wow ...look at that ... he’s not here now! So why not have ago? They might be able to find you a double cell inAzkaban with your loser of a husband!”

Malfoy made an angry movement toward Harry, butstumbled over his overlong robe. Ron laughed loudly.

“Don’t you dare talk to my mother like that, Potter!”Malfoy snarled.

Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It’s all right, Draco,” said Narcissa, restraining himwith her thin white fingers upon his shoulder. “Iexpect Potter will be reunited with dear Sirius before Iam reunited with Lucius.”

Harry raised his wand higher.

“Harry, no!” moaned Hermione, grabbing his arm andattempting to push it down by his side. “Think. ...

You mustn’t. ... You’ll be in such trouble. ...”

Madam Malkin dithered for a moment on the spot,then seemed to decide to act as though nothing washappening in the hope that it wouldn’t. She benttoward Malfoy, who was still glaring at Harry.

“I think this left sleeve could come up a little bit more,dear, let me just —”

“Ouch!” bellowed Malfoy, slapping her hand away.“Watch where you’re putting your pins, woman!Mother — I don’t think I want these anymore —”

He pulled the robes over his head and threw themonto the floor at Madam Malkin’s feet.

“You’re right, Draco,” said Narcissa, with acontemptuous glance at Hermione, “now I know thekind of scum that shops here. ... We’ll do better atTwilfitt and Tatting’s.”

And with that, the pair of them strode out of theshop, Malfoy taking care to bang as hard as he couldinto Ron on the way out.

“Well, reallyl” said Madam Malkin, snatching up thefallen robes and moving the tip of her wand over themlike a vacuum cleaner, so that it removed all the dust.

Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She was distracted all through the fitting of Ron’s andHarry’s new robes, tried to sell Hermione wizard’sdress robes instead of witch’s, and when she finallybowed them out of the shop it was with an air ofbeing glad to see the back of them.

“Got ev’rything?” asked Hagrid brightly when theyreappeared at his side.

“Just about,” said Harry. “Did you see the Malfoys?”

“Yeah,” said Hagrid, unconcerned. “Bu’ they wouldn’dare make trouble in the middle o’ Diagon Alley,Harry. Don’ worry abou’ them.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchanged looks, butbefore they could disabuse Hagrid of this comfortablenotion, Mr. and Mrs. Weasley and Ginny appeared, allclutching heavy packages of books.

“Everyone all right?” said Mrs. Weasley. “Got yourrobes? Right then, we can pop in at the Apothecaryand Eeylops on the way to Fred and George’s — stickclose, now. ...”

Neither Harry nor Ron bought any ingredients at theApothecary, seeing that they were no longer studyingPotions, but both bought large boxes of owl nuts forHedwig and Pigwidgeon at Eeylops Owl Emporium.Then, with Mrs. Weasley checking her watch everyminute or so, they headed farther along the street insearch of Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, the joke shoprun by Fred and George.

“We really haven’t got too long,” Mrs. Weasley said.

“So we’ll just have a quick look around and then backto the car. We must be close, that’s number ninety-two ... ninety-four ...”

Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Whoa,” said Ron, stopping in his tracks.

Set against the dull, poster-muffled shop frontsaround them, Fred and George’s windows hit the eyelike a firework display. Casual passersby were lookingback over their shoulders at the windows, and a fewrather stunned-looking people had actually come to ahalt, transfixed. The left-hand window was dazzlinglyfull of an assortment of goods that revolved, popped,flashed, bounced, and shrieked; Harry’s eyes began towater just looking at it. The right-hand window wascovered with a gigantic poster, purple like those of theMinistry, but emblazoned with flashing yellow letters:

WHY ARE YOU WORRYING ABOUT

YOU-KNOW-WHO?

YOU SHOULD BE WORRYING ABOUTU-NO-POO—

THE CONSTIPATION SENSATIONTHAT’S GRIPPING THE NATION!

Harry started to laugh. He heard a weak sort of moanbeside him and looked around to see Mrs. Weasleygazing, dumbfounded, at the poster. Her lips movedsilently, mouthing the name “U-No-Poo.”

“They’ll be murdered in their beds!” she whispered.

“No they won’t!” said Ron, who, like Harry, waslaughing. “This is brilliant!”

And he and Harry led the way into the shop. It waspacked with customers; Harry could not get near the

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

shelves. He stared around, looking up at the boxespiled to the ceiling: Here were the Skiving Snackboxesthat the twins had perfected during their last,unfinished year at Hogwarts; Harry noticed that theNosebleed Nougat was most popular, with only onebattered box left on the shelf. There were bins full oftrick wands, the cheapest merely turning into rubberchickens or pairs of briefs when waved, the mostexpensive beating the unwary user around the headand neck, and boxes of quills, which came in Self-Inking, Spell-Checking, and Smart-Answer varieties.

A space cleared in the crowd, and Harry pushed hisway toward the counter, where a gaggle of delightedten-year-olds was watching a tiny little wooden manslowly ascending the steps to a real set of gallows,both perched on a box that read: REUSABLEHANGMAN — SPELL IT OR HE’LL SWING!

“ ‘Patented Daydream Charms ... ’ ”

Hermione had managed to squeeze through to a largedisplay near the counter and was reading theinformation on the back of a box bearing a highlycolored picture of a handsome youth and a swooninggirl who were standing on the deck of a pirate ship.

“ ‘One simple incantation and you will enter a top-quality, highly realistic, thirty-minute daydream, easyto fit into the average school lesson and virtuallyundetectable (side effects include vacant expressionand minor drooling). Not for sale to under-sixteens.’You know,” said Hermione, looking up at Harry, “thatreally is extraordinary magic!”

“For that, Hermione,” said a voice behind them, “youcan have one for free.”

Page | 130 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

A beaming Fred stood before them, wearing a set ofmagenta robes that clashed magnificently with hisflaming hair.

“How are you, Harry?” They shook hands. “Andwhat’s happened to your eye, Hermione?”

“Your punching telescope,” she said ruefully.

“Oh blimey, I forgot about those,” said Fred. “Here —”

He pulled a tub out of his pocket and handed it toher; she unscrewed it gingerly to reveal a thick yellowpaste.

“Just dab it on, that bruise’ll be gone within thehour,” said Fred. “We had to find a decent bruiseremover. We’re testing most of our products onourselves.”

Hermione looked nervous. “It is safe, isn’t it?” sheasked.

“ ’Course it is,” said Fred bracingly. “Come on, Harry,I’ll give you a tour.”

Harry left Hermione dabbing her black eye with pasteand followed Fred toward the back of the shop, wherehe saw a stand of card and rope tricks.

“Muggle magic tricks!” said Fred happily, pointingthem out. “For freaks like Dad, you know, who loveMuggle stuff. It’s not a big earner, but we do fairlysteady business, they’re great novelties. ... Oh, here’sGeorge. ...”

Fred’s twin shook Harry’s hand energetically.

Page | 131 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Giving him the tour? Come through the back, Harry,that’s where we’re making the real money — pocketanything, you, and you’ll pay in more than GalleonsV’he added warningly to a small boy who hastilywhipped his hand out of the tub labeled EDIBLEDARK MARKS — THEY’LL MAKE ANYONE SICK!

George pushed back a curtain beside the Muggletricks and Harry saw a darker, less crowded room.The packaging on the products lining these shelveswas more subdued.

“We’ve just developed this more serious line,” saidFred. “Funny how it happened ...”

“You wouldn’t believe how many people, even peoplewho work at the Ministry, can’t do a decent ShieldCharm,” said George. “ ’Course, they didn’t have youteaching them, Harry.”

“That’s right. ... Well, we thought Shield Hats were abit of a laugh, you know, challenge your mate to jinxyou while wearing it and watch his face when the jinxjust bounces off. But the Ministry bought fivehundred for all its support staff! And we’re stillgetting massive orders!”

“So we’ve expanded into a range of Shield Cloaks,Shield Gloves ...”

"... I mean, they wouldn’t help much against theUnforgivable Curses, but for minor to moderate hexesor jinxes ...”

“And then we thought we’d get into the whole area ofDefense Against the Dark Arts, because it’s such amoney spinner,” continued George enthusiastically.“This is cool. Look, Instant Darkness Powder, we’re

Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

importing it from Peru. Handy if you want to make aquick escape.”

“And our Decoy Detonators are just walking off theshelves, look,” said Fred, pointing at a number ofweird-looking black horn-type objects that wereindeed attempting to scurry out of sight. “You justdrop one surreptitiously and it’ll run off and make anice loud noise out of sight, giving you a diversion ifyou need one.

“Handy,” said Harry, impressed.

“Here,” said George, catching a couple and throwingthem to Harry.

A young witch with short blonde hair poked her headaround the curtain; Harry saw that she too waswearing magenta staff robes.

“There’s a customer out here looking for a jokecauldron, Mr. Weasley and Mr. Weasley,” she said.

Harry found it very odd to hear Fred and Georgecalled “Mr. Weasley,” but they took it in their stride.

“Right you are, Verity, I’m coming,” said Georgepromptly. “Harry, you help yourself to anything youwant, all right? No charge.”

“I can’t do that!” said Harry, who had already pulledout his money bag to pay for the Decoy Detonators.

“You don’t pay here,” said Fred firmly, waving awayHarry’s gold.

“But —”

Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You gave us our start-up loan, we haven’t forgotten,”said George sternly. “Take whatever you like, and justremember to tell people where you got it, if they ask.”

George swept off through the curtain to help with thecustomers, and Fred led Harry back into the mainpart of the shop to find Hermione and Ginny stillporing over the Patented Daydream Charms.

“Haven’t you girls found our special WonderWitchproducts yet?” asked Fred. “Follow me, ladies. ...”

Near the window was an array of violently pinkproducts around which a cluster of excited girls wasgiggling enthusiastically. Hermione and Ginny bothhung back, looking wary.

“There you go,” said Fred proudly. “Best range of lovepotions you’ll find anywhere.”

Ginny raised an eyebrow skeptically. “Do they work?”she asked.

“Certainly they work, for up to twenty-four hours at atime depending on the weight of the boy in question

“— and the attractiveness of the girl,” said George,reappearing suddenly at their side. “But we’re notselling them to our sister,” he added, becomingsuddenly stern, “not when she’s already got about fiveboys on the go from what we’ve —”

“Whatever you’ve heard from Ron is a big fat lie,” saidGinny calmly, leaning forward to take a small pinkpot off the shelf. “What’s this?”

“Guaranteed ten-second pimple vanisher,” said Fred.“Excellent on everything from boils to blackheads, but

Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

don’t change the subject. Are you or are you notcurrently going out with a boy called Dean Thomas?”

“Yes, I am,” said Ginny. “And last time I looked, hewas definitely one boy, not five. What are those?”

She was pointing at a number of round balls of fluffin shades of pink and purple, all rolling around thebottom of a cage and emitting high-pitched squeaks.

“Pygmy Puffs,” said George. “Miniature puffskeins, wecan’t breed them fast enough. So what about MichaelCorner?”

“I dumped him, he was a bad loser,” said Ginny,putting a finger through the bars of the cage andwatching the Pygmy Puffs crowd around it. “They’rereally cute!”

“They’re fairly cuddly, yes,” conceded Fred. “Butyou’re moving through boyfriends a bit fast, aren’tyou?”

Ginny turned to look at him, her hands on her hips.There was such a Mrs. Weasley-ish glare on her facethat Harry was surprised Fred didn’t recoil.

“It’s none of your business. And I’ll thank you,” sheadded angrily to Ron, who had just appeared atGeorge’s elbow, laden with merchandise, “not to telltales about me to these two!”

“That’s three Galleons, nine Sickles, and a Knut,” saidFred, examining the many boxes in Ron’s arms.“Cough up.”

“I’m your brother!”

Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“And that’s our stuff you’re nicking. Three Galleons,nine Sickles. I’ll knock off the Knut.”

“But I haven’t got three Galleons, nine Sickles!”

“You’d better put it back then, and mind you put it onthe right shelves.”

Ron dropped several boxes, swore, and made a rudehand gesture at Fred that was unfortunately spottedby Mrs. Weasley, who had chosen that moment toappear.

“If I see you do that again I’ll jinx your fingerstogether,” she said sharply.

“Mum, can I have a Pygmy Puff?” said Ginny at once.“A what?” said Mrs. Weasley warily.

“Look, they’re so sweet. ...”

Mrs. Weasley moved aside to look at the Pygmy Puffs,and Harry, Ron, and Hermione momentarily had anunimpeded view out of the window. Draco Malfoy washurrying up the street alone. As he passed Weasleys’Wizard Wheezes, he glanced over his shoulder.Seconds later, he moved beyond the scope of thewindow and they lost sight of him.

“Wonder where his mummy is?” said Harry, frowning.

“Given her the slip by the looks of it,” said Ron.

“Why, though?” said Hermione.

Harry said nothing; he was thinking too hard.

Narcissa Malfoy would not have let her precious sonout of her sight willingly; Malfoy must have made a

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

real effort to free himself from her clutches. Harry,knowing and loathing Malfoy, was sure the reasoncould not be innocent.

He glanced around. Mrs. Weasley and Ginny werebending over the Pygmy Puffs. Mr. Weasley wasdelightedly examining a pack of Muggle markedplaying cards. Fred and George were both helpingcustomers. On the other side of the glass, Hagrid wasstanding with his back to them, looking up and downthe street.

“Get under here, quick,” said Harry, pulling hisInvisibility Cloak out of his bag.

“Oh — I don’t know, Harry,” said Hermione, lookinguncertainly toward Mrs. Weasley.

“Come on\” said Ron.

She hesitated for a second longer, then ducked underthe cloak with Harry and Ron. Nobody noticed themvanish; they were all too interested in Fred andGeorge’s products. Harry, Ron, and Hermionesqueezed their way out of the door as quickly as theycould, but by the time they gained the street, Malfoyhad disappeared just as successfully as they had.

“He was going in that direction,” murmured Harry asquietly as possible, so that the humming Hagridwould not hear them. “C’mon.”

They scurried along, peering left and right, throughshop windows and doors, until Hermione pointedahead.

“That’s him, isn’t it?” she whispered. “Turning left?”“Big surprise,” whispered Ron.

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

For Malfoy had glanced around, then slid intoKnockturn Alley and out of sight.

“Quick, or we’ll lose him,” said Harry, speeding up.

“Our feet’ll be seen!” said Hermione anxiously, as thecloak flapped a little around their ankles; it was muchmore difficult hiding all three of them under the cloaknowadays.

“It doesn’t matter,” said Harry impatiently. “Justhurry!”

But Knockturn Alley, the side street devoted to theDark Arts, looked completely deserted. They peeredinto windows as they passed, but none of the shopsseemed to have any customers at all. Harry supposedit was a bit of a giveaway in these dangerous andsuspicious times to buy Dark artifacts — or at least,to be seen buying them.

Hermione gave his arm a hard pinch.

“Ouch!”

“Shh! Look! He’s in there!” she breathed in Harry’sear.

They had drawn level with the only shop inKnockturn Alley that Harry had ever visited, Borginand Burkes, which sold a wide variety of sinisterobjects. There in the midst of the cases full of skullsand old bottles stood Draco Malfoy with his back tothem, just visible beyond the very same large blackcabinet in which Harry had once hidden to avoidMalfoy and his father. Judging by the movements ofMalfoy’s hands, he was talking animatedly. Theproprietor of the shop, Mr. Borgin, an oily-haired,

Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

stooping man, stood facing Malfoy. He was wearing acurious expression of mingled resentment and fear.

“If only we could hear what they’re saying!” saidHermione.

“We can!” said Ron excitedly. “Hang on — damn —”

He dropped a couple more of the boxes he was stillclutching as he fumbled with the largest.

“Extendable Ears, look!”

“Fantastic!” said Hermione, as Ron unraveled thelong, fleshcolored strings and began to feed themtoward the bottom of the door. “Oh, I hope the doorisn’t Imperturbable —”

“No!” said Ron gleefully. “Listen!”

They put their heads together and listened intently tothe ends of the strings, through which Malfoy’s voicecould be heard loud and clear, as though a radio hadbeen turned on.

"... you know how to fix it?”

“Possibly,” said Borgin, in a tone that suggested hewas unwilling to commit himself. “I’ll need to see it,though. Why don’t you bring it into the shop?”

“I can’t,” said Malfoy. “It’s got to stay put. I just needyou to tell me how to do it.”

Harry saw Borgin lick his lips nervously.

“Well, without seeing it, I must say it will be a verydifficult job, perhaps impossible. I couldn’t guaranteeanything.”

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No?” said Malfoy, and Harry knew, just by his tone,that Malfoy was sneering. “Perhaps this will make youmore confident.”

He moved toward Borgin and was blocked from viewby the cabinet. Harry, Ron, and Hermione shuffledsideways to try and keep him in sight, but all theycould see was Borgin, looking very frightened.

“Tell anyone,” said Malfoy, “and there will beretribution. You know Fenrir Greyback? He’s a familyfriend. He’ll be dropping in from time to time to makesure you’re giving the problem your full attention.”

“There will be no need for —”

“I’ll decide that,” said Malfoy. “Well, I’d better be off.And don’t forget to keep that one safe, I’ll need it.”

“Perhaps you’d like to take it now?”

“No, of course I wouldn’t, you stupid little man, howwould I look carrying that down the street? Just don’tsell it.”

“Of course not ... sir.”

Borgin made a bow as deep as the one Harry hadonce seen him give Lucius Malfoy.

“Not a word to anyone, Borgin, and that includes mymother, understand?”

“Naturally, naturally,” murmured Borgin, bowingagain.

Next moment, the bell over the door tinkled loudly asMalfoy stalked out of the shop looking very pleasedwith himself. He passed so close to Harry, Ron, and

Page | 140 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hermione that they felt the cloak flutter around theirknees again. Inside the shop, Borgin remained frozen;his unctuous smile had vanished; he looked worried.

“What was that about?” whispered Ron, reeling in theExtendable Ears.

“Dunno,” said Harry, thinking hard. “He wantssomething mended ... and he wants to reservesomething in there. ... Could you see what he pointedat when he said ‘that one’?”

“No, he was behind that cabinet —”

“You two stay here,” whispered Hermione.

“What are you — ?”

But Hermione had already ducked out from under thecloak. She checked her hair in the reflection in theglass, then marched into the shop, setting the belltinkling again. Ron hastily fed the Extendable Earsback under the door and passed one of the strings toHarry.

“Hello, horrible morning, isn’t it?” Hermione saidbrightly to Borgin, who did not answer, but cast her asuspicious look. Humming cheerily, Hermione strolledthrough the jumble of objects on display.

“Is this necklace for sale?” she asked, pausing besidea glass-fronted case.

“If you’ve got one and a half thousand Galleons,” saidMr. Borgin coldly.

“Oh — er — no, I haven’t got quite that much,” saidHermione, walking on. “And ... what about this lovely— um — skull?”

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Sixteen Galleons.”

“So it’s for sale, then? It isn’t being ... kept foranyone?”

Mr. Borgin squinted at her. Harry had the nastyfeeling he knew exactly what Hermione was up to.Apparently Hermione felt she had been rumbled toobecause she suddenly threw caution to the winds.

“The thing is, that — er — boy who was in here justnow, Draco Malfoy, well, he’s a friend of mine, and Iwant to get him a birthday present, but if he’s alreadyreserved anything, I obviously don’t want to get himthe same thing, so ... um ...”

It was a pretty lame story in Harry’s opinion, andapparently Borgin thought so too.

“Out,” he said sharply. “Get out!”

Hermione did not wait to be asked twice, but hurriedto the door with Borgin at her heels. As the belltinkled again, Borgin slammed the door behind herand put up the closed sign.

“Ah well,” said Ron, throwing the cloak back overHermione. “Worth a try, but you were a bit obvious —

“Well, next time you can show me how it’s done,Master of Mystery!” she snapped.

Ron and Hermione bickered all the way back toWeasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, where they were forced tostop so that they could dodge undetected around avery anxious-looking Mrs. Weasley and Hagrid, whohad clearly noticed their absence. Once in the shop,Harry whipped off the Invisibility Cloak, hid it in hisPage | 142 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

bag, and joined in with the other two when theyinsisted, in answer to Mrs. Weasley’s accusations,that they had been in the back room all along, andthat she could not have looked properly.

Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling



THE SLUG CLUB

Harry spent a lot of the last week of the holidayspondering the meaning of Malfoy’s behavior inKnockturn Alley. What disturbed him most was thesatisfied look on Malfoy’s face as he had left the shop.Nothing that made Malfoy look that happy could begood news. To his slight annoyance, however, neitherRon nor Hermione seemed quite as curious aboutMalfoy’s activities as he was; or at least, they seemedto get bored of discussing it after a few days.

“Yes, I’ve already agreed it was fishy, Harry,” saidHermione a little impatiently. She was sitting on thewindowsill in Fred and George’s room with her feet upon one of the cardboard boxes and had onlygrudgingly looked up from her new copy of AdvancedRune Translation. “But haven’t we agreed there couldbe a lot of explanations?”

“Maybe he’s broken his Hand of Glory,” said Ronvaguely, as he attempted to straighten his

Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

broomstick’s bent tail twigs. “Remember thatshriveled-up arm Malfoy had?”

“But what about when he said, ‘Don’t forget to keepthat one safe’?” asked Harry for the umpteenth time.“That sounded to me like Borgin’s got another one ofthe broken objects, and Malfoy wants both.”

“You reckon?” said Ron, now trying to scrape somedirt off his broom handle.

“Yeah, I do,” said Harry. When neither Ron norHermione answered, he said, “Malfoy’s father’s inAzkaban. Don’t you think Malfoy’d like revenge?”

Ron looked up, blinking.

“Malfoy, revenge? What can he do about it?”

“That’s my point, I don’t know!” said Harry,frustrated. “But he’s up to something and I think weshould take it seriously. His father’s a Death Eaterand —”

Harry broke off, his eyes fixed on the window behindHermione, his mouth open. A startling thought hadjust occurred to him.

“Harry?” said Hermione in an anxious voice. “What’swrong?”

“Your scar’s not hurting again, is it?” asked Ronnervously.

“He’s a Death Eater,” said Harry slowly. “He’sreplaced his father as a Death Eater!”

Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There was a silence; then Ron erupted in laughter.“Malfoy? He’s sixteen, Harry! You think You-Know-Who would let Malfoy join?”

“It seems very unlikely, Harry,” said Hermione in arepressive sort of voice. “What makes you think — ?”

“In Madam Malkin’s. She didn’t touch him, but heyelled and jerked his arm away from her when shewent to roll up his sleeve. It was his left arm. He’sbeen branded with the Dark Mark.”

Ron and Hermione looked at each other.

“Well ...” said Ron, sounding thoroughly unconvinced.

“I think he just wanted to get out of there, Harry,”said Hermione.

“He showed Borgin something we couldn’t see,” Harrypressed on stubbornly. “Something that seriouslyscared Borgin. It was the Mark, I know it — he wasshowing Borgin who he was dealing with, you sawhow seriously Borgin took him!”

Ron and Hermione exchanged another look.

“I’m not sure, Harry. ...”

“Yeah, I still don’t reckon You-Know-Who would letMalfoy join. ...”

Annoyed, but absolutely convinced he was right,

Harry snatched up a pile of filthy Quidditch robes andleft the room; Mrs. Weasley had been urging them fordays not to leave their washing and packing until thelast moment. On the landing he bumped into Ginny,who was returning to her room carrying a pile offreshly laundered clothes.

Page | 146 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I wouldn’t go in the kitchen just now,” she warnedhim. “There’s a lot of Phlegm around.”

“I’ll be careful not to slip in it.” Harry smiled.

Sure enough, when he entered the kitchen it was tofind Fleur sitting at the kitchen table, in full flowabout plans for her wedding to Bill, while Mrs.Weasley kept watch over a pile of self-peeling sprouts,looking bad-tempered.

“... Bill and I ’ave almost decided on only twobridesmaids, Ginny and Gabrielle will look very sweettogezzer. I am theenking of dressing zem in pale gold— pink would of course be ’orrible with Ginny’s ’air —

“Ah, Harry!” said Mrs. Weasley loudly, cutting acrossFleur’s monologue. “Good, I wanted to explain aboutthe security arrangements for the journey toHogwarts tomorrow. We’ve got Ministry cars again,and there will be Aurors waiting at the station —”

“Is Tonks going to be there?” asked Harry, handingover his Quidditch things.

“No, I don’t think so, she’s been stationed somewhereelse from what Arthur said.”

“She has let ’erself go, zat Tonks,” Fleur mused,examining her own stunning reflection in the back ofa teaspoon. “A big mistake if you ask —”

“Yes, thank you,” said Mrs. Weasley tartly, cuttingacross Fleur again. “You’d better get on, Harry, I wantthe trunks ready tonight, if possible, so we don’t havethe usual last-minute scramble.”

Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

And in fact, their departure the following morning wassmoother than usual. The Ministry cars glided up tothe front of the Burrow to find them waiting, trunkspacked; Hermione’s cat, Crookshanks, safely enclosedin his traveling basket; and Hedwig; Ron’s owl,Pigwidgeon; and Ginny’s new purple Pygmy Puff,Arnold, in cages.

“Au revoir, ’Ariy,” said Fleur throatily, kissing himgood-bye. Ron hurried forward, looking hopeful, butGinny stuck out her foot and Ron fell, sprawling inthe dust at Fleur’s feet. Furious, red-faced, and dirt-spattered, he hurried into the car without sayinggood-bye.

There was no cheerful Hagrid waiting for them atKing’s Cross Station. Instead, two grim-faced,bearded Aurors in dark Muggle suits moved forwardthe moment the cars stopped and, flanking the party,marched them into the station without speaking.

“Quick, quick, through the barrier,” said Mrs.

Weasley, who seemed a little flustered by this austereefficiency. “Harry had better go first, with —”

She looked inquiringly at one of the Aurors, whonodded briefly, seized Harry’s upper arm, andattempted to steer him toward the barrier betweenplatforms nine and ten.

“I can walk, thanks,” said Harry irritably, jerking hisarm out of the Auror’s grip. He pushed his trolleydirectly at the solid barrier, ignoring his silentcompanion, and found himself, a second later,standing on platform nine and three-quarters, wherethe scarlet Hogwarts Express stood belching steamover the crowd.

Page | 148 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hermione and the Weasleys joined him withinseconds. Without waiting to consult his grim-facedAuror, Harry motioned to Ron and Hermione to followhim up the platform, looking for an emptycompartment.

“We can’t, Harry,” said Hermione, looking apologetic.“Ron and I’ve got to go to the prefects’ carriage firstand then patrol the corridors for a bit.”

“Oh yeah, I forgot,” said Harry.

“You’d better get straight on the train, all of you,you’ve only got a few minutes to go,” said Mrs.Weasley, consulting her watch. “Well, have a lovelyterm, Ron. ...”

“Mr. Weasley, can I have a quick word?” said Harry,making up his mind on the spur of the moment.

“Of course,” said Mr. Weasley, who looked slightlysurprised, but followed Harry out of earshot of theothers nevertheless.

Harry had thought it through carefully and come tothe conclusion that, if he was to tell anyone, Mr.Weasley was the right person; firstly, because heworked at the Ministry and was therefore in the bestposition to make further investigations, and secondly,because he thought that there was not too much riskof Mr. Weasley exploding with anger.

He could see Mrs. Weasley and the grim-faced Aurorcasting the pair of them suspicious looks as theymoved away.

“When we were in Diagon Alley,” Harry began, but Mr.Weasley forestalled him with a grimace.

Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Am I about to discover where you, Ron, andHermione disappeared to while you were supposed tobe in the back room of Fred and George’s shop?”

“How did you — ?”

“Harry, please. You’re talking to the man who raisedFred and George.”

“Er ... yeah, all right, we weren’t in the back room.”

“Very well, then, let’s hear the worst.”

“Well, we followed Draco Malfoy. We used myInvisibility Cloak.”

“Did you have any particular reason for doing so, orwas it a mere whim?”

“Because I thought Malfoy was up to something,” saidHarry, disregarding Mr. Weasley’s look of mingledexasperation and amusement. “He’d given his motherthe slip and I wanted to know why.”

“Of course you did,” said Mr. Weasley, soundingresigned. “Well? Did you find out why?”

“He went into Borgin and Burkes,” said Harry, “andstarted bullying the bloke in there, Borgin, to helphim fix something. And he said he wanted Borgin tokeep something else for him. He made it sound like itwas the same kind of thing that needed fixing. Likethey were a pair. And ...”

Harry took a deep breath.

“There’s something else. We saw Malfoy jump about amile when Madam Malkin tried to touch his left arm. I

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

think he’s been branded with the Dark Mark. I thinkhe’s replaced his father as a Death Eater.”

Mr. Weasley looked taken aback. After a moment hesaid, “Harry, I doubt whether You-Know-Who wouldallow a sixteen-year-old —”

“Does anyone really know what You-Know-Who wouldor wouldn’t do?” asked Harry angrily. “Mr. Weasley,I’m sorry, but isn’t it worth investigating? If Malfoywants something fixing, and he needs to threatenBorgin to get it done, it’s probably something Dark ordangerous, isn’t it?”

“I doubt it, to be honest, Harry,” said Mr. Weasleyslowly. “You see, when Lucius Malfoy was arrested,we raided his house. We took away everything thatmight have been dangerous.”

“I think you missed something,” said Harrystubbornly.

“Well, maybe,” said Mr. Weasley, but Harry could tellthat Mr. Weasley was humoring him.

There was a whistle behind them; nearly everyonehad boarded the train and the doors were closing.

“You’d better hurry,” said Mr. Weasley, as Mrs.Weasley cried, “Harry, quickly!”

He hurried forward and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley helpedhim load his trunk onto the train.

“Now, dear, you’re coming to us for Christmas, it’s allfixed with Dumbledore, so we’ll see you quite soon,”said Mrs. Weasley through the window, as Harryslammed the door shut behind him and the train

Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

began to move. “You make sure you look afteryourself and —”

The train was gathering speed.

“— be good and —”

She was jogging to keep up now.stay safe!”

Harry waved until the train had turned a corner andMr. and Mrs. Weasley were lost to view, then turnedto see where the others had got to. He supposed Ronand Hermione were cloistered in the prefects’carriage, but Ginny was a little way along thecorridor, chatting to some friends. He made his waytoward her, dragging his trunk.

People stared shamelessly as he approached. Theyeven pressed their faces against the windows of theircompartments to get a look at him. He had expectedan upswing in the amount of gaping and gawping hewould have to endure this term after all the “ChosenOne” rumors in the Daily Prophet, but he did notenjoy the sensation of standing in a very brightspotlight. He tapped Ginny on the shoulder.

“Fancy trying to find a compartment?”

“I can’t, Harry, I said I’d meet Dean,” said Ginnybrightly. “See you later.”

“Right,” said Harry. He felt a strange twinge ofannoyance as she walked away, her long red hairdancing behind her; he had become so used to herpresence over the summer that he had almostforgotten that Ginny did not hang around with him,Ron, and Hermione while at school. Then he blinkedPage | 152 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

and looked around: He was surrounded bymesmerized girls.

“Hi, Harry!” said a familiar voice from behind him.

“Neville!” said Harry in relief, turning to see a round-faced boy struggling toward him.

“Hello, Harry,” said a girl with long hair and largemisty eyes, who was just behind Neville.

“Luna, hi, how are you?”

“Very well, thank you,” said Luna. She was clutchinga magazine to her chest; large letters on the frontannounced that there was a pair of free Spectrespecsinside.

“Quibbler still going strong, then?” asked Harry, whofelt a certain fondness for the magazine, having givenit an exclusive interview the previous year.

“Oh yes, circulation’s well up,” said Luna happily.

“Let’s find seats,” said Harry, and the three of themset off along the train through hordes of silentlystaring students. At last they found an emptycompartment, and Harry hurried inside gratefully.

“They’re even staring at us!” said Neville, indicatinghimself and Luna. “Because we’re with you!”

“They’re staring at you because you were at theMinistry too,” said Harry, as he hoisted his trunk intothe luggage rack. “Our little adventure there was allover the Daily Prophet, you must’ve seen it.”

“Yes, I thought Gran would be angry about all thepublicity,” said Neville, “but she was really pleased.

Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Says I’m starting to live up to my dad at long last. Shebought me a new wand, look!”

He pulled it out and showed it to Harry.

“Cherry and unicorn hair,” he said proudly. “We thinkit was one of the last Ollivander ever sold, hevanished next day — oi, come back here, Trevor!”

And he dived under the seat to retrieve his toad as itmade one of its frequent bids for freedom.

“Are we still doing D.A. meetings this year, Harry?”asked Luna, who was detaching a pair of psychedelicspectacles from the middle of The Quibbler.

“No point now we’ve got rid of Umbridge, is there?”said Harry, sitting down. Neville bumped his headagainst the seat as he emerged from under it. Helooked most disappointed.

“I liked the D.A.! I learned loads with you!”

“I enjoyed the meetings too,” said Luna serenely. “Itwas like having friends.”

This was one of those uncomfortable things Lunaoften said and which made Harry feel a squirmingmixture of pity and embarrassment. Before he couldrespond, however, there was a disturbance outsidetheir compartment door; a group of fourth-year girlswas whispering and giggling together on the otherside of the glass.

“You ask him!”

“No, you!”

“I’ll do it!”

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

And one of them, a bold-looking girl with large darkeyes, a prominent chin, and long black hair pushedher way through the door.

“Hi, Harry, I’m Romilda, Romilda Vane,” she saidloudly and confidently. “Why don’t you join us in ourcompartment? You don’t have to sit with them,” sheadded in a stage whisper, indicating Neville’s bottom,which was sticking out from under the seat again ashe groped around for Trevor, and Luna, who was nowwearing her free Spectrespecs, which gave her thelook of a demented, multicolored owl.

“They’re friends of mine,” said Harry coldly.

“Oh,” said the girl, looking very surprised. “Oh.

Okay.”

And she withdrew, sliding the door closed behind her.

“People expect you to have cooler friends than us,”said Luna, once again displaying her knack forembarrassing honesty.

“You are cool,” said Harry shortly. “None of them wasat the Ministry. They didn’t fight with me.”

“That’s a very nice thing to say,” beamed Luna. Thenshe pushed her Spectrespecs farther up her nose andsettled down to read The Quibbler.

“We didn’t face him, though,” said Neville, emergingfrom under the seat with fluff and dust in his hairand a resigned-looking Trevor in his hand. “You did.You should hear my gran talk about you. ‘That HarryPotter’s got more backbone than the whole Ministry ofMagic put together*.’ She’d give anything to have youas a grandson. ...”

Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry laughed uncomfortably and changed thesubject to O.W.L. results as soon as he could. WhileNeville recited his grades and wondered aloudwhether he would be allowed to take aTransfiguration N.E.W.T. with only an “Acceptable,”Harry watched him without really listening.

Neville’s childhood had been blighted by Voldemortjust as much as Harry’s had, but Neville had no ideahow close he had come to having Harry’s destiny. Theprophecy could have referred to either of them, yet,for his own inscrutable reasons, Voldemort hadchosen to believe that Harry was the one meant.

Had Voldemort chosen Neville, it would be Nevillesitting opposite Harry bearing the lightning-shapedscar and the weight of the prophecy. ... Or would it?Would Neville’s mother have died to save him, as Lilyhad died for Harry? Surely she would. ... But what ifshe had been unable to stand between her son andVoldemort? Would there then have been no “ChosenOne” at all? An empty seat where Neville now sat anda scarless Harry who would have been kissed good-bye by his own mother, not Ron’s?

“You all right, Harry? You look funny,” said Neville.

Harry started. “Sorry — I —”

“Wrackspurt got you?” asked Luna sympathetically,peering at Harry through her enormous coloredspectacles.

“I — what?”

“A Wrackspurt ... They’re invisible. They float inthrough your ears and make your brain go fuzzy,” shesaid. “I thought I felt one zooming around in here.”

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She flapped her hands at thin air, as though beatingoff large invisible moths. Harry and Neville caughteach other’s eyes and hastily began to talk ofQuidditch.

The weather beyond the train windows was as patchyas it had been all summer; they passed throughstretches of the chilling mist, then out into weak,clear sunlight. It was during one of the clear spells,when the sun was visible almost directly overhead,that Ron and Hermione entered the compartment atlast.

“Wish the lunch trolley would hurry up, I’m starving,”said Ron longingly, slumping into the seat besideHarry and rubbing his stomach. “Hi, Neville. Hi,

Luna. Guess what?” he added, turning to Harry.“Malfoy’s not doing prefect duty. He’s just sitting inhis compartment with the other Slytherins, we sawhim when we passed.”

Harry sat up straight, interested. It was not likeMalfoy to pass up the chance to demonstrate hispower as prefect, which he had happily abused all theprevious year.

“What did he do when he saw you?”

“The usual,” said Ron indifferently, demonstrating arude hand gesture. “Not like him, though, is it? Well— that is” — he did the hand gesture again — “butwhy isn’t he out there bullying first years?

“Dunno,” said Harry, but his mind was racing. Didn’tthis look as though Malfoy had more important thingson his mind than bullying younger students?

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Maybe he preferred the Inquisitorial Squad,” saidHermione. “Maybe being a prefect seems a bit tameafter that.”

“I don’t think so,” said Harry. “I think he’s —”

But before he could expound on his theory, thecompartment door slid open again and a breathlessthird-year girl stepped inside.

“I’m supposed to deliver these to Neville Longbottomand Harry P-Potter,” she faltered, as her eyes metHarry’s and she turned scarlet. She was holding outtwo scrolls of parchment tied with violet ribbon.Perplexed, Harry and Neville took the scroll addressedto each of them and the girl stumbled back out of thecompartment.

“What is it?” Ron demanded, as Harry unrolled his.“An invitation,” said Harry.

Harry,

I would be delighted if you would join me for a bite oflunch in compartment C.

Sincerely,

Professor H. E. F. Slug horn

“Who’s Professor Slughorn?” asked Neville, lookingperplexedly at his own invitation.

“New teacher,” said Harry. “Well, I suppose we’ll haveto go, won’t we?”

“But what does he want me for?” asked Nevillenervously, as though he was expecting detention.

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No idea,” said Harry, which was not entirely true,though he had no proof yet that his hunch wascorrect. “Listen,” he added, seized by a sudden brainwave, “let’s go under the Invisibility Cloak, then wemight get a good look at Malfoy on the way, see whathe’s up to.”

This idea, however, came to nothing: The corridors,which were packed with people on the lookout for thelunch trolley, were impossible to negotiate whilewearing the cloak. Harry stowed it regretfully back inhis bag, reflecting that it would have been nice towear it just to avoid all the staring, which seemed tohave increased in intensity even since he had lastwalked down the train. Every now and then, studentswould hurtle out of their compartments to get a betterlook at him. The exception was Cho Chang, whodarted into her compartment when she saw Harrycoming. As Harry passed the window, he saw herdeep in determined conversation with her friendMarietta, who was wearing a very thick layer ofmakeup that did not entirely obscure the oddformation of pimples still etched across her face.Smirking slightly, Harry pushed on.

When they reached compartment C, they saw at oncethat they were not Slughorn’s only invitees, althoughjudging by the enthusiasm of Slughorn’s welcome,Harry was the most warmly anticipated.

“Harry, m’boy!” said Slughorn, jumping up at thesight of him so that his great velvet-covered bellyseemed to fill all the remaining space in thecompartment. His shiny bald head and great silverymustache gleamed as brightly in the sunlight as thegolden buttons on his waistcoat. “Good to see you,good to see you! And you must be Mr. Longbottom!”

Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Neville nodded, looking scared. At a gesture fromSlughorn, they sat down opposite each other in theonly two empty seats, which were nearest the door.Harry glanced around at their fellow guests. Herecognized a Slytherin from their year, a tall black boywith high cheekbones and long, slanting eyes; therewere also two seventh-year boys Harry did not knowand, squashed in the corner beside Slughorn andlooking as though she was not entirely sure how shehad got there, Ginny.

“Now, do you know everyone?” Slughorn asked Harryand Neville. “Blaise Zabini is in your year, of course —

Zabini did not make any sign of recognition orgreeting, nor did Harry or Neville: Gryffindor andSlytherin students loathed each other on principle.

“This is Cormac McLaggen, perhaps you’ve comeacross each other — ? No?”

McLaggen, a large, wiry-haired youth, raised a hand,and Harry and Neville nodded back at him.

“— and this is Marcus Belby, I don’t know whether —?”

Belby, who was thin and nervous-looking, gave astrained smile.

“— and this charming young lady tells me she knowsyou!” Slughorn finished.

Ginny grimaced at Harry and Neville from behindSlughorn’s back.

“Well now, this is most pleasant,” said Slughorncozily. “A chance to get to know you all a little better.

Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Here, take a napkin. I’ve packed my own lunch; thetrolley, as I remember it, is heavy on licorice wands,and a poor old man’s digestive system isn’t quite upto such things. ... Pheasant, Belby?”

Belby started and accepted what looked like half acold pheasant.

“I was just telling young Marcus here that I had thepleasure of teaching his Uncle Damocles,” Slughorntold Harry and Neville, now passing around a basketof rolls. “Outstanding wizard, outstanding, and hisOrder of Merlin most well-deserved. Do you see muchof your uncle, Marcus?”

Unfortunately, Belby had just taken a large mouthfulof pheasant; in his haste to answer Slughorn heswallowed too fast, turned purple, and began tochoke.

“Anapneo,” said Slughorn calmly, pointing his wandat Belby, whose airway seemed to clear at once.

“Not ... not much of him, no,” gasped Belby, his eyesstreaming.

“Well, of course, I daresay he’s busy,” said Slughorn,looking questioningly at Belby. “I doubt he inventedthe Wolfsbane Potion without considerable hardwork!”

“I suppose ...” said Belby, who seemed afraid to takeanother bite of pheasant until he was sure thatSlughorn had finished with him. “Er ... he and mydad don’t get on very well, you see, so I don’t reallyknow much about ...”

His voice tailed away as Slughorn gave him a coldsmile and turned to McLaggen instead.

Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Now, you, Cormac,” said Slughorn, “I happen toknow you see a lot of your Uncle Tiberius, because hehas a rather splendid picture of the two of youhunting nogtails in, I think, Norfolk?”

“Oh, yeah, that was fun, that was,” said McLaggen.“We went with Bertie Higgs and Rufus Scrimgeour —this was before he became Minister, obviously —”

“Ah, you know Bertie and Rufus too?” beamedSlughorn, now offering around a small tray of pies;somehow, Belby was missed out. “Now tell me ...”

It was as Harry had suspected. Everyone here seemedto have been invited because they were connected tosomebody well-known or influential — everyoneexcept Ginny. Zabini, who was interrogated afterMcLaggen, turned out to have a famously beautifulwitch for a mother (from what Harry could make out,she had been married seven times, each of herhusbands dying mysteriously and leaving her moundsof gold). It was Neville’s turn next: This was a veryuncomfortable ten minutes, for Neville’s parents, well-known Aurors, had been tortured into insanity byBellatrix Lestrange and a couple of Death Eatercronies. At the end of Neville’s interview, Harry hadthe impression that Slughorn was reserving judgmenton Neville, yet to see whether he had any of hisparents’ flair.

“And now,” said Slughorn, shifting massively in hisseat with the air of a compere introducing his staract. “Harry Potter! Where to begin? I feel I barelyscratched the surface when we met over the summer!”He contemplated Harry for a moment as though hewas a particularly large and succulent piece ofpheasant, then said, “ The Chosen One,’ they’recalling you now!”

Page | 162 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry said nothing. Belby, McLaggen, and Zabiniwere all staring at him.

“Of course,” said Slughorn, watching Harry closely,“there have been rumors for years. ... I rememberwhen — well — after that terrible night — Lily —James — and you survived — and the word was thatyou must have powers beyond the ordinary —”

Zabini gave a tiny little cough that was clearlysupposed to indicate amused skepticism. An angryvoice burst out from behind Slughorn.

“Yeah, Zabini, because you’re so talented ... at posing.

“Oh dear!” chuckled Slughorn comfortably, lookingaround at Ginny, who was glaring at Zabini aroundSlughorn’s great belly. “You want to be careful, Blaise!I saw this young lady perform the most marvelousBat-Bogey Hex as I was passing her carriage! Iwouldn’t cross her!”

Zabini merely looked contemptuous.

“Anyway,” said Slughorn, turning back to Harry.

“Such rumors this summer. Of course, one doesn’tknow what to believe, the Prophet has been known toprint inaccuracies, make mistakes — but there seemslittle doubt, given the number of witnesses, that therewas quite a disturbance at the Ministry and that youwere there in the thick of it all!”

Harry, who could not see any way out of this withoutflatly lying, nodded but still said nothing. Slughornbeamed at him.

“So modest, so modest, no wonder Dumbledore is sofond — you were there, then? But the rest of the

Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

stories — so sensational, of course, one doesn’t knowquite what to believe — this fabled prophecy, forinstance —”

“We never heard a prophecy,” said Neville, turninggeranium pink as he said it.

“That’s right,” said Ginny staunchly. “Neville and Iwere both there too, and all this ‘Chosen One’ rubbishis just the Prophet making things up as usual.”

“You were both there too, were you?” said Slughornwith great interest, looking from Ginny to Neville, butboth of them sat clamlike before his encouragingsmile.

“Yes ... well ... it is true that the Prophet oftenexaggerates, of course. ...” Slughorn said, sounding alittle disappointed. “I remember dear Gwenog tellingme (Gwenog Jones, I mean, of course, Captain of theHolyhead Harpies) —”

He meandered off into a long-winded reminiscence,but Harry had the distinct impression that Slughornhad not finished with him, and that he had not beenconvinced by Neville and Ginny.

The afternoon wore on with more anecdotes aboutillustrious wizards Slughorn had taught, all of whomhad been delighted to join what he called the “SlugClub” at Hogwarts. Harry could not wait to leave, butcouldn’t see how to do so politely. Finally the trainemerged from yet another long misty stretch into ared sunset, and Slughorn looked around, blinking inthe twilight.

“Good gracious, it’s getting dark already! I didn’tnotice that they’d lit the lamps! You’d better go andchange into your robes, all of you. McLaggen, you

Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

must drop by and borrow that book on nogtails.

Harry, Blaise — any time you’re passing. Same goesfor you, miss,” he twinkled at Ginny. “Well, off you go,off you go!”

As he pushed past Harry into the darkening corridor,Zabini shot him a filthy look that Harry returned withinterest. He, Ginny, and Neville followed Zabini backalong the train.

“I’m glad that’s over,” muttered Neville. “Strange man,isn’t he?”

“Yeah, he is a bit,” said Harry, his eyes on Zabini.“How come you ended up in there, Ginny?”

“He saw me hex Zacharias Smith,” said Ginny. “Youremember that idiot from Hufflepuff who was in theD.A.? He kept on and on asking about what happenedat the Ministry and in the end he annoyed me somuch I hexed him — when Slughorn came in Ithought I was going to get detention, but he justthought it was a really good hex and invited me tolunch! Mad, eh?”

“Better reason for inviting someone than becausetheir mother’s famous,” said Harry, scowling at theback of Zabini’s head, “or because their uncle —”

But he broke off. An idea had just occurred to him, areckless but potentially wonderful idea. ... In aminute’s time, Zabini was going to reenter theSlytherin sixth-year compartment and Malfoy wouldbe sitting there, thinking himself unheard by anybodyexcept fellow Slytherins. ... If Harry could only enter,unseen, behind him, what might he not see or hear?True, there was little of the journey left — HogsmeadeStation had to be less than half an hour away,judging by the wildness of the scenery flashing by thePage | 165 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

windows — but nobody else seemed prepared to takeHarry’s suspicions seriously, so it was down to him toprove them.

“I’ll see you two later,” said Harry under his breath,pulling out his Invisibility Cloak and flinging it overhimself.

“But what’re you — ?” asked Neville.

“Later!” whispered Harry, darting after Zabini asquietly as possible, though the rattling of the trainmade such caution almost pointless.

The corridors were almost completely empty now.Nearly everyone had returned to their carriages tochange into their school robes and pack up theirpossessions. Though he was as close as he could getto Zabini without touching him, Harry was not quickenough to slip into the compartment when Zabiniopened the door. Zabini was already sliding it shutwhen Harry hastily stuck out his foot to prevent itclosing.

“What’s wrong with this thing?” said Zabini angrily ashe smashed the sliding door repeatedly into Harry’sfoot.

Harry seized the door and pushed it open, hard;Zabini, still clinging on to the handle, toppled oversideways into Gregory Goyle’s lap, and in the ensuingruckus, Harry darted into the compartment, leaptonto Zabini’s temporarily empty seat, and hoistedhimself up into the luggage rack. It was fortunate thatGoyle and Zabini were snarling at each other, drawingall eyes onto them, for Harry was quite sure his feetand ankles had been revealed as the cloak hadflapped around them; indeed, for one horriblemoment he thought he saw Malfoy’s eyes follow hisPage | 166 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

trainer as it whipped upward out of sight. But thenGoyle slammed the door shut and flung Zabini offhim; Zabini collapsed into his own seat lookingruffled, Vincent Crabbe returned to his comic, andMalfoy, sniggering, lay back down across two seatswith his head in Pansy Parkinson’s lap. Harry laycurled uncomfortably under the cloak to ensure thatevery inch of him remained hidden, and watchedPansy stroke the sleek blond hair off Malfoy’sforehead, smirking as she did so, as though anyonewould have loved to have been in her place. Thelanterns swinging from the carriage ceiling cast abright light over the scene: Harry could read everyword of Crabbe’s comic directly below him.

“So, Zabini,” said Malfoy, “what did Slughorn want?”

“Just trying to make up to well-connected people,”said Zabini, who was still glowering at Goyle. “Notthat he managed to find many.”

This information did not seem to please Malfoy.

“Who else had he invited?” he demanded.

“McLaggen from Gryffindor,” said Zabini.

“Oh yeah, his uncle’s big in the Ministry,” saidMalfoy.

“— someone else called Belby, from Ravenclaw —”

“Not him, he’s a prat!” said Pansy.

“— and Longbottom, Potter, and that Weasley girl,”finished Zabini.

Malfoy sat up very suddenly, knocking Pansy’s handaside.

Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“He invited Longbottom?”

“Well, I assume so, as Longbottom was there,” saidZabini indifferently.

“What’s Longbottom got to interest Slughorn?”

Zabini shrugged.

“Potter, precious Potter, obviously he wanted a look at‘the Chosen One,’ ” sneered Malfoy, “but that Weasleygirl! What’s so special about her?”

“A lot of boys like her,” said Pansy, watching Malfoyout of the corner of her eyes for his reaction. “Evenyou think she’s good-looking, don’t you, Blaise, andwe all know how hard you are to please!”

“I wouldn’t touch a filthy little blood traitor like herwhatever she looked like,” said Zabini coldly, andPansy looked pleased. Malfoy sank back across herlap and allowed her to resume the stroking of hishair.

“Well, I pity Slughorn’s taste. Maybe he’s going a bitsenile. Shame, my father always said he was a goodwizard in his day. My father used to be a bit of afavorite of his. Slughorn probably hasn’t heard I’m onthe train, or —”

“I wouldn’t bank on an invitation,” said Zabini. “Heasked me about Nott’s father when I first arrived.

They used to be old friends, apparently, but when heheard he’d been caught at the Ministry he didn’t lookhappy, and Nott didn’t get an invitation, did he? Idon’t think Slughorn’s interested in Death Eaters.”

Malfoy looked angry, but forced out a singularlyhumorless laugh.

Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, who cares what he’s interested in? What is he,when you come down to it? Just some stupidteacher.” Malfoy yawned ostentatiously. “I mean, Imight not even be at Hogwarts next year, what’s itmatter to me if some fat old has-been likes me ornot?”

“What do you mean, you might not be at Hogwartsnext year?” said Pansy indignantly, ceasing groomingMalfoy at once.

“Well, you never know,” said Malfoy with the ghost ofa smirk. “I might have — er — moved on to bigger andbetter things.”

Crouched in the luggage rack under his cloak, Harry’sheart began to race. What would Ron and Hermionesay about this? Crabbe and Goyle were gawping atMalfoy; apparently they had had no inkling of anyplans to move on to bigger and better things. EvenZabini had allowed a look of curiosity to mar hishaughty features. Pansy resumed the slow stroking ofMalfoy’s hair, looking dumbfounded.

“Do you mean — Him?”

Malfoy shrugged.

“Mother wants me to complete my education, butpersonally, I don’t see it as that important these days.I mean, think about it. ... When the Dark Lord takesover, is he going to care how many O.W.L.s orN.E.W.T.s anyone’s got? Of course he isn’t. ... It’ll beall about the kind of service he received, the level ofdevotion he was shown.”

“And you think you’ll be able to do something forhim?” asked Zabini scathingly. “Sixteen years old andnot even fully qualified yet?”

Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I’ve just said, haven’t I? Maybe he doesn’t care if I’mqualified. Maybe the job he wants me to do isn’tsomething that you need to be qualified for,” saidMalfoy quietly.

Crabbe and Goyle were both sitting with their mouthsopen like gargoyles. Pansy was gazing down at Malfoyas though she had never seen anything so awe-inspiring.

“I can see Hogwarts,” said Malfoy, clearly relishing theeffect he had created as he pointed out of theblackened window. “We’d better get our robes on.”

Harry was so busy staring at Malfoy, he did not noticeGoyle reaching up for his trunk; as he swung it down,it hit Harry hard on the side of the head. He let out aninvoluntary gasp of pain, and Malfoy looked up at theluggage rack, frowning.

Harry was not afraid of Malfoy, but he still did notmuch like the idea of being discovered hiding underhis Invisibility Cloak by a group of unfriendlySlytherins. Eyes still watering and head stillthrobbing, he drew his wand, careful not todisarrange the cloak, and waited, breath held. To hisrelief, Malfoy seemed to decide that he had imaginedthe noise; he pulled on his robes like the others,locked his trunk, and as the train slowed to a jerkycrawl, fastened a thick new traveling cloak round hisneck.

Harry could see the corridors filling up again andhoped that Hermione and Ron would take his thingsout onto the platform for him; he was stuck where hewas until the compartment had quite emptied. At last,with a final lurch, the train came to a complete halt.Goyle threw the door open and muscled his way out

Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

into a crowd of second years, punching them aside;Crabbe and Zabini followed.

“You go on,” Malfoy told Pansy, who was waiting forhim with her hand held out as though hoping hewould hold it. “I just want to check something.”

Pansy left. Now Harry and Malfoy were alone in thecompartment. People were filing past, descendingonto the dark platform. Malfoy moved over to thecompartment door and let down the blinds, so thatpeople in the corridor beyond could not peer in. Hethen bent down over his trunk and opened it again.

Harry peered down over the edge of the luggage rack,his heart pumping a little faster. What had Malfoywanted to hide from Pansy? Was he about to see themysterious broken object it was so important tomend?

“Petrificus Totalusl”

Without warning, Malfoy pointed his wand at Harry,who was instantly paralyzed. As though in slowmotion, he toppled out of the luggage rack and fell,with an agonizing, floor-shaking crash, at Malfoy’sfeet, the Invisibility Cloak trapped beneath him, hiswhole body revealed with his legs still curled absurdlyinto the cramped kneeling position. He couldn’t movea muscle; he could only gaze up at Malfoy, whosmiled broadly.

“I thought so,” he said jubilantly. “I heard Goyle’strunk hit you. And I thought I saw something whiteflash through the air after Zabini came back. ...”

His eyes lingered for a moment upon Harry’s trainers.

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You didn’t hear anything I care about, Potter. Butwhile I’ve got you here ...”

And he stamped, hard, on Harry’s face. Harry felt hisnose break; blood spurted everywhere.

“That’s from my father. Now, let’s see. ...”

Malfoy dragged the cloak out from under Harry’simmobilized body and threw it over him.

“I don’t reckon they’ll find you till the train’s back inLondon,” he said quietly. “See you around, Potter ...or not.”

And taking care to tread on Harry’s fingers, Malfoyleft the compartment.

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





SNAPE VICTORIOUS

Harry could not move a muscle. He lay there beneaththe Invisibility Cloak feeling the blood from his noseflow, hot and wet, over his face, listening to the voicesand footsteps in the corridor beyond. His immediatethought was that someone, surely, would check thecompartments before the train departed again. But atonce came the dispiriting realization that even ifsomebody looked into the compartment, he would beneither seen nor heard. His best hope was thatsomebody else would walk in and step on him.

Harry had never hated Malfoy more than as he laythere, like an absurd turtle on its back, blooddripping sickeningly into his open mouth. What astupid situation to have landed himself in ... and nowthe last few footsteps were dying away; everyone wasshuffling along the dark platform outside; he couldhear the scraping of trunks and the loud babble oftalk.

Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron and Hermione would think that he had left thetrain without them. Once they arrived at Hogwartsand took their places in the Great Hall, looked up anddown the Gryffindor table a few times, and finallyrealized that he was not there, he, no doubt, would behalfway back to London.

He tried to make a sound, even a grunt, but it wasimpossible. Then he remembered that some wizards,like Dumbledore, could perform spells withoutspeaking, so he tried to summon his wand, which hadfallen out of his hand, by saying the words “AccioWand\” over and over again in his head, but nothinghappened.

He thought he could hear the rustling of the treesthat surrounded the lake, and the far-off hoot of anowl, but no hint of a search being made or even (hedespised himself slightly for hoping it) panickedvoices wondering where Harry Potter had gone. Afeeling of hopelessness spread through him as heimagined the convoy of thestral-drawn carriagestrundling up to the school and the muffled yells oflaughter issuing from whichever carriage Malfoy wasriding in, where he could be recounting his attack onHarry to Crabbe, Goyle, Zabini, and Pansy Parkinson.

The train lurched, causing Harry to roll over onto hisside. Now he was staring at the dusty underside ofthe seats instead of the ceiling. The floor began tovibrate as the engine roared into life. The Express wasleaving and nobody knew he was still on it. ...

Then he felt his Invisibility Cloak fly off him and avoice overhead said, “Wotcher, Harry.”

There was a flash of red light and Harry’s bodyunfroze; he was able to push himself into a moredignified sitting position, hastily wipe the blood off his

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

bruised face with the back of his hand, and raise hishead to look up at Tonks, who was holding theInvisibility Cloak she had just pulled away.

“We’d better get out of here, quickly,” she said, as thetrain windows became obscured with steam and theybegan to move out of the station. “Come on, we’lljump.”

Harry hurried after her into the corridor. She pulledopen the train door and leapt onto the platform,which seemed to be sliding underneath them as thetrain gathered momentum. He followed her, staggereda little on landing, then straightened up in time to seethe gleaming scarlet steam engine pick up speed,round the corner, and disappear from view.

The cold night air was soothing on his throbbingnose. Tonks was looking at him; he felt angry andembarrassed that he had been discovered in such aridiculous position. Silently she handed him back theInvisibility Cloak.

“Who did it?”

“Draco Malfoy,” said Harry bitterly. “Thanks for ...well ...”

“No problem,” said Tonks, without smiling. Fromwhat Harry could see in the darkness, she was asmousy-haired and miserable-looking as she had beenwhen he had met her at the Burrow. “I can fix yournose if you stand still.”

Harry did not think much of this idea; he had beenintending to visit Madam Pomfrey, the matron, inwhom he had a little more confidence when it came toHealing Spells, but it seemed rude to say this, so hestayed stock-still and closed his eyes.

Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Episkey,” said Tonks.

Harry’s nose felt very hot, and then very cold. Heraised a hand and felt it gingerly. It seemed to bemended.

“Thanks a lot!”

“You’d better put that cloak back on, and we can walkup to the school,” said Tonks, still unsmiling. AsHarry swung the cloak back over himself, she wavedher wand; an immense silvery four-legged creatureerupted from it and streaked off into the darkness.

“Was that a Patronus?” asked Harry, who had seenDumbledore send messages like this.

“Yes, I’m sending word to the castle that I’ve got youor they’ll worry. Come on, we’d better not dawdle.”

They set off toward the lane that led to the school.

“How did you find me?”

“I noticed you hadn’t left the train and I knew youhad that cloak. I thought you might be hiding forsome reason. When I saw the blinds were drawndown on that compartment I thought I’d check.”

“But what are you doing here, anyway?” Harry asked.

“I’m stationed in Hogsmeade now, to give the schoolextra protection,” said Tonks.

“Is it just you who’s stationed up here, or — ?”

“No, Proudfoot, Savage, and Dawlish are here too.”

“Dawlish, that Auror Dumbledore attacked last year?”

Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“That’s right.”

They trudged up the dark, deserted lane, following thefreshly made carriage tracks. Harry looked sidewaysat Tonks under his cloak. Last year she had beeninquisitive (to the point of being a little annoying attimes), she had laughed easily, she had made jokes.Now she seemed older and much more serious andpurposeful. Was this all the effect of what hadhappened at the Ministry? He reflected uncomfortablythat Hermione would have suggested he saysomething consoling about Sirius to her, that ithadn’t been her fault at all, but he couldn’t bringhimself to do it. He was far from blaming her forSirius’s death; it was no more her fault than anyoneelse’s (and much less than his), but he did not liketalking about Sirius if he could avoid it. And so theytramped on through the cold night in silence, Tonks’slong cloak whispering on the ground behind them.

Having always traveled there by carriage, Harry hadnever before appreciated just how far Hogwarts wasfrom Hogsmeade Station. With great relief he finallysaw the tall pillars on either side of the gates, eachtopped with a winged boar. He was cold, he washungry, and he was quite keen to leave this new,gloomy Tonks behind. But when he put out a hand topush open the gates, he found them chained shut.

“Alohomora\” he said confidently, pointing his wand atthe padlock, but nothing happened.

“That won’t work on these,” said Tonks. “Dumbledorebewitched them himself.”

Harry looked around.

“I could climb a wall,” he suggested.

Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No, you couldn’t,” said Tonks flatly. “Anti-intruderjinxes on all of them. Security’s been tightened ahundredfold this summer.”

“Well then,” said Harry, starting to feel annoyed at herlack of helpfulness, “I suppose I’ll just have to sleepout here and wait for morning.”

“Someone’s coming down for you,” said Tonks. “Look.”

A lantern was bobbing at the distant foot of thecastle. Harry was so pleased to see it he felt he couldeven endure Filch’s wheezy criticisms of his tardinessand rants about how his timekeeping would improvewith the regular application of thumbscrews. It wasnot until the glowing yellow light was ten feet awayfrom them, and Harry had pulled off his InvisibilityCloak so that he could be seen, that he recognized,with a rush of pure loathing, the uplit hooked noseand long, black, greasy hair of Severus Snape.

“Well, well, well,” sneered Snape, taking out his wandand tapping the padlock once, so that the chainssnaked backward and the gates creaked open. “Niceof you to turn up, Potter, although you have evidentlydecided that the wearing of school robes woulddetract from your appearance.”

“I couldn’t change, I didn’t have my —” Harry began,but Snape cut across him.

“There is no need to wait, Nymphadora, Potter is quite— ah — safe in my hands.”

“I meant Hagrid to get the message,” said Tonks,frowning.

“Hagrid was late for the start-of-term feast, just likePotter here, so I took it instead. And incidentally,”

Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

said Snape, standing back to allow Harry to pass him,“I was interested to see your new Patronus.”

He shut the gates in her face with a loud clang andtapped the chains with his wand again, so that theyslithered, clinking, back into place.

“I think you were better off with the old one,” saidSnape, the malice in his voice unmistakable. “Thenew one looks weak.”

As Snape swung the lantern about, Harry saw,fleetingly, a look of shock and anger on Tonks’s face.Then she was covered in darkness once more.

“Good night,” Harry called to her over his shoulder, ashe began the walk up to the school with Snape.“Thanks for ... everything.”

“See you, Harry.”

Snape did not speak for a minute or so. Harry felt asthough his body was generating waves of hatred sopowerful that it seemed incredible that Snape couldnot feel them burning him. He had loathed Snapefrom their first encounter, but Snape had placedhimself forever and irrevocably beyond the possibilityof Harry’s forgiveness by his attitude toward Sirius.Whatever Dumbledore said, Harry had had time tothink over the summer, and had concluded thatSnape’s snide remarks to Sirius about remainingsafely hidden while the rest of the Order of thePhoenix were off fighting Voldemort had probablybeen a powerful factor in Sirius rushing off to theMinistry the night that he had died. Harry clung tothis notion, because it enabled him to blame Snape,which felt satisfying, and also because he knew that ifanyone was not sorry that Sirius was dead, it was theman now striding next to him in the darkness.

Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Fifty points from Gryffindor for lateness, I think,”said Snape. “And, let me see, another twenty for yourMuggle attire. You know, I don’t believe any Househas ever been in negative figures this early in theterm: We haven’t even started pudding. You mighthave set a record, Potter.”

The fury and hatred bubbling inside Harry seemed toblaze white-hot, but he would rather have beenimmobilized all the way back to London than tellSnape why he was late.

“I suppose you wanted to make an entrance, didyou?” Snape continued. “And with no flying caravailable you decided that bursting into the GreatHall halfway through the feast ought to create adramatic effect.”

Still Harry remained silent, though he thought hischest might explode. He knew that Snape had cometo fetch him for this, for the few minutes when hecould needle and torment Harry without anyone elselistening.

They reached the castle steps at last and as the greatoaken front doors swung open into the vast flaggedentrance hall, a burst of talk and laughter and oftinkling plates and glasses greeted them through thedoors standing open into the Great Hall. Harrywondered whether he could slip his Invisibility Cloakback on, thereby gaining his seat at the longGryffindor table (which, inconveniently, was thefarthest from the entrance hall) without being noticed.As though he had read Harry’s mind, however, Snapesaid, “No cloak. You can walk in so that everyone seesyou, which is what you wanted, I’m sure.”

Harry turned on the spot and marched straightthrough the open doors: anything to get away from

Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Snape. The Great Hall, with its four long House tablesand its staff table set at the top of the room, wasdecorated as usual with floating candles that madethe plates below glitter and glow. It was all ashimmering blur to Harry, however, who walked sofast that he was passing the Hufflepuff table beforepeople really started to stare, and by the time theywere standing up to get a good look at him, he hadspotted Ron and Hermione, sped along the benchestoward them, and forced his way in between them.

“Where’ve you — blimey, what’ve you done to yourface?” said Ron, goggling at him along with everyoneelse in the vicinity.

“Why, what’s wrong with it?” said Harry, grabbing aspoon and squinting at his distorted reflection.

“You’re covered in blood!” said Hermione. “Come here

She raised her wand, said “Tergeol” and siphoned offthe dried blood.

“Thanks,” said Harry, feeling his now clean face.“How’s my nose looking?”

“Normal,” said Hermione anxiously. “Why shouldn’tit? Harry, what happened? We’ve been terrified!”

“I’ll tell you later,” said Harry curtly. He was veryconscious that Ginny, Neville, Dean, and Seamuswere listening in; even Nearly Headless Nick, theGryffindor ghost, had come floating along the benchto eavesdrop.

“But —” said Hermione.

Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Not now, Hermione,” said Harry, in a darklysignificant voice. He hoped very much that they wouldall assume he had been involved in something heroic,preferably involving a couple of Death Eaters and adementor. Of course, Malfoy would spread the storyas far and wide as he could, but there was always achance it wouldn’t reach too many Gryffindor ears.

He reached across Ron for a couple of chicken legsand a handful of chips, but before he could take themthey vanished, to be replaced with puddings.

“You missed the Sorting, anyway,” said Hermione, asRon dived for a large chocolate gateau.

“Hat say anything interesting?” asked Harry, taking apiece of treacle tart.

“More of the same, really ... advising us all to unite inthe face of our enemies, you know.”

“Dumbledore mentioned Voldemort at all?”

“Not yet, but he always saves his proper speech forafter the feast, doesn’t he? It can’t be long now.”

“Snape said Hagrid was late for the feast —”

“You’ve seen Snape? How come?” said Ron betweenfrenzied mouthfuls of gateau.

“Bumped into him,” said Harry evasively.

“Hagrid was only a few minutes late,” said Hermione.“Look, he’s waving at you, Harry.”

Harry looked up at the staff table and grinned atHagrid, who was indeed waving at him. Hagrid hadnever quite managed to comport himself with the

Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

dignity of Professor McGonagall, Head of GryffindorHouse, the top of whose head came up to somewherebetween Hagrid’s elbow and shoulder as they weresitting side by side, and who was lookingdisapprovingly at this enthusiastic greeting. Harrywas surprised to see the Divination teacher, ProfessorTrelawney, sitting on Hagrid’s other side; she rarelyleft her tower room, and he had never seen her at thestart-of-term feast before. She looked as odd as ever,glittering with beads and trailing shawls, her eyesmagnified to enormous size by her spectacles. Havingalways considered her a bit of a fraud, Harry hadbeen shocked to discover at the end of the previousterm that it had been she who had made theprediction that caused Lord Voldemort to kill Harry’sparents and attack Harry himself. The knowledge hadmade him even less eager to find himself in hercompany, but thankfully, this year he would bedropping Divination. Her great beaconlike eyesswiveled in his direction; he hastily looked awaytoward the Slytherin table. Draco Malfoy was mimingthe shattering of a nose to raucous laughter andapplause. Harry dropped his gaze to his treacle tart,his insides burning again. What he would not give tofight Malfoy one-on-one ...

“So what did Professor Slughorn want?” Hermioneasked.

“To know what really happened at the Ministry,” saidHarry.

“Him and everyone else here,” sniffed Hermione.“People were interrogating us about it on the train,weren’t they, Ron?”

“Yeah,” said Ron. “All wanting to know if you reallyare ‘the Chosen One’ —”

Page | 183 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“There has been much talk on that very subject evenamongst the ghosts,” interrupted Nearly HeadlessNick, inclining his barely connected head towardHarry so that it wobbled dangerously on its ruff. “I amconsidered something of a Potter authority; it iswidely known that we are friendly. I have assured thespirit community that I will not pester you forinformation, however. ‘Harry Potter knows that hecan confide in me with complete confidence/ I toldthem. ‘I would rather die than betray his trust.’ ”

“That’s not saying much, seeing as you’re alreadydead,” Ron observed.

“Once again, you show all the sensitivity of a bluntaxe,” said Nearly Headless Nick in affronted tones,and he rose into the air and glided back toward thefar end of the Gryffindor table just as Dumbledore gotto his feet at the staff table. The talk and laughterechoing around the Hall died away almost instantly.

“The very best of evenings to you!” he said, smilingbroadly, his arms opened wide as though to embracethe whole room.

“What happened to his hand?” gasped Hermione.

She was not the only one who had noticed.Dumbledore’s right hand was as blackened and dead-looking as it had been on the night he had come tofetch Harry from the Dursleys. Whispers swept theroom; Dumbledore, interpreting them correctly,merely smiled and shook his purple-and-gold sleeveover his injury.

“Nothing to worry about,” he said airily. “Now ... toour new students, welcome, to our old students,welcome back! Another year full of magical educationawaits you ...”

Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“His hand was like that when I saw him over thesummer,” Harry whispered to Hermione. “I thoughthe’d have cured it by now, though ... or MadamPomfrey would’ve done.”

“It looks as if it’s died,” said Hermione, with anauseated expression. “But there are some injuriesyou can’t cure ... old curses ... and there are poisonswithout antidotes. ...”

"... and Mr. Filch, our caretaker, has asked me to saythat there is a blanket ban on any joke items boughtat the shop called Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes.

“Those wishing to play for their House Quidditchteams should give their names to their Heads ofHouse as usual. We are also looking for newQuidditch commentators, who should do likewise.

“We are pleased to welcome a new member of staffthis year. Professor Slughorn” — Slughorn stood up,his bald head gleaming in the candlelight, his bigwaistcoated belly casting the table below into shadow— “is a former colleague of mine who has agreed toresume his old post of Potions master.”

“Potions?”

“Potions?”

The word echoed all over the Hall as people wonderedwhether they had heard right.

“Potions?” said Ron and Hermione together, turningto stare at Harry. “But you said —”

“Professor Snape, meanwhile,” said Dumbledore,raising his voice so that it carried over all the

Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

muttering, “will be taking over the position of DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts teacher.”

“No!” said Harry, so loudly that many heads turned inhis direction. He did not care; he was staring up atthe staff table, incensed. How could Snape be giventhe Defense Against the Dark Arts job after all thistime? Hadn’t it been widely known for years thatDumbledore did not trust him to do it?

“But Harry, you said that Slughorn was going to beteaching Defense Against the Dark Arts!” saidHermione.

“I thought he was!” said Harry, racking his brains toremember when Dumbledore had told him this, butnow that he came to think of it, he was unable torecall Dumbledore ever telling him what Slughornwould be teaching.

Snape, who was sitting on Dumbledore’s right, didnot stand up at the mention of his name; he merelyraised a hand in lazy acknowledgment of the applausefrom the Slytherin table, yet Harry was sure he coulddetect a look of triumph on the features he loathed somuch.

“Well, there’s one good thing,” he said savagely.

“Snape’ll be gone by the end of the year.”

“What do you mean?” asked Ron.

“That job’s jinxed. No one’s lasted more than a year.

... Quirrell actually died doing it. ... Personally, I’mgoing to keep my fingers crossed for another death.

“Harry!” said Hermione, shocked and reproachful.

Page | 186 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“He might just go back to teaching Potions at the endof the year,” said Ron reasonably. “That Slughornbloke might not want to stay long-term. Moodydidn’t.”

Dumbledore cleared his throat. Harry, Ron, andHermione were not the only ones who had beentalking; the whole Hall had erupted in a buzz ofconversation at the news that Snape had finallyachieved his heart’s desire. Seemingly oblivious to thesensational nature of the news he had just imparted,Dumbledore said nothing more about staffappointments, but waited a few seconds to ensurethat the silence was absolute before continuing.

“Now, as everybody in this Hall knows, LordVoldemort and his followers are once more at largeand gaining in strength.”

The silence seemed to tauten and strain asDumbledore spoke. Harry glanced at Malfoy. Malfoywas not looking at Dumbledore, but making his forkhover in midair with his wand, as though he foundthe headmaster’s words unworthy of his attention.

“I cannot emphasize strongly enough how dangerousthe present situation is, and how much care each ofus at Hogwarts must take to ensure that we remainsafe. The castle’s magical fortifications have beenstrengthened over the summer, we are protected innew and more powerful ways, but we must still guardscrupulously against carelessness on the part of anystudent or member of staff. I urge you, therefore, toabide by any security restrictions that your teachersmight impose upon you, however irksome you mightfind them — in particular, the rule that you are not tobe out of bed after hours. I implore you, should younotice anything strange or suspicious within oroutside the castle, to report it to a member of staffPage | 187 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

immediately. I trust you to conduct yourselves,always, with the utmost regard for your own andothers’ safety.”

Dumbledore’s blue eyes swept over the studentsbefore he smiled once more.

“But now, your beds await, as warm and comfortableas you could possibly wish, and I know that your toppriority is to be well-rested for your lessons tomorrow.Let us therefore say good night. Pip pip!”

With the usual deafening scraping noise, the bencheswere moved back and the hundreds of students beganto file out of the Great Hall toward their dormitories.Harry, who was in no hurry at all to leave with thegawping crowd, nor to get near enough to Malfoy toallow him to retell the story of the nose-stamping,lagged behind, pretending to retie the lace on histrainer, allowing most of the Gryffindors to drawahead of him. Hermione had darted ahead to fulfillher prefect’s duty of shepherding the first years, butRon remained with Harry.

“What really happened to your nose?” he asked, oncethey were at the very back of the throng pressing outof the Hall, and out of earshot of anyone else.

Harry told him. It was a mark of the strength of theirfriendship that Ron did not laugh.

“I saw Malfoy miming something to do with a nose,”he said darkly.

“Yeah, well, never mind that,” said Harry bitterly.“Listen to what he was saying before he found out Iwas there. ...”

Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry had expected Ron to be stunned by Malfoy’sboasts. With what Harry considered purepigheadedness, however, Ron was unimpressed.

“Come on, Harry, he was just showing off forParkinson. ... What kind of mission would You-Know-Who have given him?”

“How d’you know Voldemort doesn’t need someone atHogwarts? It wouldn’t be the first —”

“I wish yeh’d stop sayin’ tha’ name, Harry,” said areproachful voice behind them. Harry looked over hisshoulder to see Hagrid shaking his head.

“Dumbledore uses that name,” said Harry stubbornly.

“Yeah, well, tha’s Dumbledore, innit?” said Hagridmysteriously. “So how come yeh were late, Harry? Iwas worried.”

“Got held up on the train,” said Harry. “Why were youlate?”

“I was with Grawp,” said Hagrid happily. “Los’ track o’the time. He’s got a new home up in the mountainsnow, Dumbledore fixed it — nice big cave. He’s muchhappier than he was in the forest. We were havin’ agood chat.”

“Really?” said Harry, taking care not to catch Ron’seye; the last time he had met Hagrid’s half-brother, avicious giant with a talent for ripping up trees by theroots, his vocabulary had comprised five words, two ofwhich he was unable to pronounce properly.

“Oh yeah, he’s really come on,” said Hagrid proudly.“Yeh’ll be amazed. I’m thinkin’ o’ trainin’ him up asme assistant.”

Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron snorted loudly, but managed to pass it off as aviolent sneeze. They were now standing beside theoak front doors.

“Anyway, I’ll see yeh tomorrow, firs’ lesson’s straightafter lunch. Come early an’ yeh can say hello ter Buck— I mean, Witherwings!”

Raising an arm in cheery farewell, he headed out ofthe front doors into the darkness.

Harry and Ron looked at each other. Harry could tellthat Ron was experiencing the same sinking feeling ashimself.

“You’re not taking Care of Magical Creatures, areyou?”

Ron shook his head. “And you’re not either, are you?”

Harry shook his head too.

“And Hermione,” said Ron, “she’s not, is she?”

Harry shook his head again. Exactly what Hagridwould say when he realized his three favoritestudents had given up his subject, he did not like tothink.

Page | 190 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling



THE HALF-BLOOD PRINCE

Harry and Ron met Hermione in the common roombefore breakfast next morning. Hoping for somesupport for his theory, Harry lost no time in tellingHermione what he had overheard Malfoy saying onthe Hogwarts Express.

“But he was obviously showing off for Parkinson,wasn’t he?” interjected Ron quickly, before Hermionecould say anything.

“Well,” she said uncertainly, “I don’t know. ... It wouldbe like Malfoy to make himself seem more importantthan he is ... but that’s a big lie to tell. ...”

“Exactly,” said Harry, but he could not press thepoint, because so many people were trying to listen into his conversation, not to mention staring at him andwhispering behind their hands.

“It’s rude to point,” Ron snapped at a particularlyminuscule first-year boy as they joined the queue toclimb out of the portrait hole. The boy, who had been

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

muttering something about Harry behind his hand tohis friend, promptly turned scarlet and toppled out ofthe hole in alarm. Ron sniggered.

“I love being a sixth year. And we’re going to begetting free time this year. Whole periods when wecan just sit up here and relax.”

“We’re going to need that time for studying, Ron!” saidHermione, as they set off down the corridor.

“Yeah, but not today,” said Ron. “Today’s going to bea real doss, I reckon.”

“Hold it!” said Hermione, throwing out an arm andhalting a passing fourth year, who was attempting topush past her with a lime-green disk clutched tightlyin his hand. “Fanged Frisbees are banned, hand itover,” she told him sternly. The scowling boy handedover the snarling Frisbee, ducked under her arm, andtook off after his friends. Ron waited for him tovanish, then tugged the Frisbee from Hermione’s grip.

“Excellent, I’ve always wanted one of these.”

Hermione’s remonstration was drowned by a loudgiggle; Lavender Brown had apparently found Ron’sremark highly amusing. She continued to laugh asshe passed them, glancing back at Ron over hershoulder. Ron looked rather pleased with himself.

The ceiling of the Great Hall was serenely blue andstreaked with frail, wispy clouds, just like the squaresof sky visible through the high mullioned windows.While they tucked into porridge and eggs and bacon,Harry and Ron told Hermione about theirembarrassing conversation with Hagrid the previousevening.

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But he can’t really think we’d continue Care ofMagical Creatures!” she said, looking distressed. “Imean, when has any of us expressed ... you know ...any enthusiasm?”

“That’s it, though, innit?” said Ron, swallowing anentire fried egg whole. “We were the ones who madethe most effort in classes because we like Hagrid. Buthe thinks we liked the stupid subject D’you reckonanyone’s going to go on to N.E.W.T.?”

Neither Harry nor Hermione answered; there was noneed. They knew perfectly well that nobody in theiryear would want to continue Care of MagicalCreatures. They avoided Hagrid’s eye and returnedhis cheery wave only halfheartedly when he left thestaff table ten minutes later.

After they had eaten, they remained in their places,awaiting Professor McGonagall’s descent from thestaff table. The distribution of class schedules wasmore complicated than usual this year, for ProfessorMcGonagall needed first to confirm that everybodyhad achieved the necessary O.W.L. grades to continuewith their chosen N.E.W.T.s.

Hermione was immediately cleared to continue withCharms, Defense Against the Dark Arts,Transfiguration, Herbology, Arithmancy, AncientRunes, and Potions, and shot off to a first-periodAncient Runes class without further ado. Neville tooka little longer to sort out; his round face was anxiousas Professor McGonagall looked down his applicationand then consulted his O.W.L. results.

“Herbology, fine,” she said. “Professor Sprout will bedelighted to see you back with an ‘Outstanding’

O.W.L. And you qualify for Defense Against the DarkArts with ‘Exceeds Expectations.’ But the problem is

Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Transfiguration. I’m sorry, Longbottom, but anAcceptable’ really isn’t good enough to continue toN.E.W.T level. I just don’t think you’d be able to copewith the coursework.”

Neville hung his head. Professor McGonagall peeredat him through her square spectacles.

“Why do you want to continue with Transfiguration,anyway? I’ve never had the impression that youparticularly enjoyed it.”

Neville looked miserable and muttered somethingabout “my grandmother wants.”

“Hmph,” snorted Professor McGonagall. “It’s high timeyour grandmother learned to be proud of thegrandson she’s got, rather than the one she thinksshe ought to have — particularly after what happenedat the Ministry.”

Neville turned very pink and blinked confusedly;Professor McGonagall had never paid him acompliment before.

“I’m sorry, Longbottom, but I cannot let you into myN.E.W.T. class. I see that you have an ‘ExceedsExpectations’ in Charms, however — why not try for aN.E.W.T. in Charms?”

“My grandmother thinks Charms is a soft option,”mumbled Neville.

“Take Charms,” said Professor McGonagall, “and Ishall drop Augusta a line reminding her that justbecause she failed her Charms O.W.L., the subject isnot necessarily worthless.” Smiling slightly at the lookof delighted incredulity on Neville’s face, ProfessorMcGonagall tapped a blank schedule with the tip ofPage | 194 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

her wand and handed it, now carrying details of hisnew classes, to Neville.

Professor McGonagall turned next to Parvati Patil,whose first question was whether Firenze, thehandsome centaur, was still teaching Divination.

“He and Professor Trelawney are dividing classesbetween them this year,” said Professor McGonagall,a hint of disapproval in her voice; it was commonknowledge that she despised the subject ofDivination. “The sixth year is being taken by ProfessorTrelawney.”

Parvati set off for Divination five minutes later lookingslightly crestfallen.

“So, Potter, Potter ...” said Professor McGonagall,consulting her notes as she turned to Harry.

“Charms, Defense Against the Dark Arts, Herbology,Transfiguration ... all fine. I must say, I was pleasedwith your Transfiguration mark, Potter, very pleased.Now, why haven’t you applied to continue withPotions? I thought it was your ambition to become anAuror?”

“It was, but you told me I had to get an ‘Outstanding’in my O.W.L., Professor.”

“And so you did when Professor Snape was teachingthe subject. Professor Slughorn, however, is perfectlyhappy to accept N.E.W.T students with ‘ExceedsExpectations’ at O.W.L. Do you wish to proceed withPotions?”

“Yes,” said Harry, “but I didn’t buy the books or anyingredients or anything —”

Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I’m sure Professor Slughorn will be able to lend yousome,” said Professor McGonagall. “Very well, Potter,here is your schedule. Oh, by the way — twentyhopefuls have already put down their names for theGryffindor Quidditch team. I shall pass the list to youin due course and you can fix up trials at yourleisure.”

A few minutes later, Ron was cleared to do the samesubjects as Harry, and the two of them left the tabletogether.

“Look,” said Ron delightedly, gazing at his schedule,“we’ve got a free period now ... and a free period afterbreak ... and after lunch ... excellent.”

They returned to the common room, which was emptyapart from a half dozen seventh years, including KatieBell, the only remaining member of the originalGryffindor Quidditch team that Harry had joined inhis first year.

“I thought you’d get that, well done,” she called over,pointing at the Captain’s badge on Harry’s chest. “Tellme when you call trials!”

“Don’t be stupid,” said Harry, “you don’t need to tryout, I’ve watched you play for five years. ...”

“You mustn’t start off like that,” she said warningly.“For all you know, there’s someone much better thanme out there. Good teams have been ruined beforenow because Captains just kept playing the old faces,or letting in their friends. ...”

Ron looked a little uncomfortable and began playingwith the Fanged Frisbee Hermione had taken from thefourth-year student. It zoomed around the commonroom, snarling and attempting to take bites of the

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

tapestry. Crookshanks’s yellow eyes followed it and hehissed when it came too close.

An hour later they reluctantly left the sunlit commonroom for the Defense Against the Dark Arts classroomfour floors below. Hermione was already queuingoutside, carrying an armful of heavy books andlooking put-upon.

“We got so much homework for Runes,” she saidanxiously, when Harry and Ron joined her. “A fifteen-inch essay, two translations, and I’ve got to readthese by Wednesday!”

“Shame,” yawned Ron.

“You wait,” she said resentfully. “I bet Snape gives usloads.”

The classroom door opened as she spoke, and Snapestepped into the corridor, his sallow face framed asever by two curtains of greasy black hair. Silence fellover the queue immediately.

“Inside,” he said.

Harry looked around as they entered. Snape hadimposed his personality upon the room already; itwas gloomier than usual, as curtains had been drawnover the windows, and was lit by candlelight. Newpictures adorned the walls, many of them showingpeople who appeared to be in pain, sporting grislyinjuries or strangely contorted body parts. Nobodyspoke as they settled down, looking around at theshadowy, gruesome pictures.

“I have not asked you to take out your books,” saidSnape, closing the door and moving to face the classfrom behind his desk; Hermione hastily dropped her

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

copy of Confronting the Faceless back into her bagand stowed it under her chair. “I wish to speak toyou, and I want your fullest attention.”

His black eyes roved over their upturned faces,lingering for a fraction of a second longer on Harry’sthan anyone else’s.

“You have had five teachers in this subject so far, Ibelieve.”

You believe ... like you haven’t watched them all comeand go, Snape, hoping you’d be next, thought Harryscathingly.

“Naturally, these teachers will all have had their ownmethods and priorities. Given this confusion I amsurprised so many of you scraped an O.W.L. in thissubject. I shall be even more surprised if all of youmanage to keep up with the N.E.W.T. work, which willbe much more advanced.”

Snape set off around the edge of the room, speakingnow in a lower voice; the class craned their necks tokeep him in view.

“The Dark Arts,” said Snape, “are many, varied, ever-changing, and eternal. Fighting them is like fighting amany-headed monster, which, each time a neck issevered, sprouts a head even fiercer and cleverer thanbefore. You are fighting that which is unfixed,mutating, indestructible.”

Harry stared at Snape. It was surely one thing torespect the Dark Arts as a dangerous enemy, anotherto speak of them, as Snape was doing, with a lovingcaress in his voice?

Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Your defenses,” said Snape, a little louder, “musttherefore be as flexible and inventive as the arts youseek to undo. These pictures” — he indicated a few ofthem as he swept past — “give a fair representation ofwhat happens to those who suffer, for instance, theCruciatus Curse” — he waved a hand toward a witchwho was clearly shrieking in agony — “feel theDementor’s Kiss” — a wizard lying huddled andblank-eyed, slumped against a wall — “or provoke theaggression of the Inferius” — a bloody mass upon theground.

“Has an Inferius been seen, then?” said Parvati Patilin a high-pitched voice. “Is it definite, is he usingthem?”

“The Dark Lord has used Inferi in the past,” saidSnape, “which means you would be well-advised toassume he might use them again. Now ...”

He set off again around the other side of theclassroom toward his desk, and again, they watchedhim as he walked, his dark robes billowing behindhim.

"... you are, I believe, complete novices in the use ofnonverbal spells. What is the advantage of anonverbal spell?”

Hermione’s hand shot into the air. Snape took histime looking around at everybody else, making surehe had no choice, before saying curtly, “Very well —Miss Granger?”

“Your adversary has no warning about what kind ofmagic you’re about to perform,” said Hermione,

“which gives you a split-second advantage.”

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“An answer copied almost word for word from TheStandard Book of Spells, Grade Six,” said Snapedismissively (over in the corner, Malfoy sniggered),“but correct in essentials. Yes, those who progress tousing magic without shouting incantations gain anelement of surprise in their spell-casting. Not allwizards can do this, of course; it is a question ofconcentration and mind power which some” — hisgaze lingered maliciously upon Harry once more —“lack.”

Harry knew Snape was thinking of their disastrousOcclumency lessons of the previous year. He refusedto drop his gaze, but glowered at Snape until Snapelooked away.

“You will now divide,” Snape went on, “into pairs. Onepartner will attempt to jinx the other withoutspeaking. The other will attempt to repel the jinx inequal silence. Carry on.”

Although Snape did not know it, Harry had taught atleast half the class (everyone who had been a memberof the D.A.) how to perform a Shield Charm theprevious year. None of them had ever cast the charmwithout speaking, however. A reasonable amount ofcheating ensued; many people were merelywhispering the incantation instead of saying it aloud.Typically, ten minutes into the lesson Hermionemanaged to repel Neville’s muttered Jelly-Legs Jinxwithout uttering a single word, a feat that wouldsurely have earned her twenty points for Gryffindorfrom any reasonable teacher, thought Harry bitterly,but which Snape ignored. He swept between them asthey practiced, looking just as much like anovergrown bat as ever, lingering to watch Harry andRon struggling with the task.

Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron, who was supposed to be jinxing Harry, waspurple in the face, his lips tightly compressed to savehimself from the temptation of muttering theincantation. Harry had his wand raised, waiting ontenterhooks to repel a jinx that seemed unlikely everto come.

“Pathetic, Weasley,” said Snape, after a while. “Here— let me show you —”

He turned his wand on Harry so fast that Harryreacted instinctively; all thought of nonverbal spellsforgotten, he yelled, “Protegol”

His Shield Charm was so strong Snape was knockedoff-balance and hit a desk. The whole class hadlooked around and now watched as Snape rightedhimself, scowling.

“Do you remember me telling you we are practicingnonverbal spells, Potter?”

“Yes,” said Harry stiffly.

“Yes, sir.”

“There’s no need to call me ‘sir,’ Professor.”

The words had escaped him before he knew what hewas saying. Several people gasped, includingHermione. Behind Snape, however, Ron, Dean, andSeamus grinned appreciatively.

“Detention, Saturday night, my office,” said Snape. “Ido not take cheek from anyone, Potter ... not even ‘theChosen One. ’ ”

“That was brilliant, Harry!” chortled Ron, once theywere safely on their way to break a short while later.

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“You really shouldn’t have said it,” said Hermione,frowning at Ron. “What made you?”

“He tried to jinx me, in case you didn’t notice!” fumedHarry. “I had enough of that during thoseOcclumency lessons! Why doesn’t he use anotherguinea pig for a change? What’s Dumbledore playingat, anyway, letting him teach Defense? Did you hearhim talking about the Dark Arts? He loves them! Allthat unfixed, indestructible stuff —”

“Well,” said Hermione, “I thought he sounded a bitlike you.”

“Like me?”

“Yes, when you were telling us what it’s like to faceVoldemort. You said it wasn’t just memorizing abunch of spells, you said it was just you and yourbrains and your guts — well, wasn’t that what Snapewas saying? That it really comes down to being braveand quick-thinking?”

Harry was so disarmed that she had thought hiswords as well worth memorizing as The StandardBook of Spells that he did not argue.

“Harry! Hey, Harry!”

Harry looked around; Jack Sloper, one of the Beaterson last year’s Gryffindor Quidditch team, washurrying toward him holding a roll of parchment.

“For you,” panted Sloper. “Listen, I heard you’re thenew Captain. When’re you holding trials?”

“I’m not sure yet,” said Harry, thinking privately thatSloper would be very lucky to get back on the team.“I’ll let you know.”

Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, right. I was hoping it’d be this weekend —”

But Harry was not listening; he had just recognizedthe thin, slanting writing on the parchment. LeavingSloper in mid-sentence, he hurried away with Ronand Hermione, unrolling the parchment as he went.

Dear Harry,

I would like to start our private lessons this Saturday.Kindly come along to my office at 8 p.m. I hope you areenjoying your first day back at school.

Yours sincerely,

Albus Dumbledore

P. S. I enjoy Acid Pops.

“He enjoys Acid Pops?” said Ron, who had read themessage over Harry’s shoulder and was lookingperplexed.

“It’s the password to get past the gargoyle outside hisstudy,” said Harry in a low voice. “Ha! Snape’s notgoing to be pleased. ... I won’t be able to do hisdetention!”

He, Ron, and Hermione spent the whole of breakspeculating on what Dumbledore would teach Harry.Ron thought it most likely to be spectacular jinxesand hexes of the type the Death Eaters would notknow. Hermione said such things were illegal, andthought it much more likely that Dumbledore wantedto teach Harry advanced Defensive magic. Afterbreak, she went off to Arithmancy while Harry andRon returned to the common room, where theygrudgingly started Snape’s homework. This turnedout to be so complex that they still had not finishedPage | 203 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

when Hermione joined them for their after-lunch freeperiod (though she considerably speeded up theprocess). They had only just finished when the bellrang for the afternoon’s double Potions and they beatthe familiar path down to the dungeon classroom thathad, for so long, been Snape’s.

When they arrived in the corridor they saw that therewere only a dozen people progressing to N.E.W.T.level. Crabbe and Goyle had evidently failed to achievethe required O.W.L. grade, but four Slytherins hadmade it through, including Malfoy. Four Ravenclawswere there, and one Hufflepuff, Ernie Macmillan,whom Harry liked despite his rather pompousmanner.

“Harry,” Ernie said portentously, holding out his handas Harry approached, “didn’t get a chance to speak inDefense Against the Dark Arts this morning. Goodlesson, I thought, but Shield Charms are old hat, ofcourse, for us old D.A. lags ... And how are you, Ron— Hermione?”

Before they could say more than “fine,” the dungeondoor opened and Slughorn’s belly preceded him out ofthe door. As they filed into the room, his great walrusmustache curved above his beaming mouth, and hegreeted Harry and Zabini with particular enthusiasm.

The dungeon was, most unusually, already full ofvapors and odd smells. Harry, Ron, and Hermionesniffed interestedly as they passed large, bubblingcauldrons. The four Slytherins took a table together,as did the four Ravenclaws. This left Harry, Ron, andHermione to share a table with Ernie. They chose theone nearest a gold-colored cauldron that was emittingone of the most seductive scents Harry had everinhaled: Somehow it reminded him simultaneously oftreacle tart, the woody smell of a broomstick handle,Page | 204 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

and something flowery he thought he might havesmelled at the Burrow. He found that he wasbreathing very slowly and deeply and that the potion’sfumes seemed to be filling him up like drink. A greatcontentment stole over him; he grinned across at Ron,who grinned back lazily.

“Now then, now then, now then,” said Slughorn,whose massive outline was quivering through themany shimmering vapors. “Scales out, everyone, andpotion kits, and don’t forget your copies of AdvancedPotion-Making. ...”

“Sir?” said Harry, raising his hand.

“Harry, m’boy?”

“I haven’t got a book or scales or anything — nor’sRon — we didn’t realize we’d be able to do theN.E.W.T., you see —”

“Ah, yes, Professor McGonagall did mention ... not toworry, my dear boy, not to worry at all. You can useingredients from the store cupboard today, and I’msure we can lend you some scales, and we’ve got asmall stock of old books here, they’ll do until you canwrite to Flourish and Blotts. ...”

Slughorn strode over to a corner cupboard and, aftera moment’s foraging, emerged with two very battered-looking copies of Advanced Potion-Making by LibatiusBorage, which he gave to Harry and Ron along withtwo sets of tarnished scales.

“Now then,” said Slughorn, returning to the front ofthe class and inflating his already bulging chest sothat the buttons on his waistcoat threatened to burstoff, “I’ve prepared a few potions for you to have a lookat, just out of interest, you know. These are the kindPage | 205 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

of thing you ought to be able to make after completingyour N.E.W.T.s. You ought to have heard of ’em, evenif you haven’t made ’em yet. Anyone tell me what thisone is?”

He indicated the cauldron nearest the Slytherin table.Harry raised himself slightly in his seat and saw whatlooked like plain water boiling away inside it.

Hermione’s well-practiced hand hit the air beforeanybody else’s; Slughorn pointed at her.

“It’s Veritaserum, a colorless, odorless potion thatforces the drinker to tell the truth,” said Hermione.

“Very good, very good!” said Slughorn happily. “Now,”he continued, pointing at the cauldron nearest theRavenclaw table, “this one here is pretty well known.... Featured in a few Ministry leaflets lately too ... Whocan — ?”

Hermione’s hand was fastest once more.

“It’s Polyjuice Potion, sir,” she said.

Harry too had recognized the slow-bubbling, mudlikesubstance in the second cauldron, but did not resentHermione getting the credit for answering thequestion; she, after all, was the one who hadsucceeded in making it, back in their second year.

“Excellent, excellent! Now, this one here ... yes, mydear?” said Slughorn, now looking slightly bemused,as Hermione’s hand punched the air again.

“It’s Amortentia!”

Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It is indeed. It seems almost foolish to ask,” saidSlughorn, who was looking mightily impressed, “but Iassume you know what it does?”

“It’s the most powerful love potion in the world!” saidHermione.

“Quite right! You recognized it, I suppose, by itsdistinctive mother-of-pearl sheen?”

“And the steam rising in characteristic spirals,” saidHermione enthusiastically, “and it’s supposed tosmell differently to each of us, according to whatattracts us, and I can smell freshly mown grass andnew parchment and —”

But she turned slightly pink and did not complete thesentence.

“May I ask your name, my dear?” said Slughorn,ignoring Hermione’s embarrassment.

“Hermione Granger, sir.”

“Granger? Granger? Can you possibly be related toHector Dagworth-Granger, who founded the MostExtraordinary Society of Potioneers?”

“No, I don’t think so, sir. I’m Muggle-born, you see.”

Harry saw Malfoy lean close to Nott and whispersomething; both of them sniggered, but Slughornshowed no dismay; on the contrary, he beamed andlooked from Hermione to Harry, who was sitting nextto her.

“Oho! ‘One of my best friends is Muggle-born, andshe’s the best in our yeah’ I’m assuming this is thevery friend of whom you spoke, Harry?”

Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, sir,” said Harry.

“Well, well, take twenty well-earned points forGryffindor, Miss Granger,” said Slughorn genially.

Malfoy looked rather as he had done the timeHermione had punched him in the face. Hermioneturned to Harry with a radiant expression andwhispered, “Did you really tell him I’m the best in theyear? Oh, Harry!”

“Well, what’s so impressive about that?” whisperedRon, who for some reason looked annoyed. “You arethe best in the year — I’d’ve told him so if he’d askedme!”

Hermione smiled but made a “shhing” gesture, so thatthey could hear what Slughorn was saying. Ronlooked slightly disgruntled.

“Amortentia doesn’t really create love, of course. It isimpossible to manufacture or imitate love. No, thiswill simply cause a powerful infatuation or obsession.It is probably the most dangerous and powerfulpotion in this room — oh yes,” he said, noddinggravely at Malfoy and Nott, both of whom weresmirking skeptically. “When you have seen as muchof life as I have, you will not underestimate the powerof obsessive love. ...

“And now,” said Slughorn, “it is time for us to startwork.”

“Sir, you haven’t told us what’s in this one,” saidErnie Macmillan, pointing at a small black cauldronstanding on Slughorn’s desk. The potion within wassplashing about merrily; it was the color of moltengold, and large drops were leaping like goldfish abovethe surface, though not a particle had spilled.

Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oho,” said Slughorn again. Harry was sure thatSlughorn had not forgotten the potion at all, but hadwaited to be asked for dramatic effect. “Yes. That.Well, that one, ladies and gentlemen, is a mostcurious little potion called Felix Felicis. I take it,” heturned, smiling, to look at Hermione, who had let outan audible gasp, “that you know what Felix Felicisdoes, Miss Granger?”

“It’s liquid luck,” said Hermione excitedly. “It makesyou lucky!”

The whole class seemed to sit up a little straighter.Now all Harry could see of Malfoy was the back of hissleek blond head, because he was at last givingSlughorn his full and undivided attention.

“Quite right, take another ten points for Gryffindor.Yes, it’s a funny little potion, Felix Felicis,” saidSlughorn. “Desperately tricky to make, anddisastrous to get wrong. However, if brewed correctly,as this has been, you will find that all your endeavorstend to succeed ... at least until the effects wear off.”

“Why don’t people drink it all the time, sir?” saidTerry Boot eagerly.

“Because if taken in excess, it causes giddiness,recklessness, and dangerous overconfidence,” saidSlughorn. “Too much of a good thing, you know ...highly toxic in large quantities. But taken sparingly,and very occasionally ...”

“Have you ever taken it, sir?” asked Michael Cornerwith great interest.

“Twice in my life,” said Slughorn. “Once when I wastwenty-four, once when I was fifty-seven. Two

Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

tablespoonfuls taken with breakfast. Two perfectdays.”

He gazed dreamily into the distance. Whether he wasplayacting or not, thought Harry, the effect was good.

“And that,” said Slughorn, apparently coming back toearth, “is what I shall be offering as a prize in thislesson.”

There was silence in which every bubble and gurgle ofthe surrounding potions seemed magnified tenfold.

“One tiny bottle of Felix Felicis,” said Slughorn, takinga minuscule glass bottle with a cork in it out of hispocket and showing it to them all. “Enough for twelvehours’ luck. From dawn till dusk, you will be lucky ineverything you attempt.

“Now, I must give you warning that Felix Felicis is abanned substance in organized competitions ...sporting events, for instance, examinations, orelections. So the winner is to use it on an ordinaryday only ... and watch how that ordinary day becomesextraordinary!

“So,” said Slughorn, suddenly brisk, “how are you towin my fabulous prize? Well, by turning to page ten ofAdvanced Potion-Making. We have a little over an hourleft to us, which should be time for you to make adecent attempt at the Draught of Living Death. I knowit is more complex than anything you have attemptedbefore, and I do not expect a perfect potion fromanybody. The person who does best, however, will winlittle Felix here. Off you go!”

There was a scraping as everyone drew theircauldrons toward them and some loud clunks aspeople began adding weights to their scales, but

Page | 210 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

nobody spoke. The concentration within the room wasalmost tangible. Harry saw Malfoy riffling feverishlythrough his copy of Advanced Potion-Making. It couldnot have been clearer that Malfoy really wanted thatlucky day. Harry bent swiftly over the tattered bookSlughorn had lent him.

To his annoyance he saw that the previous owner hadscribbled all over the pages, so that the margins wereas black as the printed portions. Bending low todecipher the ingredients (even here, the previousowner had made annotations and crossed things out)Harry hurried off toward the store cupboard to findwhat he needed. As he dashed back to his cauldron,he saw Malfoy cutting up valerian roots as fast as hecould.

Everyone kept glancing around at what the rest of theclass was doing; this was both an advantage and adisadvantage of Potions, that it was hard to keep yourwork private. Within ten minutes, the whole placewas full of bluish steam. Hermione, of course, seemedto have progressed furthest. Her potion alreadyresembled the “smooth, black currant-colored liquid”mentioned as the ideal halfway stage.

Having finished chopping his roots, Harry bent lowover his book again. It was really very irritating,having to try and decipher the directions under all thestupid scribbles of the previous owner, who for somereason had taken issue with the order to cut up thesopophorous bean and had written in the alternativeinstruction:

Crush with flat side of silver dagger,releases juice better than cutting.

Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Sir, I think you knew my grandfather, AbraxasMalfoy?”

Harry looked up; Slughorn was just passing theSlytherin table.

“Yes,” said Slughorn, without looking at Malfoy, “Iwas sorry to hear he had died, although of course itwasn’t unexpected, dragon pox at his age. ...”

And he walked away. Harry bent back over hiscauldron, smirking. He could tell that Malfoy hadexpected to be treated like Harry or Zabini; perhapseven hoped for some preferential treatment of the typehe had learned to expect from Snape. It looked asthough Malfoy would have to rely on nothing buttalent to win the bottle of Felix Felicis.

The sopophorous bean was proving very difficult tocut up. Harry turned to Hermione.

“Can I borrow your silver knife?”

She nodded impatiently, not taking her eyes off herpotion, which was still deep purple, though accordingto the book ought to be turning a light shade of lilacby now.

Harry crushed his bean with the flat side of thedagger. To his astonishment, it immediately exudedso much juice he was amazed the shriveled beancould have held it all. Hastily scooping it all into thecauldron he saw, to his surprise, that the potionimmediately turned exactly the shade of lilacdescribed by the textbook.

His annoyance with the previous owner vanishing onthe spot, Harry now squinted at the next line ofinstructions. According to the book, he had to stir

Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

counterclockwise until the potion turned clear aswater. According to the addition the previous ownerhad made, however, he ought to add a clockwise stirafter every seventh counterclockwise stir. Could theold owner be right twice?

Harry stirred counterclockwise, held his breath, andstirred once clockwise. The effect was immediate. Thepotion turned palest pink.

“How are you doing that?” demanded Hermione, whowas red-faced and whose hair was growing bushierand bushier in the fumes from her cauldron; herpotion was still resolutely purple.

“Add a clockwise stir —”

“No, no, the book says counterclockwise!” shesnapped.

Harry shrugged and continued what he was doing.Seven stirs counterclockwise, one clockwise, pause ...seven stirs counterclockwise, one stir clockwise ...

Across the table, Ron was cursing fluently under hisbreath; his potion looked like liquid licorice. Harryglanced around. As far as he could see, no one else’spotion had turned as pale as his. He felt elated,something that had certainly never happened beforein this dungeon.

“And time’s ... up!” called Slughorn. “Stop stirring,please!”

Slughorn moved slowly among the tables, peering intocauldrons. He made no comment, but occasionallygave the potions a stir or a sniff. At last he reachedthe table where Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Erniewere sitting. He smiled ruefully at the tarlikePage | 213 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

substance in Ron’s cauldron. He passed over Ernie’snavy concoction. Hermione’s potion he gave anapproving nod. Then he saw Harry’s, and a look ofincredulous delight spread over his face.

“The clear winner!” he cried to the dungeon.

“Excellent, excellent, Harry! Good lord, it’s clearyou’ve inherited your mother’s talent. She was a dabhand at Potions, Lily was! Here you are, then, hereyou are — one bottle of Felix Felicis, as promised, anduse it well!”

Harry slipped the tiny bottle of golden liquid into hisinner pocket, feeling an odd combination of delight atthe furious looks on the Slytherins’ faces and guilt atthe disappointed expression on Hermione’s. Ronlooked simply dumbfounded.

“How did you do that?” he whispered to Harry as theyleft the dungeon.

“Got lucky, I suppose,” said Harry, because Malfoywas within earshot.

Once they were securely ensconced at the Gryffindortable for dinner, however, he felt safe enough to tellthem. Hermione’s face became stonier with everyword he uttered.

“I s’pose you think I cheated?” he finished, aggravatedby her expression.

“Well, it wasn’t exactly your own work, was it?” shesaid stiffly.

“He only followed different instructions to ours,” saidRon. “Could’ve been a catastrophe, couldn’t it? But hetook a risk and it paid off.” He heaved a sigh.“Slughorn could’ve handed me that book, but no, I get

Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

the one no one’s ever written on. Puked on, by thelook of page fifty-two, but —”

“Hang on,” said a voice close by Harry’s left ear andhe caught a sudden waft of that flowery smell he hadpicked up in Slughorn’s dungeon. He looked aroundand saw that Ginny had joined them. “Did I hearright? You’ve been taking orders from somethingsomeone wrote in a book, Harry?”

She looked alarmed and angry. Harry knew what wason her mind at once.

“It’s nothing,” he said reassuringly, lowering his voice.“It’s not like, you know, Riddle’s diary. It’s just an oldtextbook someone’s scribbled on.”

“But you’re doing what it says?”

“I just tried a few of the tips written in the margins,honestly, Ginny, there’s nothing funny —”

“Ginny’s got a point,” said Hermione, perking up atonce. “We ought to check that there’s nothing oddabout it. I mean, all these funny instructions, whoknows?”

“Hey!” said Harry indignantly, as she pulled his copyof Advanced Potion-Making out of his bag and raisedher wand.

“Specialis Revelio\” she said, rapping it smartly on thefront cover.

Nothing whatsoever happened. The book simply laythere, looking old and dirty and dog-eared.

“Finished?” said Harry irritably. “Or d’you want towait and see if it does a few backflips?”

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It seems all right,” said Hermione, still staring at thebook suspiciously. “I mean, it really does seem to be... just a textbook.”

“Good. Then I’ll have it back,” said Harry, snatching itoff the table, but it slipped from his hand and landedopen on the floor.

Nobody else was looking. Harry bent low to retrievethe book, and as he did so, he saw somethingscribbled along the bottom of the back cover in thesame small, cramped handwriting as the instructionsthat had won him his bottle of Felix Felicis, nowsafely hidden inside a pair of socks in his trunkupstairs.

This Book is the Property of the Half-Blood Prince.

Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling



THE HOUSE OF GAUNT

For the rest of the week’s Potions lessons Harrycontinued to follow the Half-Blood Prince’sinstructions wherever they deviated from LibatiusBorage’s, with the result that by their fourth lessonSlughorn was raving about Harry’s abilities, sayingthat he had rarely taught anyone so talented. NeitherRon nor Hermione was delighted by this. AlthoughHarry had offered to share his book with both ofthem, Ron had more difficulty deciphering thehandwriting than Harry did, and could not keepasking Harry to read aloud or it might looksuspicious. Hermione, meanwhile, was resolutelyplowing on with what she called the “official”instructions, but becoming increasingly bad-temperedas they yielded poorer results than the Prince’s.

Harry wondered vaguely who the Half-Blood Princehad been. Although the amount of homework theyhad been given prevented him from reading the wholeof his copy of Advanced Potion-Making, he hadskimmed through it sufficiently to see that there was

Page | 217 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling



barely a page on which the Prince had not madeadditional notes, not all of them concerned withpotion-making. Here and there were directions forwhat looked like spells that the Prince had made uphimself.

“Or herself,” said Hermione irritably, overhearingHarry pointing some of these out to Ron in thecommon room on Saturday evening. “It might havebeen a girl. I think the handwriting looks more like agirl’s than a boy’s.”

“The Half-Blood Prince, he was called,” Harry said.“How many girls have been Princes?”

Hermione seemed to have no answer to this. Shemerely scowled and twitched her essay on ThePrinciples of Re materialization away from Ron, whowas trying to read it upside down.

Harry looked at his watch and hurriedly put the oldcopy of Advanced Potion-Making back into his bag.

“It’s five to eight, I’d better go, I’ll be late forDumbledore.”

“Ooooh!” gasped Hermione, looking up at once. “Goodluck! We’ll wait up, we want to hear what he teachesyou!”

“Hope it goes okay,” said Ron, and the pair of themwatched Harry leave through the portrait hole.

Harry proceeded through deserted corridors, thoughhe had to step hastily behind a statue when ProfessorTrelawney appeared around a corner, muttering toherself as she shuffled a pack of dirty-looking playingcards, reading them as she walked.

Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Two of spades: conflict,” she murmured, as shepassed the place where Harry crouched, hidden.“Seven of spades: an ill omen. Ten of spades: violence.Knave of spades: a dark young man, possiblytroubled, one who dislikes the questioner —”

She stopped dead, right on the other side of Harry’sstatue.

“Well, that can’t be right,” she said, annoyed, andHarry heard her reshuffling vigorously as she set offagain, leaving nothing but a whiff of cooking sherrybehind her. Harry waited until he was quite sure shehad gone, then hurried off again until he reached thespot in the seventh-floor corridor where a singlegargoyle stood against the wall.

“Acid Pops,” said Harry, and the gargoyle leapt aside;the wall behind it slid apart, and a moving spiralstone staircase was revealed, onto which Harrystepped, so that he was carried in smooth circles upto the door with the brass knocker that led toDumbledore’s office.

Harry knocked.

“Come in,” said Dumbledore’s voice.

“Good evening, sir,” said Harry, walking into theheadmaster’s office.

“Ah, good evening, Harry. Sit down,” saidDumbledore, smiling. “I hope you’ve had an enjoyablefirst week back at school?”

“Yes, thanks, sir,” said Harry.

“You must have been busy, a detention under yourbelt already!”

Page | 219 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Er,” began Harry awkwardly, but Dumbledore didnot look too stern.

“I have arranged with Professor Snape that you willdo your detention next Saturday instead.”

“Right,” said Harry, who had more pressing matterson his mind than S nape’s detention, and now lookedaround surreptitiously for some indication of whatDumbledore was planning to do with him thisevening. The circular office looked just as it alwaysdid; the delicate silver instruments stood on spindle-legged tables, puffing smoke and whirring; portraits ofprevious headmasters and headmistresses dozed intheir frames, and Dumbledore’s magnificent phoenix,Fawkes, stood on his perch behind the door, watchingHarry with bright interest. It did not even look asthough Dumbledore had cleared a space for duelingpractice.

“So, Harry,” said Dumbledore, in a businesslike voice.“You have been wondering, I am sure, what I haveplanned for you during these — for want of a betterword — lessons?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Well, I have decided that it is time, now that youknow what prompted Lord Voldemort to try and killyou fifteen years ago, for you to be given certaininformation.”

There was a pause.

“You said, at the end of last term, you were going totell me everything,” said Harry. It was hard to keep anote of accusation from his voice. “Sir,” he added.

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“And so I did,” said Dumbledore placidly. “I told youeverything I know. From this point forth, we shall beleaving the firm foundation of fact and journeyingtogether through the murky marshes of memory intothickets of wildest guesswork. From here on in,

Harry, I may be as woefully wrong as HumphreyBelcher, who believed the time was ripe for a cheesecauldron.”

“But you think you’re right?” said Harry.

“Naturally I do, but as I have already proven to you, Imake mistakes like the next man. In fact, being —forgive me — rather cleverer than most men, mymistakes tend to be correspondingly huger.”

“Sir,” said Harry tentatively, “does what you’re goingto tell me have anything to do with the prophecy? Willit help me ... survive?”

“It has a very great deal to do with the prophecy,” saidDumbledore, as casually as if Harry had asked himabout the next day’s weather, “and I certainly hopethat it will help you to survive.”

Dumbledore got to his feet and walked around thedesk, past Harry, who turned eagerly in his seat towatch Dumbledore bending over the cabinet besidethe door. When Dumbledore straightened up, he washolding a familiar shallow stone basin etched withodd markings around its rim. He placed the Pensieveon the desk in front of Harry.

“You look worried.”

Harry had indeed been eyeing the Pensieve with someapprehension. His previous experiences with the odddevice that stored and revealed thoughts andmemories, though highly instructive, had also been

Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

uncomfortable. The last time he had disturbed itscontents, he had seen much more than he wouldhave wished. But Dumbledore was smiling.

“This time, you enter the Pensieve with me ... and,even more unusually, with permission.”

“Where are we going, sir?”

“For a trip down Bob Ogden’s memory lane,” saidDumbledore, pulling from his pocket a crystal bottlecontaining a swirling silvery-white substance.

“Who was Bob Ogden?”

“He was employed by the Department of Magical LawEnforcement,” said Dumbledore. “He died some timeago, but not before I had tracked him down andpersuaded him to confide these recollections to me.

We are about to accompany him on a visit he made inthe course of his duties. If you will stand, Harry ...”

But Dumbledore was having difficulty pulling out thestopper of the crystal bottle: His injured hand seemedstiff and painful.

“Shall — shall I, sir?”

“No matter, Harry —”

Dumbledore pointed his wand at the bottle and thecork flew out.

“Sir — how did you injure your hand?” Harry askedagain, looking at the blackened fingers with a mixtureof revulsion and pity.

“Now is not the moment for that story, Harry. Not yet.We have an appointment with Bob Ogden.”

Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore tipped the silvery contents of the bottleinto the Pensieve, where they swirled and shimmered,neither liquid nor gas.

“After you,” said Dumbledore, gesturing toward thebowl.

Harry bent forward, took a deep breath, and plungedhis face into the silvery substance. He felt his feetleave the office floor; he was falling, falling throughwhirling darkness and then, quite suddenly, he wasblinking in dazzling sunlight. Before his eyes hadadjusted, Dumbledore landed beside him.

They were standing in a country lane bordered byhigh, tangled hedgerows, beneath a summer sky asbright and blue as a forget-me-not. Some ten feet infront of them stood a short, plump man wearingenormously thick glasses that reduced his eyes tomolelike specks. He was reading a wooden signpostthat was sticking out of the brambles on the left-handside of the road. Harry knew this must be Ogden; hewas the only person in sight, and he was also wearingthe strange assortment of clothes so often chosen byinexperienced wizards trying to look like Muggles: inthis case, a frock coat and spats over a striped one-piece bathing costume. Before Harry had time to domore than register his bizarre appearance, however,Ogden had set off at a brisk walk down the lane.

Dumbledore and Harry followed. As they passed thewooden sign, Harry looked up at its two arms. Theone pointing back the way they had come read:

GREAT HANGLETON, 5 MILES. The arm pointingafter Ogden said LITTLE HANGLETON, 1 MILE.

They walked a short way with nothing to see but thehedgerows, the wide blue sky overhead and theswishing, frock-coated figure ahead. Then the lane

Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

curved to the left and fell away, sloping steeply downa hillside, so that they had a sudden, unexpectedview of a whole valley laid out in front of them. Harrycould see a village, undoubtedly Little Hangleton,nestled between two steep hills, its church andgraveyard clearly visible. Across the valley, set on theopposite hillside, was a handsome manor housesurrounded by a wide expanse of velvety green lawn.

Ogden had broken into a reluctant trot due to thesteep downward slope. Dumbledore lengthened hisstride, and Harry hurried to keep up. He thoughtLittle Hangleton must be their final destination andwondered, as he had done on the night they hadfound Slughorn, why they had to approach it fromsuch a distance. He soon discovered that he wasmistaken in thinking that they were going to thevillage, however. The lane curved to the right andwhen they rounded the corner, it was to see the veryedge of Ogden’s frock coat vanishing through a gap inthe hedge.

Dumbledore and Harry followed him onto a narrowdirt track bordered by higher and wilder hedgerowsthan those they had left behind. The path wascrooked, rocky, and potholed, sloping downhill likethe last one, and it seemed to be heading for a patchof dark trees a little below them. Sure enough, thetrack soon opened up at the copse, and Dumbledoreand Harry came to a halt behind Ogden, who hadstopped and drawn his wand.

Despite the cloudless sky, the old trees ahead castdeep, dark, cool shadows, and it was a few secondsbefore Harry’s eyes discerned the building half-hiddenamongst the tangle of trunks. It seemed to him a verystrange location to choose for a house, or else an odddecision to leave the trees growing nearby, blockingall light and the view of the valley below. He wonderedPage | 224 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

whether it was inhabited; its walls were mossy and somany tiles had fallen off the roof that the rafters werevisible in places. Nettles grew all around it, their tipsreaching the windows, which were tiny and thick withgrime. Just as he had concluded that nobody couldpossibly live there, however, one of the windows wasthrown open with a clatter, and a thin trickle of steamor smoke issued from it, as though somebody wascooking.

Ogden moved forward quietly and, it seemed to Harry,rather cautiously. As the dark shadows of the treesslid over him, he stopped again, staring at the frontdoor, to which somebody had nailed a dead snake.

Then there was a rustle and a crack, and a man inrags dropped from the nearest tree, landing on hisfeet right in front of Ogden, who leapt backward sofast he stood on the tails of his frock coat andstumbled.

“ You’re not welcome.”

The man standing before them had thick hair somatted with dirt it could have been any color. Severalof his teeth were missing. His eyes were small anddark and stared in opposite directions. He might havelooked comical, but he did not; the effect wasfrightening, and Harry could not blame Ogden forbacking away several more paces before he spoke.

“Er — good morning. I’m from the Ministry of Magic

“You’re not welcome.”

“Er — I’m sorry — I don’t understand you,” saidOgden nervously.

Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry thought Ogden was being extremely dim; thestranger was making himself very clear in Harry’sopinion, particularly as he was brandishing a wand inone hand and a short and rather bloody knife in theother.

“You understand him, I’m sure, Harry?” saidDumbledore quietly.

“Yes, of course,” said Harry, slightly nonplussed.

“Why can’t Ogden — ?”

But as his eyes found the dead snake on the dooragain, he suddenly understood.

“He’s speaking Parseltongue?”

“Very good,” said Dumbledore, nodding and smiling.

The man in rags was now advancing on Ogden, knifein one hand, wand in the other.

“Now, look —” Ogden began, but too late: There was abang, and Ogden was on the ground, clutching hisnose, while a nasty yellowish goo squirted frombetween his fingers.

“Morfin!” said a loud voice.

An elderly man had come hurrying out of the cottage,banging the door behind him so that the dead snakeswung pathetically. This man was shorter than thefirst, and oddly proportioned; his shoulders were verybroad and his arms overlong, which, with his brightbrown eyes, short scrubby hair, and wrinkled face,gave him the look of a powerful, aged monkey. Hecame to a halt beside the man with the knife, whowas now cackling with laughter at the sight of Ogdenon the ground.

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Ministry, is it?” said the older man, looking down atOgden.

“Correct!” said Ogden angrily, dabbing his face. “Andyou, I take it, are Mr. Gaunt?”

“S’right,” said Gaunt. “Got you in the face, did he?”

“Yes, he did!” snapped Ogden.

“Should’ve made your presence known, shouldn’tyou?” said Gaunt aggressively. “This is privateproperty. Can’t just walk in here and not expect myson to defend himself.”

“Defend himself against what, man?” said Ogden,clambering back to his feet.

“Busybodies. Intruders. Muggles and filth.”

Ogden pointed his wand at his own nose, which wasstill issuing large amounts of what looked like yellowpus, and the flow stopped at once. Mr. Gaunt spokeout of the corner of his mouth to Morfin.

“Get in the house. Don’t argue.”

This time, ready for it, Harry recognized Parseltongue;even while he could understand what was being said,he distinguished the weird hissing noise that was allOgden could hear. Morfin seemed to be on the pointof disagreeing, but when his father cast him athreatening look he changed his mind, lumberingaway to the cottage with an odd rolling gait andslamming the front door behind him, so that thesnake swung sadly again.

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It’s your son I’m here to see, Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden,as he mopped the last of the pus from the front of hiscoat. “That was Morfin, wasn’t it?”

“Ar, that was Morfin,” said the old man indifferently.“Are you pure-blood?” he asked, suddenly aggressive.

“That’s neither here nor there,” said Ogden coldly,and Harry felt his respect for Ogden rise. ApparentlyGaunt felt rather differently. He squinted into Ogden’sface and muttered, in what was clearly supposed tobe an offensive tone, “Now I come to think about it,

I’ve seen noses like yours down in the village.”

“I don’t doubt it, if your son’s been let loose on them,”said Ogden. “Perhaps we could continue thisdiscussion inside?”

“Inside?”

“Yes, Mr. Gaunt. I’ve already told you. I’m here aboutMorfin. We sent an owl —”

“I’ve no use for owls,” said Gaunt. “I don’t openletters.”

“Then you can hardly complain that you get nowarning of visitors,” said Ogden tartly. “I am herefollowing a serious breach of Wizarding law, whichoccurred here in the early hours of this morning —”

“All right, all right, all right!” bellowed Gaunt. “Comein the bleeding house, then, and much good it’ll doyou!”

The house seemed to contain three tiny rooms. Twodoors led off the main room, which served as kitchenand living room combined. Morfin was sitting in afilthy armchair beside the smoking fire, twisting a live

Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

adder between his thick fingers and crooning softly atit in Parseltongue:

Hissy, hissy, little snakey,

Slither on the floor,

You be good to MorfinOr hell nail you to the door.

There was a scuffling noise in the corner beside theopen window, and Harry realized that there wassomebody else in the room, a girl whose ragged graydress was the exact color of the dirty stone wallbehind her. She was standing beside a steaming poton a grimy black stove, and was fiddling around withthe shelf of squalid-looking pots and pans above it.Her hair was lank and dull and she had a plain, pale,rather heavy face. Her eyes, like her brother’s, staredin opposite directions. She looked a little cleaner thanthe two men, but Harry thought he had never seen amore defeated-looking person.

“M’daughter, Merope,” said Gaunt grudgingly, asOgden looked inquiringly toward her.

“Good morning,” said Ogden.

She did not answer, but with a frightened glance ather father turned her back on the room andcontinued shifting the pots on the shelf behind her.

“Well, Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden, “to get straight to thepoint, we have reason to believe that your son,

Morfin, performed magic in front of a Muggle late lastnight.”

There was a deafening clang. Merope had droppedone of the pots.

Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Pick it up\” Gaunt bellowed at her. “That’s it, grub onthe floor like some filthy Muggle, what’s your wandfor, you useless sack of muck?”

“Mr. Gaunt, please!” said Ogden in a shocked voice,as Merope, who had already picked up the pot,flushed blotchily scarlet, lost her grip on the potagain, drew her wand shakily from her pocket,pointed it at the pot, and muttered a hasty, inaudiblespell that caused the pot to shoot across the flooraway from her, hit the opposite wall, and crack intwo.

Morfin let out a mad cackle of laughter. Gauntscreamed, “Mend it, you pointless lump, mend it!”

Merope stumbled across the room, but before she hadtime to raise her wand, Ogden had lifted his own andsaid firmly, “Reparo.” The pot mended itself instantly.

Gaunt looked for a moment as though he was going toshout at Ogden, but seemed to think better of it:Instead, he jeered at his daughter, “Lucky the niceman from the Ministry’s here, isn’t it? Perhaps he’lltake you off my hands, perhaps he doesn’t mind dirtySquibs. ...”

Without looking at anybody or thanking Ogden,Merope picked up the pot and returned it, handstrembling, to its shelf. She then stood quite still, herback against the wall between the filthy window andthe stove, as though she wished for nothing morethan to sink into the stone and vanish.

“Mr. Gaunt,” Ogden began again, “as I’ve said: thereason for my visit —”

Page | 230 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I heard you the first time!” snapped Gaunt. “And sowhat? Morfin gave a Muggle a bit of what was comingto him — what about it, then?”

“Morfin has broken Wizarding law,” said Ogdensternly.

“ ‘Morfin has broken Wizarding law.’ ” Gaunt imitatedOgden’s voice, making it pompous and singsong.Morfin cackled again. “He taught a filthy Muggle alesson, that’s illegal now, is it?”

“Yes,” said Ogden. “I’m afraid it is.”

He pulled from an inside pocket a small scroll ofparchment and unrolled it.

“What’s that, then, his sentence?” said Gaunt, hisvoice rising angrily.

“It is a summons to the Ministry for a hearing —”

“Summons! Summons? Who do you think you are,summoning my son anywhere?”

“I’m Head of the Magical Law Enforcement Squad,”said Ogden.

“And you think we’re scum, do you?” screamedGaunt, advancing on Ogden now, with a dirty yellow-nailed finger pointing at his chest. “Scum who’ll comerunning when the Ministry tells ’em to? Do you knowwho you’re talking to, you filthy little Mudblood, doyou?

“I was under the impression that I was speaking toMr. Gaunt,” said Ogden, looking wary, but standinghis ground.

Page | 231 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“That’s right!” roared Gaunt. For a moment, Harrythought Gaunt was making an obscene hand gesture,but then realized that he was showing Ogden theugly, black-stoned ring he was wearing on his middlefinger, waving it before Ogden’s eyes. “See this? Seethis? Know what it is? Know where it came from?Centuries it’s been in our family, that’s how far backwe go, and pure-blood all the way! Know how muchI’ve been offered for this, with the Peverell coat ofarms engraved on the stone?”

“I’ve really no idea,” said Ogden, blinking as the ringsailed within an inch of his nose, “and it’s quitebeside the point, Mr. Gaunt. Your son has committed

With a howl of rage, Gaunt ran toward his daughter.For a split second, Harry thought he was going tothrottle her as his hand flew to her throat; nextmoment, he was dragging her toward Ogden by a goldchain around her neck.

“See this?” he bellowed at Ogden, shaking a heavygold locket at him, while Merope spluttered andgasped for breath.

“I see it, I see it!” said Ogden hastily.

“Slytherin’sl” yelled Gaunt. “Salazar Slytherin’s! We’rehis last living descendants, what do you say to that,eh?”

“Mr. Gaunt, your daughter!” said Ogden in alarm, butGaunt had already released Merope; she staggeredaway from him, back to her corner, massaging herneck and gulping for air.

“So!” said Gaunt triumphantly, as though he had justproved a complicated point beyond all possible

Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

dispute. “Don’t you go talking to us as if we’re dirt onyour shoes! Generations of purebloods, wizards all —more than you can say, I don’t doubt!”

And he spat on the floor at Ogden’s feet. Morfincackled again. Merope, huddled beside the window,her head bowed and her face hidden by her lank hair,said nothing.

“Mr. Gaunt,” said Ogden doggedly, “I am afraid thatneither your ancestors nor mine have anything to dowith the matter in hand. I am here because of Morfin,Morfin and the Muggle he accosted late last night.

Our information” — he glanced down at his scroll ofparchment — “is that Morfin performed a jinx or hexon the said Muggle, causing him to erupt in highlypainful hives.”

Morfin giggled.

“Be quiet, boy,” snarled Gaunt in Parseltongue, andMorfin fell silent again.

“And so what if he did, then?” Gaunt said defiantly toOgden. “I expect you’ve wiped the Muggle’s filthy faceclean for him, and his memory to boot —”

“That’s hardly the point, is it, Mr. Gaunt?” saidOgden. “This was an unprovoked attack on adefenseless —”

“Ar, I had you marked out as a Muggle-lover themoment I saw you,” sneered Gaunt, and he spat onthe floor again.

“This discussion is getting us nowhere,” said Ogdenfirmly. “It is clear from your son’s attitude that hefeels no remorse for his actions.” He glanced down athis scroll of parchment again. “Morfin will attend a

Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

hearing on the fourteenth of September to answer thecharges of using magic in front of a Muggle andcausing harm and distress to that same Mugg —”

Ogden broke off. The jingling, clopping sounds ofhorses and loud, laughing voices were drifting inthrough the open window. Apparently the windinglane to the village passed very close to the copsewhere the house stood. Gaunt froze, listening, hiseyes wide. Morfin hissed and turned his face towardthe sounds, his expression hungry. Merope raised herhead. Her face, Harry saw, was starkly white.

“My God, what an eyesore!” rang out a girl’s voice, asclearly audible through the open window as if she hadstood in the room beside them. “Couldn’t your fatherhave that hovel cleared away, Tom?”

“It’s not ours,” said a young man’s voice. “Everythingon the other side of the valley belongs to us, but thatcottage belongs to an old tramp called Gaunt, and hischildren. The son’s quite mad, you should hear someof the stories they tell in the village —”

The girl laughed. The jingling, clopping noises weregrowing louder and louder. Morfin made to get out ofhis armchair.

“Keep your seat,” said his father warningly, inParseltongue.

“Tom,” said the girl’s voice again, now so close theywere clearly right beside the house, “I might be wrong— but has somebody nailed a snake to that door?”

“Good lord, you’re right!” said the man’s voice. “That’llbe the son, I told you he’s not right in the head. Don’tlook at it, Cecilia, darling.”

Page | 234 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The jingling and clopping sounds were now growingfainter again.

“ ‘Darling,’ ” whispered Morfin in Parseltongue,looking at his sister. “ ‘Darling,’ he called her. So hewouldn’t have you anyway.”

Merope was so white Harry felt sure she was going tofaint.

“What’s that?” said Gaunt sharply, also inParseltongue, looking from his son to his daughter.

“ What did you say, Morfin?”

“She likes looking at that Muggle,” said Morfin, avicious expression on his face as he stared at hissister, who now looked terrified. “Always in thegarden when he passes, peering through the hedge athim, isn’t she? And last night —”

Merope shook her head jerkily, imploringly, butMorfin went on ruthlessly, “Hanging out of thewindow waiting for him to ride home, wasn’t she?”

“Hanging out of the window to look at a Muggle?” saidGaunt quietly.

All three of the Gaunts seemed to have forgottenOgden, who was looking both bewildered and irritatedat this renewed outbreak of incomprehensible hissingand rasping.

“Is it true?” said Gaunt in a deadly voice, advancing astep or two toward the terrified girl. “My daughter —pure-blooded descendant of Salazar Slytherin —hankering after a filthy, dirt-veined Muggle?”

Merope shook her head frantically, pressing herselfinto the wall, apparently unable to speak.

Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But I got him, FatheA” cackled Morfin. “I got him ashe went by and he didn’t look so pretty with hives allover him, did he, Merope?”

“You disgusting little Squib, you filthy little bloodtraitoA.” roared Gaunt, losing control, and his handsclosed around his daughter’s throat.

Both Harry and Ogden yelled “No!” at the same time;Ogden raised his wand and cried, “Relashiol” Gauntwas thrown backward, away from his daughter; hetripped over a chair and fell flat on his back. With aroar of rage, Morfin leapt out of his chair and ran atOgden, brandishing his bloody knife and firing hexesindiscriminately from his wand.

Ogden ran for his life. Dumbledore indicated that theyought to follow and Harry obeyed, Merope’s screamsechoing in his ears.

Ogden hurtled up the path and erupted onto the mainlane, his arms over his head, where he collided withthe glossy chestnut horse ridden by a very handsome,dark-haired young man. Both he and the pretty girlriding beside him on a gray horse roared withlaughter at the sight of Ogden, who bounced off thehorse’s flank and set off again, his frock coat flying,covered from head to foot in dust, running pell-mellup the lane.

“I think that will do, Harry,” said Dumbledore. Hetook Harry by the elbow and tugged. Next moment,they were both soaring weightlessly throughdarkness, until they landed squarely on their feet,back in Dumbledore’s now twilit office.

“What happened to the girl in the cottage?” said Harryat once, as Dumbledore lit extra lamps with a flick ofhis wand. “Merope, or whatever her name was?”

Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, she survived,” said Dumbledore, reseatinghimself behind his desk and indicating that Harryshould sit down too. “Ogden Apparated back to theMinistry and returned with reinforcements withinfifteen minutes. Morfin and his father attempted tofight, but both were overpowered, removed from thecottage, and subsequently convicted by theWizengamot. Morfin, who already had a record ofMuggle attacks, was sentenced to three years inAzkaban. Marvolo, who had injured several Ministryemployees in addition to Ogden, received six months.”

“Marvolo?” Harry repeated wonderingly.

“That’s right,” said Dumbledore, smiling in approval.

“I am glad to see you’re keeping up.”

“That old man was — ?”

“Voldemort’s grandfather, yes,” said Dumbledore.“Marvolo, his son, Morfin, and his daughter, Merope,were the last of the Gaunts, a very ancient Wizardingfamily noted for a vein of instability and violence thatflourished through the generations due to their habitof marrying their own cousins. Lack of sense coupledwith a great liking for grandeur meant that the familygold was squandered several generations beforeMarvolo was born. He, as you saw, was left in squalorand poverty, with a very nasty temper, a fantasticamount of arrogance and pride, and a couple offamily heirlooms that he treasured just as much ashis son, and rather more than his daughter.”

“So Merope,” said Harry, leaning forward in his chairand staring at Dumbledore, “so Merope was ... Sir,does that mean she was ... Voldemort’s mother?”

Page | 237 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It does,” said Dumbledore. “And it so happens thatwe also had a glimpse of Voldemort’s father. I wonderwhether you noticed?”

“The Muggle Morfin attacked? The man on thehorse?”

“Very good indeed,” said Dumbledore, beaming. “Yes,that was Tom Riddle senior, the handsome Mugglewho used to go riding past the Gaunt cottage and forwhom Merope Gaunt cherished a secret, burningpassion.”

“And they ended up married?” Harry said in disbelief,unable to imagine two people less likely to fall in love.

“I think you are forgetting,” said Dumbledore, “thatMerope was a witch. I do not believe that her magicalpowers appeared to their best advantage when shewas being terrorized by her father. Once Marvolo andMorfin were safely in Azkaban, once she was aloneand free for the first time in her life, then, I am sure,she was able to give full rein to her abilities and toplot her escape from the desperate life she had led foreighteen years.

“Can you not think of any measure Merope couldhave taken to make Tom Riddle forget his Mugglecompanion, and fall in love with her instead?”

“The Imperius Curse?” Harry suggested. “Or a lovepotion?”

“Very good. Personally, I am inclined to think that sheused a love potion. I am sure it would have seemedmore romantic to her, and I do not think it wouldhave been very difficult, some hot day, when Riddlewas riding alone, to persuade him to take a drink ofwater. In any case, within a few months of the scenePage | 238 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

we have just witnessed, the village of Little Hangletonenjoyed a tremendous scandal. You can imagine thegossip it caused when the squire’s son ran off withthe tramp’s daughter, Merope.

“But the villagers’ shock was nothing to Marvolo’s. Hereturned from Azkaban, expecting to find hisdaughter dutifully awaiting his return with a hot mealready on his table. Instead, he found a clear inch ofdust and her note of farewell, explaining what shehad done.

“From all that I have been able to discover, he nevermentioned her name or existence from that timeforth. The shock of her desertion may havecontributed to his early death — or perhaps he hadsimply never learned to feed himself. Azkaban hadgreatly weakened Marvolo, and he did not live to seeMorfin return to the cottage.”

“And Merope? She ... she died, didn’t she? Wasn’tVoldemort brought up in an orphanage?”

“Yes, indeed,” said Dumbledore. “We must do acertain amount of guessing here, although I do notthink it is difficult to deduce what happened. You see,within a few months of their runaway marriage, TomRiddle reappeared at the manor house in LittleHangleton without his wife. The rumor flew aroundthe neighborhood that he was talking of being‘hoodwinked’ and ‘taken in.’ What he meant, I amsure, is that he had been under an enchantment thathad now lifted, though I daresay he did not dare usethose precise words for fear of being thought insane.When they heard what he was saying, however, thevillagers guessed that Merope had lied to Tom Riddle,pretending that she was going to have his baby, andthat he had married her for this reason.”

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But she did have his baby.”

“But not until a year after they were married. TomRiddle left her while she was still pregnant.”

“What went wrong?” asked Harry. “Why did the lovepotion stop working?”

“Again, this is guesswork,” said Dumbledore, “but Ibelieve that Merope, who was deeply in love with herhusband, could not bear to continue enslaving him bymagical means. I believe that she made the choice tostop giving him the potion. Perhaps, besotted as shewas, she had convinced herself that he would by nowhave fallen in love with her in return. Perhaps shethought he would stay for the baby’s sake. If so, shewas wrong on both counts. He left her, never saw heragain, and never troubled to discover what became ofhis son.”

The sky outside was inky black and the lamps inDumbledore’s office seemed to glow more brightlythan before.

“I think that will do for tonight, Harry,” saidDumbledore after a moment or two.

“Yes, sir,” said Harry.

He got to his feet, but did not leave.

“Sir ... is it important to know all this aboutVoldemort’s past?”

“Very important, I think,” said Dumbledore.

“And it ... it’s got something to do with the prophecy?”

“It has everything to do with the prophecy.”

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Right,” said Harry, a little confused, but reassuredall the same.

He turned to go, then another question occurred tohim, and he turned back again. “Sir, am I allowed totell Ron and Hermione everything you’ve told me?”

Dumbledore considered him for a moment, then said,“Yes, I think Mr. Weasley and Miss Granger haveproved themselves trustworthy. But Harry, I am goingto ask you to ask them not to repeat any of this toanybody else. It would not be a good idea if word gotaround how much I know, or suspect, about LordVoldemort’s secrets.”

“No, sir, I’ll make sure it’s just Ron and Hermione.Good night.”

He turned away again, and was almost at the doorwhen he saw it. Sitting on one of the little spindle-legged tables that supported so many frail-lookingsilver instruments, was an ugly gold ring set with alarge, cracked, black stone.

“Sir,” said Harry, staring at it. “That ring —”

“Yes?” said Dumbledore.

“You were wearing it when we visited ProfessorSlughorn that night.”

“So I was,” Dumbledore agreed.

“But isn’t it ... sir, isn’t it the same ring MarvoloGaunt showed Ogden?”

Dumbledore bowed his head. “The very same.”

“But how come — ? Have you always had it?”

Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No, I acquired it very recently,” said Dumbledore. “Afew days before I came to fetch you from your auntand uncle’s, in fact.”

“That would be around the time you injured yourhand, then, sir?”

“Around that time, yes, Harry.”

Harry hesitated. Dumbledore was smiling.

“Sir, how exactly — ?”

“Too late, Harry! You shall hear the story anothertime. Good night.”

“Good night, sir.”

Page | 242 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





HERMIONE’S HELPING HAND

As Hermione had predicted, the sixth years’ freeperiods were not the hours of blissful relaxation Ronhad anticipated, but times in which to attempt tokeep up with the vast amount of homework they werebeing set. Not only were they studying as though theyhad exams every day, but the lessons themselves hadbecome more demanding than ever before. Harrybarely understood half of what Professor McGonagallsaid to them these days; even Hermione had had toask her to repeat instructions once or twice.Incredibly, and to Hermione’s increasing resentment,Harry’s best subject had suddenly become Potions,thanks to the Half-Blood Prince.

Nonverbal spells were now expected, not only inDefense Against the Dark Arts, but in Charms andTransfiguration too. Harry frequently looked over athis classmates in the common room or at mealtimesto see them purple in the face and straining asthough they had overdosed on U-No-Poo; but he knewthat they were really struggling to make spells work

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

without saying incantations aloud. It was a relief toget outside into the greenhouses; they were dealingwith more dangerous plants than ever in Herbology,but at least they were still allowed to swear loudly ifthe Venomous Tentacula seized them unexpectedlyfrom behind.

One result of their enormous workload and the frantichours of practicing nonverbal spells was that Harry,Ron, and Hermione had so far been unable to findtime to go and visit Hagrid. He had stopped coming tomeals at the staff table, an ominous sign, and on thefew occasions when they had passed him in thecorridors or out in the grounds, he had mysteriouslyfailed to notice them or hear their greetings.

“We’ve got to go and explain,” said Hermione, lookingup at Hagrid’s huge empty chair at the staff table thefollowing Saturday at breakfast.

“We’ve got Quidditch tryouts this morning!” said Ron.“And we’re supposed to be practicing that AguamentiCharm from Flitwick! Anyway, explain what? How arewe going to tell him we hated his stupid subject?”

“We didn’t hate it!” said Hermione.

“Speak for yourself, I haven’t forgotten the skrewts,”said Ron darkly. “And I’m telling you now, we’ve had anarrow escape. You didn’t hear him going on abouthis gormless brother — we’d have been teachingGrawp how to tie his shoelaces if we’d stayed.”

“I hate not talking to Hagrid,” said Hermione, lookingupset.

“Well go down after Quidditch,” Harry assured her.

He too was missing Hagrid, although like Ron hethought that they were better off without Grawp in

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

their lives. “But trials might take all morning, thenumber of people who have applied.” He felt slightlynervous at confronting the first hurdle of hisCaptaincy. “I dunno why the team’s this popular all ofa sudden.”

“Oh, come on, Harry,” said Hermione, suddenlyimpatient. “It’s not Quidditch that’s popular, it’s you!You’ve never been more interesting, and frankly,you’ve never been more fanciable.”

Ron gagged on a large piece of kipper. Hermionespared him one look of disdain before turning back toHarry.

“Everyone knows you’ve been telling the truth now,don’t they? The whole Wizarding world has had toadmit that you were right about Voldemort being backand that you really have fought him twice in the lasttwo years and escaped both times. And now they’recalling you ‘the Chosen One’ — well, come on, can’tyou see why people are fascinated by you?”

Harry was finding the Great Hall very hot all of asudden, even though the ceiling still looked cold andrainy.

“And you’ve been through all that persecution fromthe Ministry when they were trying to make out youwere unstable and a liar. You can still see the markson the back of your hand where that evil womanmade you write with your own blood, but you stuck toyour story anyway. ...”

“You can still see where those brains got hold of me inthe Ministry, look,” said Ron, shaking back hissleeves.

Page | 245 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“And it doesn’t hurt that you’ve grown about a footover the summer either,” Hermione finished, ignoringRon.

“I’m tall,” said Ron inconsequentially.

The post owls arrived, swooping down through rain-flecked windows, scattering everyone with droplets ofwater. Most people were receiving more post thanusual; anxious parents were keen to hear from theirchildren and to reassure them, in turn, that all waswell at home. Harry had received no mail since thestart of term; his only regular correspondent was nowdead and although he had hoped that Lupin mightwrite occasionally, he had so far been disappointed.He was very surprised, therefore, to see the snowywhite Hedwig circling amongst all the brown and grayowls. She landed in front of him carrying a large,square package. A moment later, an identical packagelanded in front of Ron, crushing beneath it hisminuscule and exhausted owl, Pigwidgeon.

“Ha!” said Harry, unwrapping the parcel to reveal anew copy of Advanced Potion-Making, fresh fromFlourish and Blotts.

“Oh good,” said Hermione, delighted. “Now you cangive that graffitied copy back.”

“Are you mad?” said Harry. “I’m keeping it! Look, I’vethought it out —”

He pulled the old copy of Advanced Potion-Making outof his bag and tapped the cover with his wand,muttering, “Diffindol” The cover fell off. He did thesame thing with the brand-new book (Hermionelooked scandalized). He then swapped the covers,tapped each, and said, “Reparo\”

Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There sat the Prince’s copy, disguised as a new book,and there sat the fresh copy from Flourish and Blotts,looking thoroughly secondhand.

“I’ll give Slughorn back the new one, he can’tcomplain, it cost nine Galleons.”

Hermione pressed her lips together, looking angryand disapproving, but was distracted by a third owllanding in front of her carrying that day’s copy of theDaily Prophet. She unfolded it hastily and scannedthe front page.

“Anyone we know dead?” asked Ron in a determinedlycasual voice; he posed the same question every timeHermione opened her paper.

“No, but there have been more dementor attacks,”said Hermione. “And an arrest.”

“Excellent, who?” said Harry, thinking of BellatrixLestrange.

“Stan Shunpike,” said Hermione.

“What?” said Harry, startled.

“ ‘Stanley Shunpike, conductor on the popularWizarding conveyance the Knight Bus, has beenarrested on suspicion of Death Eater activity. Mr.Shunpike, 21, was taken into custody late last nightafter a raid on his Clapham home ...’ ”

“Stan Shunpike, a Death Eater?” said Harry,remembering the spotty youth he had first met threeyears before. “No way!”

“He might have been put under the Imperius Curse,”said Ron reasonably. “You never can tell.”

Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It doesn’t look like it,” said Hermione, who was stillreading. “It says here he was arrested after he wasoverheard talking about the Death Eaters’ secretplans in a pub.” She looked up with a troubledexpression on her face. “If he was under the ImperiusCurse, he’d hardly stand around gossiping abouttheir plans, would he?”

“It sounds like he was trying to make out he knewmore than he did,” said Ron. “Isn’t he the one whoclaimed he was going to become Minister of Magicwhen he was trying to chat up those veela?”

“Yeah, that’s him,” said Harry. “I dunno what they’replaying at, taking Stan seriously.”

“They probably want to look as though they’re doingsomething,” said Hermione, frowning. “People areterrified — you know the Patil twins’ parents wantthem to go home? And Eloise Midgen has alreadybeen withdrawn. Her father picked her up last night.”

“What!” said Ron, goggling at Hermione. “ButHogwarts is safer than their homes, bound to be!We’ve got Aurors, and all those extra protective spells,and we’ve got Dumbledore!”

“I don’t think we’ve got him all the time,” saidHermione very quietly, glancing toward the staff tableover the top of the Prophet “Haven’t you noticed? Hisseat’s been empty as often as Hagrid’s this pastweek.”

Harry and Ron looked up at the staff table. Theheadmaster’s chair was indeed empty. Now Harrycame to think of it, he had not seen Dumbledoresince their private lesson a week ago.

Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I think he’s left the school to do something with theOrder,” said Hermione in a low voice. “I mean ... it’sall looking serious, isn’t it?

Harry and Ron did not answer, but Harry knew thatthey were all thinking the same thing. There had beena horrible incident the day before, when HannahAbbott had been taken out of Herbology to be told hermother had been found dead. They had not seenHannah since.

When they left the Gryffindor table five minutes laterto head down to the Quidditch pitch, they passedLavender Brown and Parvati Patil. Remembering whatHermione had said about the Patil twins’ parentswanting them to leave Hogwarts, Harry wasunsurprised to see that the two best friends werewhispering together, looking distressed. What didsurprise him was that when Ron drew level withthem, Parvati suddenly nudged Lavender, who lookedaround and gave Ron a wide smile. Ron blinked ather, then returned the smile uncertainly. His walkinstantly became something more like a strut. Harryresisted the temptation to laugh, remembering thatRon had refrained from doing so after Malfoy hadbroken Harry’s nose; Hermione, however, looked coldand distant all the way down to the stadium throughthe cool, misty drizzle, and departed to find a place inthe stands without wishing Ron good luck.

As Harry had expected, the trials took most of themorning. Half of Gryffindor House seemed to haveturned up, from first years who were nervouslyclutching a selection of the dreadful old schoolbrooms, to seventh years who towered over the rest,looking coolly intimidating. The latter included alarge, wiry-haired boy Harry recognized immediatelyfrom the Hogwarts Express.

Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“We met on the train, in old Sluggy’s compartment,”he said confidently, stepping out of the crowd toshake Harry’s hand. “Cormac McLaggen, Keeper.”

“You didn’t try out last year, did you?” asked Harry,taking note of the breadth of McLaggen and thinkingthat he would probably block all three goal hoopswithout even moving.

“I was in the hospital wing when they held the trials,”said McLaggen, with something of a swagger. “Ate apound of doxy eggs for a bet.”

“Right,” said Harry. “Well ... if you wait over there ...”

He pointed over to the edge of the pitch, close towhere Hermione was sitting. He thought he saw aflicker of annoyance pass over McLaggen’s face andwondered whether McLaggen expected preferentialtreatment because they were both “old Sluggy’s”favorites.

Harry decided to start with a basic test, asking allapplicants for the team to divide into groups of tenand fly once around the pitch. This was a gooddecision: The first ten was made up of first years andit could not have been plainer that they had hardlyever flown before. Only one boy managed to remainairborne for more than a few seconds, and he was sosurprised he promptly crashed into one of the goalposts.

The second group was comprised of ten of the silliestgirls Harry had ever encountered, who, when he blewhis whistle, merely fell about giggling and clutchingone another. Romilda Vane was amongst them. Whenhe told them to leave the pitch, they did so quitecheerfully and went to sit in the stands to heckleeveryone else.

Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The third group had a pileup halfway around thepitch. Most of the fourth group had come withoutbroomsticks. The fifth group were Hufflepuffs.

“If there’s anyone else here who’s not fromGryffindor,” roared Harry, who was starting to getseriously annoyed, “leave now, please!”

There was a pause, then a couple of little Ravenclawswent sprinting off the pitch, snorting with laughter.

After two hours, many complaints, and severaltantrums, one involving a crashed Comet Two Sixtyand several broken teeth, Harry had found himselfthree Chasers: Katie Bell, returned to the team afteran excellent trial; a new find called Demelza Robins,who was particularly good at dodging Bludgers; andGinny Weasley, who had outflown all the competitionand scored seventeen goals to boot. Pleased thoughhe was with his choices, Harry had also shoutedhimself hoarse at the many complainers and was nowenduring a similar battle with the rejected Beaters.

“That’s my final decision and if you don’t get out ofthe way for the Keepers I’ll hex you,” he bellowed.

Neither of his chosen Beaters had the old brilliance ofFred and George, but he was still reasonably pleasedwith them: Jimmy Peakes, a short but broad-chestedthird-year boy who had managed to raise a lump thesize of an egg on the back of Harry’s head with aferociously hit Bludger, and Ritchie Coote, who lookedweedy but aimed well. They now joined Katie,

Demelza, and Ginny in the stands to watch theselection of their last team member.

Harry had deliberately left the trial of the Keepersuntil last, hoping for an emptier stadium and lesspressure on all concerned. Unfortunately, however, all

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

the rejected players and a number of people who hadcome down to watch after a lengthy breakfast hadjoined the crowd by now, so that it was larger thanever. As each Keeper flew up to the goal hoops, thecrowd roared and jeered in equal measure. Harryglanced over at Ron, who had always had a problemwith nerves; Harry had hoped that winning their finalmatch last term might have cured it, but apparentlynot: Ron was a delicate shade of green.

None of the first five applicants saved more than twogoals apiece. To Harry’s great disappointment,

Cormac McLaggen saved four penalties out of five. Onthe last one, however, he shot off in completely thewrong direction; the crowd laughed and booed andMcLaggen returned to the ground grinding his teeth.

Ron looked ready to pass out as he mounted hisCleansweep Eleven. “Good luck!” cried a voice fromthe stands. Harry looked around, expecting to seeHermione, but it was Lavender Brown. He would havequite liked to have hidden his face in his hands, asshe did a moment later, but thought that as theCaptain he ought to show slightly more grit, and soturned to watch Ron do his trial.

Yet he need not have worried: Ron saved one, two,three, four, five penalties in a row. Delighted, andresisting joining in the cheers of the crowd withdifficulty, Harry turned to McLaggen to tell him that,most unfortunately, Ron had beaten him, only to findMcLaggen’s red face inches from his own. He steppedback hastily.

“His sister didn’t really try,” said McLaggenmenacingly. There was a vein pulsing in his templelike the one Harry had often admired in UncleVernon’s. “She gave him an easy save.”

Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Rubbish,” said Harry coldly. “That was the one henearly missed.”

McLaggen took a step nearer Harry, who stood hisground this time.

“Give me another go.”

“No,” said Harry. “You’ve had your go. You saved four.Ron saved five. Ron’s Keeper, he won it fair andsquare. Get out of my way.”

He thought for a moment that McLaggen might punchhim, but he contented himself with an ugly grimaceand stormed away, growling what sounded likethreats to thin air.

Harry turned around to find his new team beaming athim.

“Well done,” he croaked. “You flew really well —”

“You did brilliantly, Ron!”

This time it really was Hermione running towardthem from the stands; Harry saw Lavender walkingoff the pitch, arm in arm with Parvati, a rathergrumpy expression on her face. Ron looked extremelypleased with himself and even taller than usual as hegrinned at the team and at Hermione.

After fixing the time of their first full practice for thefollowing Thursday, Harry, Ron, and Hermione badegood-bye to the rest of the team and headed offtoward Hagrid’s. A watery sun was trying to breakthrough the clouds now and it had stopped drizzlingat last. Harry felt extremely hungry; he hoped therewould be something to eat at Hagrid’s.

Page | 253 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I thought I was going to miss that fourth penalty,”Ron was saying happily. “Tricky shot from Demelza,did you see, had a bit of spin on it —”

“Yes, yes, you were magnificent,” said Hermione,looking amused.

“I was better than that McLaggen anyway,” said Ronin a highly satisfied voice. “Did you see himlumbering off in the wrong direction on his fifth?Looked like he’d been Confunded. ...”

To Harry’s surprise, Hermione turned a very deepshade of pink at these words. Ron noticed nothing; hewas too busy describing each of his other penalties inloving detail.

The great gray hippogriff, Buckbeak, was tethered infront of Hagrid’s cabin. He clicked his razor-sharpbeak at their approach and turned his huge headtoward them.

“Oh dear,” said Hermione nervously. “He’s still a bitscary, isn’t he?”

“Come off it, you’ve ridden him, haven’t you?” saidRon.

Harry stepped forward and bowed low to thehippogriff without breaking eye contact or blinking.After a few seconds, Buckbeak sank into a bow too.

“How are you?” Harry asked him in a low voice,moving forward to stroke the feathery head. “Missinghim? But you’re okay here with Hagrid, aren’t you?”

“Oi!” said a loud voice.

Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid had come striding around the corner of hiscabin wearing a large flowery apron and carrying asack of potatoes. His enormous boarhound, Fang,was at his heels; Fang gave a booming bark andbounded forward.

“Git away from him! Hell have yer fingers — oh. It’syeh lot.”

Fang was jumping up at Hermione and Ron,attempting to lick their ears. Hagrid stood and lookedat them all for a split second, then turned and strodeinto his cabin, slamming the door behind him.

“Oh dear!” said Hermione, looking stricken.

“Don’t worry about it,” said Harry grimly. He walkedover to the door and knocked loudly.

“Hagrid! Open up, we want to talk to you!”

There was no sound from within.

“If you don’t open the door, we’ll blast it open!” Harrysaid, pulling out his wand.

“Harry!” said Hermione, sounding shocked. “You can’tpossibly —”

“Yeah, I can!” said Harry. “Stand back —”

But before he could say anything else, the door flewopen again as Harry had known it would, and therestood Hagrid, glowering down at him and looking,despite the flowery apron, positively alarming.

“I’m a teacher!” he roared at Harry. “A teacher, Potter!How dare yeh threaten ter break down my door!”

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm sorry, sir,” said Harry, emphasizing the last wordas he stowed his wand inside his robes.

Hagrid looked stunned. “Since when have yeh calledme ‘sir’?”

“Since when have you called me ‘Potter’?”

“Oh, very clever,” growled Hagrid. “Very amusin’.That’s me outsmarted, innit? All righ’, come in then,yeh ungrateful little ...”

Mumbling darkly, he stood back to let them pass.Hermione scurried in after Harry, looking ratherfrightened.

“Well?” said Hagrid grumpily, as Harry, Ron, andHermione sat down around his enormous woodentable, Fang laying his head immediately upon Harry’sknee and drooling all over his robes. “What’s this?Feelin’ sorry for me? Reckon I’m lonely or summat?”

“No,” said Harry at once. “We wanted to see you.”

“We’ve missed you!” said Hermione tremulously.

“Missed me, have yeh?” snorted Hagrid. “Yeah. Righ’.”

He stomped around, brewing up tea in his enormouscopper kettle, muttering all the while. Finally heslammed down three bucket-sized mugs ofmahogany-brown tea in front of them and a plate ofhis rock cakes. Harry was hungry enough even forHagrid’s cooking, and took one at once.

“Hagrid,” said Hermione timidly, when he joined themat the table and started peeling his potatoes with abrutality that suggested that each tuber had done

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

him a great personal wrong, “we really wanted tocarry on with Care of Magical Creatures, you know.”

Hagrid gave another great snort. Harry rather thoughtsome bogeys landed on the potatoes, and wasinwardly thankful that they were not staying fordinner.

“We did!” said Hermione. “But none of us could fit itinto our schedules!”

“Yeah. Righ’,” said Hagrid again.

There was a funny squelching sound and they alllooked around: Hermione let out a tiny shriek, andRon leapt out of his seat and hurried around the tableaway from the large barrel standing in the corner thatthey had only just noticed. It was full of what lookedlike foot-long maggots, slimy, white, and writhing.

“What are they, Hagrid?” asked Harry, trying to soundinterested rather than revolted, but putting down hisrock cake all the same.

“Jus’ giant grubs,” said Hagrid.

“And they grow into ... ?” said Ron, lookingapprehensive.

“They won’ grow inter nuthin’,” said Hagrid. “I got ’emter feed ter Aragog.”

And without warning, he burst into tears.

“Hagrid!” cried Hermione, leaping up, hurryingaround the table the long way to avoid the barrel ofmaggots, and putting an arm around his shakingshoulders. “What is it?”

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It’s ... him ...” gulped Hagrid, his beetle-black eyesstreaming as he mopped his face with his apron. “It’s... Aragog. ... I think he’s dyin’. ... He got ill over thesummer an’ he’s not gettin’ better. ... I don’ knowwhat I’ll do if he ... if he ... We’ve bin tergether solong. ...”

Hermione patted Hagrid’s shoulder, looking at acomplete loss for anything to say. Harry knew howshe felt. He had known Hagrid to present a viciousbaby dragon with a teddy bear, seen him croon overgiant scorpions with suckers and stingers, attempt toreason with his brutal giant of a half-brother, but thiswas perhaps the most incomprehensible of all hismonster fancies: the gigantic talking spider, Aragog,who dwelled deep in the Forbidden Forest and whichhe and Ron had only narrowly escaped four yearspreviously.

“Is there — is there anything we can do?” Hermioneasked, ignoring Ron’s frantic grimaces and head-shakings.

“I don’ think there is, Hermione,” choked Hagrid,attempting to stem the flood of his tears. “See, therest o’ the tribe ... Aragog’s family ... they’re gettin’ abit funny now he’s ill ... bit restive ...”

“Yeah, I think we saw a bit of that side of them,” saidRon in an undertone.

"... I don’ reckon it’d be safe fer anyone but me ter gonear the colony at the mo’,” Hagrid finished, blowinghis nose hard on his apron and looking up. “Butthanks fer offerin’, Hermione. ... It means a lot. ...”

After that, the atmosphere lightened considerably, foralthough neither Harry nor Ron had shown anyinclination to go and feed giant grubs to a murderous,

Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

gargantuan spider, Hagrid seemed to take it forgranted that they would have liked to have done andbecame his usual self once more.

“Ar, I always knew yeh’d find it hard ter squeeze meinter yer timetables,” he said gruffly, pouring themmore tea. “Even if yeh applied fer Time-Turners —”

“We couldn’t have done,” said Hermione. “Wesmashed the entire stock of Ministry Time-Turnerswhen we were there last summer. It was in the DailyProphet.”

“Ar, well then,” said Hagrid. “There’s no way yehcould’ve done it. ... I’m sorry I’ve bin — yeh know —I’ve jus’ bin worried abou’ Aragog ... an’ I did wonderwhether, if Professor Grubbly-Plank had bin teachin’yeh

At which all three of them stated categorically anduntruthfully that Professor Grubbly-Plank, who hadsubstituted for Hagrid a few times, was a dreadfulteacher, with the result that by the time Hagrid wavedthem off the premises at dusk, he looked quitecheerful.

“I’m starving,” said Harry, once the door had closedbehind them and they were hurrying through thedark and deserted grounds; he had abandoned therock cake after an ominous cracking noise from oneof his back teeth. “And I’ve got that detention withSnape tonight, I haven’t got much time for dinner. ...”

As they came into the castle they spotted CormacMcLaggen entering the Great Hall. It took him twoattempts to get through the doors; he ricocheted offthe frame on the first attempt. Ron merely guffawedgloatingly and strode off into the Hall after him, butHarry caught Hermione’s arm and held her back.

Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What?” said Hermione defensively.

“If you ask me,” said Harry quietly, “McLaggen lookslike he was Confunded this morning. And he wasstanding right in front of where you were sitting.”

Hermione blushed.

“Oh, all right then, I did it,” she whispered. “But youshould have heard the way he was talking about Ronand Ginny! Anyway, he’s got a nasty temper, you sawhow he reacted when he didn’t get in — you wouldn’thave wanted someone like that on the team.”

“No,” said Harry. “No, I suppose that’s true. Butwasn’t that dishonest, Hermione? I mean, you’re aprefect, aren’t you?”

“Oh, be quiet,” she snapped, as he smirked.

“What are you two doing?” demanded Ron,reappearing in the doorway to the Great Hall andlooking suspicious.

“Nothing,” said Harry and Hermione together, andthey hurried after Ron. The smell of roast beef madeHarry’s stomach ache with hunger, but they hadbarely taken three steps toward the Gryffindor tablewhen Professor Slughorn appeared in front of them,blocking their path.

“Harry, Harry, just the man I was hoping to see!” heboomed genially, twiddling the ends of his walrusmustache and puffing out his enormous belly. “I washoping to catch you before dinner! What do you say toa spot of supper tonight in my rooms instead? We’rehaving a little party, just a few rising stars, I’ve gotMcLaggen coming and Zabini, the charming MelindaBobbin — I don’t know whether you know her? HerPage | 260 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

family owns a large chain of apothecaries — and, ofcourse, I hope very much that Miss Granger will favorme by coming too.”

Slughorn made Hermione a little bow as he finishedspeaking. It was as though Ron was not present;Slughorn did not so much as look at him.

“I can’t come, Professor,” said Harry at once. “I’ve gota detention with Professor Snape.”

“Oh dear!” said Slughorn, his face falling comically.“Dear, dear, I was counting on you, Harry! Well, now,I’ll just have to have a word with Severus and explainthe situation. I’m sure I’ll be able to persuade him topostpone your detention. Yes, I’ll see you both later!”

He bustled away out of the Hall.

“He’s got no chance of persuading Snape,” said Harry,the moment Slughorn was out of earshot. “Thisdetention’s already been postponed once; Snape did itfor Dumbledore, but he won’t do it for anyone else.”

“Oh, I wish you could come, I don’t want to go on myown!” said Hermione anxiously; Harry knew that shewas thinking about McLaggen.

“I doubt you’ll be alone, Ginny’ll probably be invited,”snapped Ron, who did not seem to have taken kindlyto being ignored by Slughorn.

After dinner they made their way back to GryffindorTower. The common room was very crowded, as mostpeople had finished dinner by now, but they managedto find a free table and sat down; Ron, who had beenin a bad mood ever since the encounter withSlughorn, folded his arms and frowned at the ceiling.Hermione reached out for a copy of the EveningPage | 261 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Prophet, which somebody had left abandoned on achair.

“Anything new?” said Harry.

“Not really ...” Hermione had opened the newspaperand was scanning the inside pages. “Oh, look, yourdad’s in here, Ron — he’s all right!” she addedquickly, for Ron had looked around in alarm. “It justsays he’s been to visit the Malfoys’ house. ‘Thissecond search of the Death Eater’s residence does notseem to have yielded any results. Arthur Weasley ofthe Office for the Detection and Confiscation ofCounterfeit Defensive Spells and Protective Objectssaid that his team had been acting upon a confidentialtip-off’”

“Yeah, mine!” said Harry. “I told him at King’s Crossabout Malfoy and that thing he was trying to getBorgin to fix! Well, if it’s not at their house, he musthave brought whatever it is to Hogwarts with him —”

“But how can he have done, Harry?” said Hermione,putting down the newspaper with a surprised look.“We were all searched when we arrived, weren’t we?”

“Were you?” said Harry, taken aback. “I wasn’t!”

“Oh no, of course you weren’t, I forgot you were late.

... Well, Filch ran over all of us with Secrecy Sensorswhen we got into the entrance hall. Any Dark objectwould have been found, I know for a fact Crabbe hada shrunken head confiscated. So you see, Malfoy can’thave brought in anything dangerous!”

Momentarily stymied, Harry watched Ginny Weasleyplaying with Arnold the Pygmy Puff for a while beforeseeing a way around this objection.

Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Someone’s sent it to him by owl, then,” he said. “Hismother or someone.”

“All the owls are being checked too,” said Hermione.“Filch told us so when he was jabbing those SecrecySensors everywhere he could reach.”

Really stumped this time, Harry found nothing else tosay. There did not seem to be any way Malfoy couldhave brought a dangerous or Dark object into theschool. He looked hopefully at Ron, who was sittingwith his arms folded, staring over at Lavender Brown.

“Can you think of any way Malfoy — ?”

“Oh, drop it, Harry,” said Ron.

“Listen, it’s not my fault Slughorn invited Hermioneand me to his stupid party, neither of us wanted togo, you know!” said Harry, firing up.

“Well, as I’m not invited to any parties,” said Ron,getting to his feet again, “I think I’ll go to bed.”

He stomped off toward the door to the boys’dormitories, leaving Harry and Hermione staring afterhim.

“Harry?” said the new Chaser, Demelza Robins,appearing suddenly at his shoulder. “I’ve got amessage for you.”

“From Professor Slughorn?” asked Harry, sitting uphopefully.

“No ... from Professor Snape,” said Demelza. Harry’sheart sank. “He says you’re to come to his office athalf past eight tonight to do your detention — er — nomatter how many party invitations you’ve received.

Page | 263 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

And he wanted you to know you’ll be sorting outrotten flobberworms from good ones, to use in Potionsand — and he says there’s no need to bring protectivegloves.”

“Right,” said Harry grimly. “Thanks a lot, Demelza.”

Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





SILVER AND OPALS

Where was Dumbledore, and what was he doing?Harry caught sight of the headmaster only twice overthe next few weeks. He rarely appeared at mealsanymore, and Harry was sure Hermione was right inthinking that he was leaving the school for days at atime. Had Dumbledore forgotten the lessons he wassupposed to be giving Harry? Dumbledore had saidthat the lessons were leading to something to do withthe prophecy; Harry had felt bolstered, comforted,and now he felt slightly abandoned.

Halfway through October came their first trip of theterm to Hogsmeade. Harry had wondered whetherthese trips would still be allowed, given theincreasingly tight security measures around theschool, but was pleased to know that they were goingahead; it was always good to get out of the castlegrounds for a few hours.

Harry woke early on the morning of the trip, whichwas proving stormy, and whiled away the time until

Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

breakfast by reading his copy of Advanced Potion-Making. He did not usually lie in bed reading histextbooks; that sort of behavior, as Ron rightly said,was indecent in anybody except Hermione, who wassimply weird that way. Harry felt, however, that theHalf-Blood Prince’s copy of Advanced Potion-Makinghardly qualified as a textbook. The more Harry poredover the book, the more he realized how much was inthere, not only the handy hints and shortcuts onpotions that were earning him such a glowingreputation with Slughorn, but also the imaginativelittle jinxes and hexes scribbled in the margins, whichHarry was sure, judging by the crossings-out andrevisions, that the Prince had invented himself.

Harry had already attempted a few of the Prince’s self-invented spells. There had been a hex that causedtoenails to grow alarmingly fast (he had tried this onCrabbe in the corridor, with very entertaining results);a jinx that glued the tongue to the roof of the mouth(which he had twice used, to general applause, on anunsuspecting Argus Filch); and, perhaps most usefulof all, Muffliato, a spell that filled the ears of anyonenearby with an unidentifiable buzzing, so that lengthyconversations could be held in class without beingoverheard. The only person who did not find thesecharms amusing was Hermione, who maintained arigidly disapproving expression throughout andrefused to talk at all if Harry had used the Muffliatospell on anyone in the vicinity.

Sitting up in bed, Harry turned the book sideways soas to examine more closely the scribbled instructionsfor a spell that seemed to have caused the Princesome trouble. There were many crossings-out andalterations, but finally, crammed into a corner of thepage, the scribble:

Levicorpus (nvbl)

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

While the wind and sleet pounded relentlessly on thewindows, and Neville snored loudly, Harry stared atthe letters in brackets. Nvbl ... that had to mean“nonverbal.” Harry rather doubted he would be ableto bring off this particular spell; he was still havingdifficulty with nonverbal spells, something Snape hadbeen quick to comment on in every D.A.D.A. class. Onthe other hand, the Prince had proved a much moreeffective teacher than Snape so far.

Pointing his wand at nothing in particular, he gave itan upward flick and said Levicorpusl inside his head.

“ Aaaaaaaargh! ”

There was a flash of light and the room was full ofvoices: Everyone had woken up as Ron had let out ayell. Harry sent Advanced Potion-Making flying inpanic; Ron was dangling upside down in midair asthough an invisible hook had hoisted him up by theankle.

“Sorry!” yelled Harry, as Dean and Seamus roaredwith laughter, and Neville picked himself up from thefloor, having fallen out of bed. “Hang on — I’ll let youdown —”

He groped for the potion book and riffled through it ina panic, trying to find the right page; at last helocated it and deciphered one cramped wordunderneath the spell: Praying that this was thecounter-jinx, Harry thought Liberacorpus\ with all hismight.

There was another flash of light, and Ron fell in aheap onto his mattress.

“Sorry,” repeated Harry weakly, while Dean andSeamus continued to roar with laughter.

Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Tomorrow,” said Ron in a muffled voice, “I’d ratheryou set the alarm clock.”

By the time they had got dressed, padding themselvesout with several of Mrs. Weasley’s hand-knittedsweaters and carrying cloaks, scarves, and gloves,Ron’s shock had subsided and he had decided thatHarry’s new spell was highly amusing; so amusing, infact, that he lost no time in regaling Hermione withthe story as they sat down for breakfast.

"... and then there was another flash of light and Ilanded on the bed again!” Ron grinned, helpinghimself to sausages.

Hermione had not cracked a smile during thisanecdote, and now turned an expression of wintrydisapproval upon Harry.

“Was this spell, by any chance, another one from thatpotion book of yours?” she asked.

Harry frowned at her.

“Always jump to the worst conclusion, don’t you?”“Was it?”

“Well ... yeah, it was, but so what?”

“So you just decided to try out an unknown,handwritten incantation and see what wouldhappen?”

“Why does it matter if it’s handwritten?” said Harry,preferring not to answer the rest of the question.

“Because it’s probably not Ministry of Magic-approved,” said Hermione. “And also,” she added, as

Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry and Ron rolled their eyes, “because I’m startingto think this Prince character was a bit dodgy.”

Both Harry and Ron shouted her down at once.

“It was a laugh!” said Ron, upending a ketchup bottleover his sausages. “Just a laugh, Hermione, that’sall!”

“Dangling people upside down by the ankle?” saidHermione. “Who puts their time and energy intomaking up spells like that?”

“Fred and George,” said Ron, shrugging, “it’s theirkind of thing. And, er —”

“My dad,” said Harry. He had only just remembered.

“What?” said Ron and Hermione together.

“My dad used this spell,” said Harry. “I — Lupin toldme.”

This last part was not true; in fact, Harry had seenhis father use the spell on Snape, but he had nevertold Ron and Hermione about that particularexcursion into the Pensieve. Now, however, awonderful possibility occurred to him. Could the Half-Blood Prince possibly be — ?

“Maybe your dad did use it, Harry,” said Hermione,“but he’s not the only one. We’ve seen a whole bunchof people use it, in case you’ve forgotten. Danglingpeople in the air. Making them float along, asleep,helpless.”

Harry stared at her. With a sinking feeling, he tooremembered the behavior of the Death Eaters at theQuidditch World Cup. Ron came to his aid.

Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“That was different,” he said robustly. “They wereabusing it. Harry and his dad were just having alaugh. You don’t like the Prince, Hermione,” he added,pointing a sausage at her sternly, “because he’s betterthan you at Potions —”

“It’s got nothing to do with that!” said Hermione, hercheeks reddening. “I just think it’s very irresponsibleto start performing spells when you don’t even knowwhat they’re for, and stop talking about ‘the Prince’ asif it’s his title, I bet it’s just a stupid nickname, and itdoesn’t seem as though he was a very nice person tome!”

“I don’t see where you get that from,” said Harryheatedly. “If he’d been a budding Death Eater hewouldn’t have been boasting about being ‘half-blood,’would he?”

Even as he said it, Harry remembered that his fatherhad been pure-blood, but he pushed the thought outof his mind; he would worry about that later. ...

“The Death Eaters can’t all be pure-blood, there aren’tenough pure-blood wizards left,” said Hermionestubbornly. “I expect most of them are half-bloodspretending to be pure. It’s only Muggle-borns theyhate, they’d be quite happy to let you and Ron joinup.”

“There is no way they’d let me be a Death Eater!” saidRon indignantly, a bit of sausage flying off the fork hewas now brandishing at Hermione and hitting ErnieMacmillan on the head. “My whole family are bloodtraitors! That’s as bad as Muggle-borns to DeathEaters!”

Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“And they’d love to have me,” said Harry sarcastically.“We’d be best pals if they didn’t keep trying to do me

in.

This made Ron laugh; even Hermione gave a grudgingsmile, and a distraction arrived in the shape of Ginny.

“Hey, Harry, I’m supposed to give you this.”

It was a scroll of parchment with Harry’s namewritten upon it in familiar thin, slanting writing.

“Thanks, Ginny ... It’s Dumbledore’s next lesson!”Harry told Ron and Hermione, pulling open theparchment and quickly reading its contents. “Mondayevening!” He felt suddenly light and happy. “Want tojoin us in Hogsmeade, Ginny?” he asked.

“I’m going with Dean — might see you there,” shereplied, waving at them as she left.

Filch was standing at the oak front doors as usual,checking off the names of people who had permissionto go into Hogsmeade. The process took even longerthan normal as Filch was triple-checking everybodywith his Secrecy Sensor.

“What does it matter if we’re smuggling Dark stuffOUT?” demanded Ron, eyeing the long thin SecrecySensor with apprehension. “Surely you ought to bechecking what we bring back IN?”

His cheek earned him a few extra jabs with theSensor, and he was still wincing as they stepped outinto the wind and sleet.

The walk into Hogsmeade was not enjoyable. Harrywrapped his scarf over his lower face; the exposedpart soon felt both raw and numb. The road to the

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

village was full of students bent double against thebitter wind. More than once Harry wondered whetherthey might not have had a better time in the warmcommon room, and when they finally reachedHogsmeade and saw that Zonko’s Joke Shop hadbeen boarded up, Harry took it as confirmation thatthis trip was not destined to be fun. Ron pointed, witha thickly gloved hand, toward Honeydukes, which wasmercifully open, and Harry and Hermione staggeredin his wake into the crowded shop.

“Thank God,” shivered Ron as they were enveloped bywarm, toffee-scented air. “Let’s stay here allafternoon.”

“Harry, m’boy!” said a booming voice from behindthem.

“Oh no,” muttered Harry. The three of them turned tosee Professor Slughorn, who was wearing anenormous furry hat and an overcoat with matchingfur collar, clutching a large bag of crystalizedpineapple, and occupying at least a quarter of theshop.

“Harry, that’s three of my little suppers you’ve missednow!” said Slughorn, poking him genially in the chest.“It won’t do, m’boy, I’m determined to have you! MissGranger loves them, don’t you?”

“Yes,” said Hermione helplessly, “they’re really —”

“So why don’t you come along, Harry?” demandedSlughorn.

“Well, I’ve had Quidditch practice, Professor,” saidHarry, who had indeed been scheduling practicesevery time Slughorn had sent him a little, violetribbon-adorned invitation. This strategy meant that

Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron was not left out, and they usually had a laughwith Ginny, imagining Hermione shut up withMcLaggen and Zabini.

“Well, I certainly expect you to win your first matchafter all this hard work!” said Slughorn. “But a littlerecreation never hurt anybody. Now, how aboutMonday night, you can’t possibly want to practice inthis weather. ...”

“I can’t, Professor, I’ve got — er — an appointmentwith Professor Dumbledore that evening.”

“Unlucky again!” cried Slughorn dramatically. “Ah,well ... you can’t evade me forever, Harry!”

And with a regal wave, he waddled out of the shop,taking as little notice of Ron as though he had been adisplay of Cockroach Clusters.

“I can’t believe you’ve wriggled out of another one,”said Hermione, shaking her head. “They’re not thatbad, you know. ... They’re even quite fun sometimes....” But then she caught sight of Ron’s expression.

“Oh, look — they’ve got deluxe sugar quills — thosewould last hours!”

Glad that Hermione had changed the subject, Harryshowed much more interest in the new extra-largesugar quills than he would normally have done, butRon continued to look moody and merely shruggedwhen Hermione asked him where he wanted to gonext.

“Let’s go to the Three Broomsticks,” said Harry. “It’llbe warm.”

They bundled their scarves back over their faces andleft the sweetshop. The bitter wind was like knives on

Page | 273 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

their faces after the sugary warmth of Honeydukes.The street was not very busy; nobody was lingering tochat, just hurrying toward their destinations. Theexceptions were two men a little ahead of them,standing just outside the Three Broomsticks. One wasvery tall and thin; squinting through his rain-washedglasses Harry recognized the barman who worked inthe other Hogsmeade pub, the Hog’s Head. As Harry,Ron, and Hermione drew closer, the barman drew hiscloak more tightly around his neck and walked away,leaving the shorter man to fumble with something inhis arms. They were barely feet from him when Harryrealized who the man was.

“Mundungus!”

The squat, bandy-legged man with long, straggly,ginger hair jumped and dropped an ancient suitcase,which burst open, releasing what looked like theentire contents of a junk shop window.

“Oh, ’ello, ’Arry,” said Mundungus Fletcher, with amost unconvincing stab at airiness. “Well, don’t letme keep ya.”

And he began scrabbling on the ground to retrieve thecontents of his suitcase with every appearance of aman eager to be gone.

“Are you selling this stuff?” asked Harry, watchingMundungus grab an assortment of grubby-lookingobjects from the ground.

“Oh, well, gotta scrape a living,” said Mundungus.“Gimme that!”

Ron had stooped down and picked up somethingsilver.

Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Hang on,” Ron said slowly. “This looks familiar —”

“Thank you!” said Mundungus, snatching the gobletout of Ron’s hand and stuffing it back into the case.“Well, I’ll see you all — OUCH!”

Harry had pinned Mundungus against the wall of thepub by the throat. Holding him fast with one hand, hepulled out his wand.

“Harry!” squealed Hermione.

“You took that from Sirius’s house,” said Harry, whowas almost nose to nose with Mundungus and wasbreathing in an unpleasant smell of old tobacco andspirits. “That had the Black family crest on it.”

“I — no — what — ?” spluttered Mundungus, whowas slowly turning purple.

“What did you do, go back the night he died and stripthe place?” snarled Harry.

“I — no —”

“Give it to me!”

“Harry, you mustn’t!” shrieked Hermione, asMundungus started to turn blue.

There was a bang, and Harry felt his hands fly offMundungus’s throat. Gasping and spluttering,Mundungus seized his fallen case, then — CRACK —he Disapparated.

Harry swore at the top of his voice, spinning on thespot to see where Mundungus had gone.

“COME BACK, YOU THIEVING — !”

Page | 275 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“There’s no point, Harry.”

Tonks had appeared out of nowhere, her mousy hairwet with sleet.

“Mundungus will probably be in London by now.There’s no point yelling.”

“He’s nicked Sirius’s stuff! Nicked it!”

“Yes, but still,” said Tonks, who seemed perfectlyuntroubled by this piece of information. “You shouldget out of the cold.”

She watched them go through the door of the ThreeBroomsticks.

The moment he was inside, Harry burst out, “He wasnicking Sirius’s stuff.”

“I know, Harry, but please don’t shout, people arestaring,” whispered Hermione. “Go and sit down, I’llget you a drink.”

Harry was still fuming when Hermione returned totheir table a few minutes later holding three bottles ofbutterbeer.

“Can’t the Order control Mundungus?” Harrydemanded of the other two in a furious whisper.

“Can’t they at least stop him stealing everything that’snot fixed down when he’s at headquarters?”

“Shh!” said Hermione desperately, looking around tomake sure nobody was listening; there were a coupleof warlocks sitting close by who were staring at Harrywith great interest, and Zabini was lolling against apillar not far away. “Harry, I’d be annoyed too, I knowit’s your things he’s stealing —”

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry gagged on his butterbeer; he had momentarilyforgotten that he owned number twelve, GrimmauldPlace.

“Yeah, it’s my stuff!” he said. “No wonder he wasn’tpleased to see me! Well, I’m going to tell Dumbledorewhat’s going on, he’s the only one who scaresMundungus.”

“Good idea,” whispered Hermione, clearly pleased thatHarry was calming down. “Ron, what are you staringat?”

“Nothing,” said Ron, hastily looking away from thebar, but Harry knew he was trying to catch the eye ofthe curvy and attractive barmaid, Madam Rosmerta,for whom he had long nursed a soft spot.

“I expect ‘nothing’s’ in the back getting morefirewhisky,” said Hermione waspishly.

Ron ignored this jibe, sipping his drink in what heevidently considered to be a dignified silence. Harrywas thinking about Sirius, and how he had hatedthose silver goblets anyway. Hermione drummed herfingers on the table, her eyes flickering between Ronand the bar. The moment Harry drained the lastdrops in his bottle she said, “Shall we call it a dayand go back to school, then?”

The other two nodded; it had not been a fun trip andthe weather was getting worse the longer they stayed.Once again they drew their cloaks tightly aroundthem, rearranged their scarves, pulled on their gloves,then followed Katie Bell and a friend out of the puband back up the High Street. Harry’s thoughtsstrayed to Ginny as they trudged up the road toHogwarts through the frozen slush. They had not metup with her, undoubtedly, thought Harry, becausePage | 277 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

she and Dean were cozily closeted in MadamPuddifoot’s Tea Shop, that haunt of happy couples.Scowling, he bowed his head against the swirling sleetand trudged on.

It was a little while before Harry became aware thatthe voices of Katie Bell and her friend, which werebeing carried back to him on the wind, had becomeshriller and louder. Harry squinted at their indistinctfigures. The two girls were having an argument aboutsomething Katie was holding in her hand. “It’snothing to do with you, Leanne!” Harry heard Katiesay.

They rounded a corner in the lane, sleet coming thickand fast, blurring Harry’s glasses. Just as he raised agloved hand to wipe them, Leanne made to grab holdof the package Katie was holding; Katie tugged it backand the package fell to the ground.

At once, Katie rose into the air, not as Ron had done,suspended comically by the ankle, but gracefully, herarms outstretched, as though she was about to fly.

Yet there was something wrong, something eerie. ...Her hair was whipped around her by the fierce wind,but her eyes were closed and her face was quiteempty of expression. Harry, Ron, Hermione, andLeanne had all halted in their tracks, watching.

Then, six feet above the ground, Katie let out aterrible scream. Her eyes flew open but whatever shecould see, or whatever she was feeling, was clearlycausing her terrible anguish. She screamed andscreamed; Leanne started to scream too and seizedKatie’s ankles, trying to tug her back to the ground.Harry, Ron, and Hermione rushed forward to help,but even as they grabbed Katie’s legs, she fell on topof them; Harry and Ron managed to catch her but shewas writhing so much they could hardly hold her.Page | 278 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Instead they lowered her to the ground where shethrashed and screamed, apparently unable torecognize any of them.

Harry looked around; the landscape seemed deserted.

“Stay there!” he shouted at the others over thehowling wind. “I’m going for help!”

He began to sprint toward the school; he had neverseen anyone behave as Katie had just behaved andcould not think what had caused it; he hurtledaround a bend in the lane and collided with whatseemed to be an enormous bear on its hind legs.

“Hagrid!” he panted, disentangling himself from thehedgerow into which he had fallen.

“Harry!” said Hagrid, who had sleet trapped in hiseyebrows and beard, and was wearing his great,shaggy beaverskin coat. “Jus’ bin visitin’ Grawp, he’scornin’ on so well yeh wouldn’ —”

“Hagrid, someone’s hurt back there, or cursed, orsomething —”

“Wha?” said Hagrid, bending lower to hear whatHarry was saying over the raging wind.

“Someone’s been cursed!” bellowed Harry.

“Cursed? Who’s bin cursed — not Ron? Hermione?”

“No, it’s not them, it’s Katie Bell — this way ...”

Together they ran back along the lane. It took themno time to find the little group of people around Katie,who was still writhing and screaming on the ground;

Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron, Hermione, and Leanne were all trying to quiether.

“Get back!” shouted Hagrid. “Lemme see her!”

“Something’s happened to her!” sobbed Leanne. “Idon’t know what —”

Hagrid stared at Katie for a second, then without aword, bent down, scooped her into his arms, and ranoff toward the castle with her. Within seconds, Katie’spiercing screams had died away and the only soundwas the roar of the wind.

Hermione hurried over to Katie’s wailing friend andput an arm around her.

“It’s Leanne, isn’t it?”

The girl nodded.

“Did it just happen all of a sudden, or — ?”

“It was when that package tore,” sobbed Leanne,pointing at the now sodden brown-paper package onthe ground, which had split open to reveal a greenishglitter. Ron bent down, his hand outstretched, butHarry seized his arm and pulled him back.

“Don’t touch if!”

He crouched down. An ornate opal necklace wasvisible, poking out of the paper.

“I’ve seen that before,” said Harry, staring at thething. “It was on display in Borgin and Burkes agesago. The label said it was cursed. Katie must havetouched it.” He looked up at Leanne, who had started

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

to shake uncontrollably. “How did Katie get hold ofthis?”

“Well, that’s why we were arguing. She came backfrom the bathroom in the Three Broomsticks holdingit, said it was a surprise for somebody at Hogwartsand she had to deliver it. She looked all funny whenshe said it. ... Oh no, oh no, I bet she’d beenImperiused and I didn’t realize!”

Leanne shook with renewed sobs. Hermione pattedher shoulder gently.

“She didn’t say who’d given it to her, Leanne?”

“No ... she wouldn’t tell me ... and I said she wasbeing stupid and not to take it up to school, but shejust wouldn’t listen and ... and then I tried to grab itfrom her ... and — and —”

Leanne let out a wail of despair.

“We’d better get up to school,” said Hermione, herarm still around Leanne. “We’ll be able to find outhow she is. Come on. ...”

Harry hesitated for a moment, then pulled his scarffrom around his face and, ignoring Ron’s gasp,carefully covered the necklace in it and picked it up.

“Well need to show this to Madam Pomfrey,” he said.

As they followed Hermione and Leanne up the road,Harry was thinking furiously. They had just enteredthe grounds when he spoke, unable to keep histhoughts to himself any longer.

“Malfoy knows about this necklace. It was in a case atBorgin and Burkes four years ago, I saw him having a

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

good look at it while I was hiding from him and hisdad. This is what he was buying that day when wefollowed him! He remembered it and he went back forit!”

“I — I dunno, Harry,” said Ron hesitantly. “Loads ofpeople go to Borgin and Burkes ... and didn’t that girlsay Katie got it in the girls’ bathroom?”

“She said she came back from the bathroom with it,she didn’t necessarily get it in the bathroom itself—”

“McGonagall!” said Ron warningly.

Harry looked up. Sure enough, Professor McGonagallwas hurrying down the stone steps through swirlingsleet to meet them.

“Hagrid says you four saw what happened to KatieBell — upstairs to my office at once, please! What’sthat you’re holding, Potter?”

“It’s the thing she touched,” said Harry.

“Good lord,” said Professor McGonagall, lookingalarmed as she took the necklace from Harry. “No, no,Filch, they’re with me!” she added hastily, as Filchcame shuffling eagerly across the entrance hallholding his Secrecy Sensor aloft. “Take this necklaceto Professor Snape at once, but be sure not to touchit, keep it wrapped in the scarf!”

Harry and the others followed Professor McGonagallupstairs and into her office. The sleet-spatteredwindows were rattling in their frames, and the roomwas chilly despite the fire crackling in the grate.Professor McGonagall closed the door and sweptaround her desk to face Harry, Ron, Hermione, andthe still sobbing Leanne.

Page | 282 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well?” she said sharply. “What happened?”

Haltingly, and with many pauses while she attemptedto control her crying, Leanne told ProfessorMcGonagall how Katie had gone to the bathroom inthe Three Broomsticks and returned holding theunmarked package, how Katie had seemed a littleodd, and how they had argued about the advisabilityof agreeing to deliver unknown objects, the argumentculminating in the tussle over the parcel, which toreopen. At this point, Leanne was so overcome, therewas no getting another word out of her.

“All right,” said Professor McGonagall, not unkindly,“go up to the hospital wing, please, Leanne, and getMadam Pomfrey to give you something for shock.”

When she had left the room, Professor McGonagallturned back to Harry, Ron, and Hermione.

“What happened when Katie touched the necklace?”

“She rose up in the air,” said Harry, before either Ronor Hermione could speak, “and then began to scream,and collapsed. Professor, can I see ProfessorDumbledore, please?”

“The headmaster is away until Monday, Potter,” saidProfessor McGonagall, looking surprised.

“Away?” Harry repeated angrily.

“Yes, Potter, away!” said Professor McGonagall tartly.“But anything you have to say about this horriblebusiness can be said to me, I’m sure!”

For a split second, Harry hesitated. ProfessorMcGonagall did not invite confidences; Dumbledore,though in many ways more intimidating, still seemed

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

less likely to scorn a theory, however wild. This was alife-and-death matter, though, and no moment toworry about being laughed at.

“I think Draco Malfoy gave Katie that necklace,Professor.”

On one side of him, Ron rubbed his nose in apparentembarrassment; on the other, Hermione shuffled herfeet as though quite keen to put a bit of distancebetween herself and Harry.

“That is a very serious accusation, Potter,” saidProfessor McGonagall, after a shocked pause. “Do youhave any proof?”

“No,” said Harry, “but ...” and he told her aboutfollowing Malfoy to Borgin and Burkes and theconversation they had overheard between him andMr. Borgin.

When he had finished speaking, ProfessorMcGonagall looked slightly confused.

“Malfoy took something to Borgin and Burkes forrepair?”

“No, Professor, he just wanted Borgin to tell him howto mend something, he didn’t have it with him. Butthat’s not the point, the thing is that he boughtsomething at the same time, and I think it was thatnecklace —”

“You saw Malfoy leaving the shop with a similarpackage?”

“No, Professor, he told Borgin to keep it in the shopfor him —”

Page | 284 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But Harry,” Hermione interrupted, “Borgin askedhim if he wanted to take it with him, and Malfoy said

no —

“Because he didn’t want to touch it, obviously!” saidHarry angrily.

“What he actually said was, ‘How would I lookcarrying that down the street?’ ” said Hermione.

“Well, he would look a bit of a prat carrying anecklace,” interjected Ron.

“Oh, Ron,” said Hermione despairingly, “it would beall wrapped up, so he wouldn’t have to touch it, andquite easy to hide inside a cloak, so nobody would seeit! I think whatever he reserved at Borgin and Burkeswas noisy or bulky, something he knew would drawattention to him if he carried it down the street — andin any case,” she pressed on loudly, before Harrycould interrupt, “I asked Borgin about the necklace,don’t you remember? When I went in to try and findout what Malfoy had asked him to keep, I saw itthere. And Borgin just told me the price, he didn’t sayit was already sold or anything —”

“Well, you were being really obvious, he realized whatyou were up to within about five seconds, of coursehe wasn’t going to tell you — anyway, Malfoy could’vesent off for it since —”

“That’s enough!” said Professor McGonagall, asHermione opened her mouth to retort, lookingfurious. “Potter, I appreciate you telling me this, butwe cannot point the finger of blame at Mr. Malfoypurely because he visited the shop where thisnecklace might have been purchased. The same isprobably true of hundreds of people —”

Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“— that’s what I said —” muttered Ron.

“— and in any case, we have put stringent securitymeasures in place this year. I do not believe thatnecklace can possibly have entered this schoolwithout our knowledge —”

“But —”

“— and what is more,” said Professor McGonagall,with an air of awful finality, “Mr. Malfoy was not inHogsmeade today.”

Harry gaped at her, deflating.

“How do you know, Professor?”

“Because he was doing detention with me. He hasnow failed to complete his Transfiguration homeworktwice in a row. So, thank you for telling me yoursuspicions, Potter,” she said as she marched pastthem, “but I need to go up to the hospital wing now tocheck on Katie Bell. Good day to you all.”

She held open her office door. They had no choice butto file past her without another word.

Harry was angry with the other two for siding withMcGonagall; nevertheless, he felt compelled to join inonce they started discussing what had happened.

“So who do you reckon Katie was supposed to give thenecklace to?” asked Ron, as they climbed the stairs tothe common room.

“Goodness only knows,” said Hermione. “But whoeverit was has had a narrow escape. No one could haveopened that package without touching the necklace.”

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It could’ve been meant for loads of people,” saidHarry. “Dumbledore — the Death Eaters would love toget rid of him, he must be one of their top targets. OrSlughorn — Dumbledore reckons Voldemort reallywanted him and they can’t be pleased that he’s sidedwith Dumbledore. Or —”

“Or you,” said Hermione, looking troubled.

“Couldn’t have been,” said Harry, “or Katie would’vejust turned around in the lane and given it to me,wouldn’t she? I was behind her all the way out of theThree Broomsticks. It would have made much moresense to deliver the parcel outside Hogwarts, whatwith Filch searching everyone who goes in and out. Iwonder why Malfoy told her to take it into the castle?”

“Harry, Malfoy wasn’t in Hogsmeade!” said Hermione,actually stamping her foot in frustration.

“He must have used an accomplice, then,” said Harry.“Crabbe or Goyle — or, come to think of it, anotherDeath Eater, he’ll have loads better cronies thanCrabbe and Goyle now he’s joined up —”

Ron and Hermione exchanged looks that plainly saidThere’s no point arguing with him.

“Dilligrout,” said Hermione firmly as they reached theFat Lady.

The portrait swung open to admit them to thecommon room. It was quite full and smelled of dampclothing; many people seemed to have returned fromHogsmeade early because of the bad weather. Therewas no buzz of fear or speculation, however: Clearly,the news of Katie’s fate had not yet spread.

Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It wasn’t a very slick attack, really, when you stopand think about it,” said Ron, casually turfing a firstyear out of one of the good armchairs by the fire sothat he could sit down. “The curse didn’t even make itinto the castle. Not what you’d call foolproof.”

“You’re right,” said Hermione, prodding Ron out of thechair with her foot and offering it to the first yearagain. “It wasn’t very well thought-out at all.”

“But since when has Malfoy been one of the world’sgreat thinkers?” asked Harry.

Neither Ron nor Hermione answered him.

Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





THE SECRET RIDDLE

Katie was removed to St. Mungo’s Hospital forMagical Maladies and Injuries the following day, bywhich time the news that she had been cursed hadspread all over the school, though the details wereconfused and nobody other than Harry, Ron,Hermione, and Leanne seemed to know that Katieherself had not been the intended target.

“Oh, and Malfoy knows, of course,” said Harry to Ronand Hermione, who continued their new policy offeigning deafness whenever Harry mentioned hisMalfoy-Is-a-Death-Eater theory.

Harry had wondered whether Dumbledore wouldreturn from wherever he had been in time for Mondaynight’s lesson, but having had no word to thecontrary, he presented himself outside Dumbledore’soffice at eight o’clock, knocked, and was told to enter.There sat Dumbledore looking unusually tired; hishand was as black and burned as ever, but he smiledwhen he gestured to Harry to sit down. The Pensieve

Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

was sitting on the desk again, casting silvery specksof light over the ceiling.

“You have had a busy time while I have been away,”Dumbledore said. “I believe you witnessed Katie’saccident.”

“Yes, sir. How is she?”

“Still very unwell, although she was relatively lucky.She appears to have brushed the necklace with thesmallest possible amount of skin: There was a tinyhole in her glove. Had she put it on, had she evenheld it in her ungloved hand, she would have died,perhaps instantly. Luckily Professor Snape was ableto do enough to prevent a rapid spread of the curse —

“Why him?” asked Harry quickly. “Why not MadamPomfrey?”

“Impertinent,” said a soft voice from one of theportraits on the wall, and Phineas Nigellus Black,Sirius’s great-great-grandfather, raised his head fromhis arms where he had appeared to be sleeping. “Iwould not have permitted a student to question theway Hogwarts operated in my day.”

“Yes, thank you, Phineas,” said Dumbledorequellingly. “Professor Snape knows much more aboutthe Dark Arts than Madam Pomfrey, Harry. Anyway,the St. Mungo’s staff are sending me hourly reports,and I am hopeful that Katie will make a full recoveryin time.”

“Where were you this weekend, sir?” Harry asked,disregarding a strong feeling that he might bepushing his luck, a feeling apparently shared byPhineas Nigellus, who hissed softly.

Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I would rather not say just now,” said Dumbledore.“However, I shall tell you in due course.”

“You will?” said Harry, startled.

“Yes, I expect so,” said Dumbledore, withdrawing afresh bottle of silver memories from inside his robesand uncorking it with a prod of his wand.

“Sir,” said Harry tentatively, “I met Mundungus inHogsmeade.”

“Ah yes, I am already aware that Mundungus hasbeen treating your inheritance with light-fingeredcontempt,” said Dumbledore, frowning a little. “Hehas gone to ground since you accosted him outsidethe Three Broomsticks; I rather think he dreadsfacing me. However, rest assured that he will not bemaking away with any more of Sirius’s oldpossessions.”

“That mangy old half-blood has been stealing Blackheirlooms?” said Phineas Nigellus, incensed; and hestalked out of his frame, undoubtedly to visit hisportrait in number twelve, Grimmauld Place.

“Professor,” said Harry, after a short pause, “didProfessor McGonagall tell you what I told her afterKatie got hurt? About Draco Malfoy?”

“She told me of your suspicions, yes,” saidDumbledore.

“And do you — ?”

“I shall take all appropriate measures to investigateanyone who might have had a hand in Katie’saccident,” said Dumbledore. “But what concerns menow, Harry, is our lesson.”

Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry felt slightly resentful at this: If their lessonswere so very important, why had there been such along gap between the first and second? However, hesaid no more about Draco Malfoy, but watched asDumbledore poured the fresh memories into thePensieve and began swirling the stone basin oncemore between his long-fingered hands.

“You will remember, I am sure, that we left the tale ofLord Voldemort’s beginnings at the point where thehandsome Muggle, Tom Riddle, had abandoned hiswitch wife, Merope, and returned to his family homein Little Hangleton. Merope was left alone in London,expecting the baby who would one day become LordVoldemort.”

“How do you know she was in London, sir?”

“Because of the evidence of one Caractacus Burke,”said Dumbledore, “who, by an odd coincidence,helped found the very shop whence came thenecklace we have just been discussing.”

He swilled the contents of the Pensieve as Harry hadseen him swill them before, much as a goldprospector sifts for gold. Up out of the swirling, silverymass rose a little old man revolving slowly in thePensieve, silver as a ghost but much more solid, witha thatch of hair that completely covered his eyes.

“Yes, we acquired it in curious circumstances. It wasbrought in by a young witch just before Christmas,oh, many years ago now. She said she needed thegold badly, well, that much was obvious. Covered inrags and pretty far along ... Going to have a baby, see.She said the locket had been Slytherin’s. Well, wehear that sort of story all the time, ‘Oh, this wasMerlin’s, this was, his favorite teapot,’ but when Ilooked at it, it had his mark all right, and a fewPage | 292 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

simple spells were enough to tell me the truth. Ofcourse, that made it near enough priceless. She didn’tseem to have any idea how much it was worth. Happyto get ten Galleons for it. Best bargain we ever made!”

Dumbledore gave the Pensieve an extra-vigorousshake and Caractacus Burke descended back into theswirling mass of memory from whence he had come.

“He only gave her ten Galleons?” said Harryindignantly.

“Caractacus Burke was not famed for his generosity,”said Dumbledore. “So we know that, near the end ofher pregnancy, Merope was alone in London and indesperate need of gold, desperate enough to sell herone and only valuable possession, the locket that wasone of Marvolo’s treasured family heirlooms.”

“But she could do magic!” said Harry impatiently.

“She could have got food and everything for herself bymagic, couldn’t she?”

“Ah,” said Dumbledore, “perhaps she could. But it ismy belief— I am guessing again, but I am sure I amright — that when her husband abandoned her,Merope stopped using magic. I do not think that shewanted to be a witch any longer. Of course, it is alsopossible that her unrequited love and the attendantdespair sapped her of her powers; that can happen.

In any case, as you are about to see, Merope refusedto raise her wand even to save her own life.”

“She wouldn’t even stay alive for her son?”

Dumbledore raised his eyebrows. “Could you possiblybe feeling sorry for Lord Voldemort?”

Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry quickly, “but she had a choice, didn’tshe, not like my mother —”

“Your mother had a choice too,” said Dumbledoregently. “Yes, Merope Riddle chose death in spite of ason who needed her, but do not judge her tooharshly, Harry. She was greatly weakened by longsuffering and she never had your mother’s courage.And now, if you will stand ...”

“Where are we going?” Harry asked, as Dumbledorejoined him at the front of the desk.

“This time,” said Dumbledore, “we are going to entermy memory. I think you will find it both rich in detailand satisfyingly accurate. After you, Harry ...”

Harry bent over the Pensieve; his face broke the coolsurface of the memory and then he was fallingthrough darkness again. ... Seconds later, his feet hitfirm ground; he opened his eyes and found that heand Dumbledore were standing in a bustling, old-fashioned London street.

“There I am,” said Dumbledore brightly, pointingahead of them to a tall figure crossing the road infront of a horse-drawn milk cart.

This younger Albus Dumbledore’s long hair and beardwere auburn. Having reached their side of the street,he strode off along the pavement, drawing manycurious glances due to the flamboyantly cut suit ofplum velvet that he was wearing.

“Nice suit, sir,” said Harry, before he could stophimself, but Dumbledore merely chuckled as theyfollowed his younger self a short distance, finallypassing through a set of iron gates into a barecourtyard that fronted a rather grim, square buildingPage | 294 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

surrounded by high railings. He mounted the fewsteps leading to the front door and knocked once.After a moment or two, the door was opened by ascruffy girl wearing an apron.

“Good afternoon. I have an appointment with a Mrs.Cole, who, I believe, is the matron here?”

“Oh,” said the bewildered-looking girl, taking inDumbledore’s eccentric appearance. “Um ... just amo’... MRS. COLE!” she bellowed over her shoulder.

Harry heard a distant voice shouting something inresponse. The girl turned back to Dumbledore. “Comein, she’s on ’er way.”

Dumbledore stepped into a hallway tiled in black andwhite; the whole place was shabby but spotlesslyclean. Harry and the older Dumbledore followed.Before the front door had closed behind them, askinny, harassed-looking woman came scurryingtoward them. She had a sharp-featured face thatappeared more anxious than unkind, and she wastalking over her shoulder to another aproned helperas she walked toward Dumbledore.

"... and take the iodine upstairs to Martha, BillyStubbs has been picking his scabs and Eric Whalley’soozing all over his sheets — chicken pox on top ofeverything else,” she said to nobody in particular, andthen her eyes fell upon Dumbledore and she stoppeddead in her tracks, looking as astonished as if agiraffe had just crossed her threshold.

“Good afternoon,” said Dumbledore, holding out hishand.

Mrs. Cole simply gaped.

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“My name is Albus Dumbledore. I sent you a letterrequesting an appointment and you very kindlyinvited me here today.”

Mrs. Cole blinked. Apparently deciding thatDumbledore was not a hallucination, she said feebly,“Oh yes. Well — well then — you’d better come intomy room. Yes.”

She led Dumbledore into a small room that seemedpart sitting room, part office. It was as shabby as thehallway and the furniture was old and mismatched.She invited Dumbledore to sit on a rickety chair andseated herself behind a cluttered desk, eyeing himnervously.

“I am here, as I told you in my letter, to discuss TomRiddle and arrangements for his future,” saidDumbledore.

“Are you family?” asked Mrs. Cole.

“No, I am a teacher,” said Dumbledore. “I have cometo offer Tom a place at my school.”

“What school’s this, then?”

“It is called Hogwarts,” said Dumbledore.

“And how come you’re interested in Tom?”

“We believe he has qualities we are looking for.”

“You mean he’s won a scholarship? How can he havedone? He’s never been entered for one.”

“Well, his name has been down for our school sincebirth —”

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Who registered him? His parents?”

There was no doubt that Mrs. Cole was aninconveniently sharp woman. Apparently Dumbledorethought so too, for Harry now saw him slip his wandout of the pocket of his velvet suit, at the same timepicking up a piece of perfectly blank paper from Mrs.Cole’s desktop.

“Here,” said Dumbledore, waving his wand once as hepassed her the piece of paper, “I think this will makeeverything clear.”

Mrs. Cole’s eyes slid out of focus and back again asshe gazed intently at the blank paper for a moment.

“That seems perfectly in order,” she said placidly,handing it back. Then her eyes fell upon a bottle ofgin and two glasses that had certainly not beenpresent a few seconds before.

“Er — may I offer you a glass of gin?” she said in anextra-refined voice.

“Thank you very much,” said Dumbledore, beaming.

It soon became clear that Mrs. Cole was no novicewhen it came to gin drinking. Pouring both of them agenerous measure, she drained her own glass in onegulp. Smacking her lips frankly, she smiled atDumbledore for the first time, and he didn’t hesitateto press his advantage.

“I was wondering whether you could tell me anythingof Tom Riddle’s history? I think he was born here inthe orphanage?”

“That’s right,” said Mrs. Cole, helping herself to moregin. “I remember it clear as anything, because I’d just

Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

started here myself. New Year’s Eve and bitter cold,snowing, you know. Nasty night. And this girl, notmuch older than I was myself at the time, camestaggering up the front steps. Well, she wasn’t thefirst. We took her in, and she had the baby within thehour. And she was dead in another hour.”

Mrs. Cole nodded impressively and took anothergenerous gulp of gin.

“Did she say anything before she died?” askedDumbledore. “Anything about the boy’s father, forinstance?”

“Now, as it happens, she did,” said Mrs. Cole, whoseemed to be rather enjoying herself now, with the ginin her hand and an eager audience for her story. “Iremember she said to me, ‘I hope he looks like hispapa,’ and I won’t lie, she was right to hope it,because she was no beauty — and then she told mehe was to be named Tom, for his father, and Marvolo,for her father — yes, I know, funny name, isn’t it? Wewondered whether she came from a circus — and shesaid the boy’s surname was to be Riddle. And shedied soon after that without another word.

“Well, we named him just as she’d said, it seemed soimportant to the poor girl, but no Tom nor Marvolonor any kind of Riddle ever came looking for him, norany family at all, so he stayed in the orphanage andhe’s been here ever since.”

Mrs. Cole helped herself, almost absentmindedly, toanother healthy measure of gin. Two pink spots hadappeared high on her cheekbones. Then she said,“He’s a funny boy.”

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “I thought he might be.”

Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“He was a funny baby too. He hardly ever cried, youknow. And then, when he got a little older, he was ...odd.”

“Odd in what way?” asked Dumbledore gently.

“Well, he —”

But Mrs. Cole pulled up short, and there was nothingblurry or vague about the inquisitorial glance sheshot Dumbledore over her gin glass.

“He’s definitely got a place at your school, you say?”

“Definitely,” said Dumbledore.

“And nothing I say can change that?”

“Nothing,” said Dumbledore.

“You’ll be taking him away, whatever?”

“Whatever,” repeated Dumbledore gravely.

She squinted at him as though deciding whether ornot to trust him. Apparently she decided she could,because she said in a sudden rush, “He scares theother children.”

“You mean he is a bully?” asked Dumbledore.

“I think he must be,” said Mrs. Cole, frowningslightly, “but it’s very hard to catch him at it. Therehave been incidents. ... Nasty things ...”

Dumbledore did not press her, though Harry couldtell that he was interested. She took yet another gulpof gin and her rosy cheeks grew rosier still.

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Billy Stubbs’s rabbit ... well, Tom said he didn’t do itand I don’t see how he could have done, but even so,it didn’t hang itself from the rafters, did it?”

“I shouldn’t think so, no,” said Dumbledore quietly.

“But I’m jiggered if I know how he got up there to doit. All I know is he and Billy had argued the daybefore. And then” — Mrs. Cole took another swig ofgin, slopping a little over her chin this time — “on thesummer outing — we take them out, you know, oncea year, to the countryside or to the seaside — well,Amy Benson and Dennis Bishop were never quiteright afterwards, and all we ever got out of them wasthat they’d gone into a cave with Tom Riddle. Heswore they’d just gone exploring, but somethinghappened in there, I’m sure of it. And, well, therehave been a lot of things, funny things. ...”

She looked around at Dumbledore again, and thoughher cheeks were flushed, her gaze was steady. “I don’tthink many people will be sorry to see the back ofhim.”

“You understand, I’m sure, that we will not bekeeping him permanently?” said Dumbledore. “He willhave to return here, at the very least, every summer.”

“Oh, well, that’s better than a whack on the nose witha rusty poker,” said Mrs. Cole with a slight hiccup.

She got to her feet, and Harry was impressed to seethat she was quite steady, even though two-thirds ofthe gin was now gone. “I suppose you’d like to seehim?”

“Very much,” said Dumbledore, rising too.

She led him out of her office and up the stone stairs,calling out instructions and admonitions to helpers

Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

and children as she passed. The orphans, Harry saw,were all wearing the same kind of grayish tunic. Theylooked reasonably well-cared for, but there was nodenying that this was a grim place in which to growup.

“Here we are,” said Mrs. Cole, as they turned off thesecond landing and stopped outside the first door in along corridor. She knocked twice and entered.

“Tom? You’ve got a visitor. This is Mr. Dumberton —sorry, Dunderbore. He’s come to tell you — well, I’lllet him do it.”

Harry and the two Dumbledores entered the room,and Mrs. Cole closed the door on them. It was a smallbare room with nothing in it except an old wardrobe,a wooden chair, and an iron bedstead. A boy wassitting on top of the gray blankets, his legs stretchedout in front of him, holding a book.

There was no trace of the Gaunts in Tom Riddle’sface. Merope had got her dying wish: He was hishandsome father in miniature, tall for eleven yearsold, dark-haired, and pale. His eyes narrowed slightlyas he took in Dumbledore’s eccentric appearance.There was a moment’s silence.

“How do you do, Tom?” said Dumbledore, walkingforward and holding out his hand.

The boy hesitated, then took it, and they shookhands. Dumbledore drew up the hard wooden chairbeside Riddle, so that the pair of them looked ratherlike a hospital patient and visitor.

“I am Professor Dumbledore.”

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“ ‘Professor?” repeated Riddle. He looked wary. “Isthat like ‘doctor? What are you here for? Did she getyou in to have a look at me?”

He was pointing at the door through which Mrs. Colehad just left.

“No, no,” said Dumbledore, smiling.

“I don’t believe you,” said Riddle. “She wants melooked at, doesn’t she? Tell the truth!”

He spoke the last three words with a ringing forcethat was almost shocking. It was a command, and itsounded as though he had given it many timesbefore. His eyes had widened and he was glaring atDumbledore, who made no response except tocontinue smiling pleasantly. After a few secondsRiddle stopped glaring, though he looked, if anything,warier still.

“Who are you?”

“I have told you. My name is Professor Dumbledoreand I work at a school called Hogwarts. I have cometo offer you a place at my school — your new school,if you would like to come.”

Riddle’s reaction to this was most surprising. He leaptfrom the bed and backed away from Dumbledore,looking furious.

“You can’t kid me! The asylum, that’s where you’refrom, isn’t it? ‘Professor,’yes, of course — well, I’mnot going, see? That old cat’s the one who should bein the asylum. I never did anything to little AmyBenson or Dennis Bishop, and you can ask them,they’ll tell you!”

Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I am not from the asylum,” said Dumbledorepatiently. “I am a teacher and, if you will sit downcalmly, I shall tell you about Hogwarts. Of course, ifyou would rather not come to the school, nobody willforce you —”

“I’d like to see them try,” sneered Riddle.

“Hogwarts,” Dumbledore went on, as though he hadnot heard Riddle’s last words, “is a school for peoplewith special abilities —”

“I’m not mad!”

“I know that you are not mad. Hogwarts is not aschool for mad people. It is a school of magic.”

There was silence. Riddle had frozen, his faceexpressionless, but his eyes were flickering back andforth between each of Dumbledore’s, as though tryingto catch one of them lying.

“Magic?” he repeated in a whisper.

“That’s right,” said Dumbledore.

“It’s ... it’s magic, what I can do?”

“What is it that you can do?”

“All sorts,” breathed Riddle. A flush of excitement wasrising up his neck into his hollow cheeks; he lookedfevered. “I can make things move without touchingthem. I can make animals do what I want them to do,without training them. I can make bad things happento people who annoy me. I can make them hurt if Iwant to.”

Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

His legs were trembling. He stumbled forward and satdown on the bed again, staring at his hands, his headbowed as though in prayer.

“I knew I was different,” he whispered to his ownquivering fingers. “I knew I was special. Always, Iknew there was something.”

“Well, you were quite right,” said Dumbledore, whowas no longer smiling, but watching Riddle intently.“You are a wizard.”

Riddle lifted his head. His face was transfigured:

There was a wild happiness upon it, yet for somereason it did not make him better looking; on thecontrary, his finely carved features seemed somehowrougher, his expression almost bestial.

“Are you a wizard too?”

“Yes, I am.”

“Prove it,” said Riddle at once, in the samecommanding tone he had used when he had said,

“Tell the truth.”

Dumbledore raised his eyebrows. “If, as I take it, youare accepting your place at Hogwarts —”

“Of course I am!”

“Then you will address me as ‘Professor’ or ‘sir.’ ”

Riddle’s expression hardened for the most fleetingmoment before he said, in an unrecognizably politevoice, “I’m sorry, sir. I meant — please, Professor,could you show me — ?”

Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry was sure that Dumbledore was going to refuse,that he would tell Riddle there would be plenty of timefor practical demonstrations at Hogwarts, that theywere currently in a building full of Muggles and musttherefore be cautious. To his great surprise, however,Dumbledore drew his wand from an inside pocket ofhis suit jacket, pointed it at the shabby wardrobe inthe corner, and gave the wand a casual flick.

The wardrobe burst into flames.

Riddle jumped to his feet; Harry could hardly blamehim for howling in shock and rage; all his worldlypossessions must be in there. But even as Riddlerounded on Dumbledore, the flames vanished, leavingthe wardrobe completely undamaged.

Riddle stared from the wardrobe to Dumbledore; then,his expression greedy, he pointed at the wand.

“Where can I get one of them?”

“All in good time,” said Dumbledore. “I think there issomething trying to get out of your wardrobe.”

And sure enough, a faint rattling could be heard frominside it. For the first time, Riddle looked frightened.

“Open the door,” said Dumbledore.

Riddle hesitated, then crossed the room and threwopen the wardrobe door. On the topmost shelf, abovea rail of threadbare clothes, a small cardboard boxwas shaking and rattling as though there were severalfrantic mice trapped inside it.

“Take it out,” said Dumbledore.

Riddle took down the quaking box. He lookedunnerved.

Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Is there anything in that box that you ought not tohave?” asked Dumbledore.

Riddle threw Dumbledore a long, clear, calculatinglook. “Yes, I suppose so, sir,” he said finally, in anexpressionless voice.

“Open it,” said Dumbledore.

Riddle took off the lid and tipped the contents ontohis bed without looking at them. Harry, who hadexpected something much more exciting, saw a messof small, everyday objects: a yo-yo, a silver thimble,and a tarnished mouth organ among them. Once freeof the box, they stopped quivering and lay quite stillupon the thin blankets.

“You will return them to their owners with yourapologies,” said Dumbledore calmly, putting his wandback into his jacket. “I shall know whether it hasbeen done. And be warned: Thieving is not toleratedat Hogwarts.”

Riddle did not look remotely abashed; he was stillstaring coldly and appraisingly at Dumbledore. At lasthe said in a colorless voice, “Yes, sir.”

“At Hogwarts,” Dumbledore went on, “we teach younot only to use magic, but to control it. You have —inadvertently, I am sure — been using your powers ina way that is neither taught nor tolerated at ourschool. You are not the first, nor will you be the last,to allow your magic to run away with you. But youshould know that Hogwarts can expel students, andthe Ministry of Magic — yes, there is a Ministry — willpunish lawbreakers still more severely. All newwizards must accept that, in entering our world, theyabide by our laws.”

Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, sir,” said Riddle again.

It was impossible to tell what he was thinking; hisface remained quite blank as he put the little cache ofstolen objects back into the cardboard box. When hehad finished, he turned to Dumbledore and saidbaldly, “I haven’t got any money.”

“That is easily remedied,” said Dumbledore, drawing aleather money-pouch from his pocket. “There is afund at Hogwarts for those who require assistance tobuy books and robes. You might have to buy some ofyour spellbooks and so on secondhand, but —”

“Where do you buy spellbooks?” interrupted Riddle,who had taken the heavy money bag withoutthanking Dumbledore, and was now examining a fatgold Galleon.

“In Diagon Alley,” said Dumbledore. “I have your listof books and school equipment with me. I can helpyou find everything —”

“You’re coming with me?” asked Riddle, looking up.“Certainly, if you —”

“I don’t need you,” said Riddle. “I’m used to doingthings for myself, I go round London on my own allthe time. How do you get to this Diagon Alley — sir?”he added, catching Dumbledore’s eye.

Harry thought that Dumbledore would insist uponaccompanying Riddle, but once again he wassurprised. Dumbledore handed Riddle the envelopecontaining his list of equipment, and after tellingRiddle exactly how to get to the Leaky Cauldron fromthe orphanage, he said, “You will be able to see it,although Muggles around you — non-magical people,Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

that is — will not. Ask for Tom the barman — easyenough to remember, as he shares your name —”

Riddle gave an irritable twitch, as though trying todisplace an irksome fly.

“You dislike the name Tom’?”

“There are a lot of Toms,” muttered Riddle. Then, asthough he could not suppress the question, asthough it burst from him in spite of himself, heasked, “Was my father a wizard? He was called TomRiddle too, they’ve told me.”

“I’m afraid I don’t know,” said Dumbledore, his voicegentle.

“My mother can’t have been magic, or she wouldn’thave died,” said Riddle, more to himself thanDumbledore. “It must’ve been him. So — when I’ve gotall my stuff — when do I come to this Hogwarts?”

“All the details are on the second piece of parchmentin your envelope,” said Dumbledore. “You will leavefrom King’s Cross Station on the first of September.There is a train ticket in there too.”

Riddle nodded. Dumbledore got to his feet and heldout his hand again. Taking it, Riddle said, “I canspeak to snakes. I found out when we’ve been to thecountry on trips — they find me, they whisper to me.Is that normal for a wizard?”

Harry could tell that he had withheld mention of thisstrangest power until that moment, determined toimpress.

“It is unusual,” said Dumbledore, after a moment’shesitation, “but not unheard of.”

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

His tone was casual but his eyes moved curiouslyover Riddle’s face. They stood for a moment, man andboy, staring at each other. Then the handshake wasbroken; Dumbledore was at the door.

“Good-bye, Tom. I shall see you at Hogwarts.”

“I think that will do,” said the white-hairedDumbledore at Harry’s side, and seconds later, theywere soaring weightlessly through darkness oncemore, before landing squarely in the present-dayoffice.

“Sit down,” said Dumbledore, landing beside Harry.

Harry obeyed, his mind still full of what he had justseen.

“He believed it much quicker than I did — I mean,when you told him he was a wizard,” said Harry. “Ididn’t believe Hagrid at first, when he told me.”

“Yes, Riddle was perfectly ready to believe that he was— to use his word — ‘special,’ ” said Dumbledore.

“Did you know — then?” asked Harry.

“Did I know that I had just met the most dangerousDark wizard of all time?” said Dumbledore. “No, I hadno idea that he was to grow up to be what he is.However, I was certainly intrigued by him. I returnedto Hogwarts intending to keep an eye upon him,something I should have done in any case, given thathe was alone and friendless, but which, already, I feltI ought to do for others’ sake as much as his.

“His powers, as you heard, were surprisingly well-developed for such a young wizard and — mostinterestingly and ominously of all — he had already

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

discovered that he had some measure of control overthem, and begun to use them consciously. And asyou saw, they were not the random experimentstypical of young wizards: He was already using magicagainst other people, to frighten, to punish, tocontrol. The little stories of the strangled rabbit andthe young boy and girl he lured into a cave were mostsuggestive. ... ‘I can make them hurt if I want to. ...”’

“And he was a Parselmouth,” interjected Harry.

“Yes, indeed; a rare ability, and one supposedlyconnected with the Dark Arts, although as we know,there are Parselmouths among the great and the goodtoo. In fact, his ability to speak to serpents did notmake me nearly as uneasy as his obvious instincts forcruelty, secrecy, and domination.

“Time is making fools of us again,” said Dumbledore,indicating the dark sky beyond the windows. “Butbefore we part, I want to draw your attention tocertain features of the scene we have just witnessed,for they have a great bearing on the matters we shallbe discussing in future meetings.

“Firstly, I hope you noticed Riddle’s reaction when Imentioned that another shared his first name, Tom’?”

Harry nodded.

“There he showed his contempt for anything that tiedhim to other people, anything that made himordinary. Even then, he wished to be different,separate, notorious. He shed his name, as you know,within a few short years of that conversation andcreated the mask of ‘Lord Voldemort’ behind which hehas been hidden for so long.

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I trust that you also noticed that Tom Riddle wasalready highly self-sufficient, secretive, and,apparently, friendless? He did not want help orcompanionship on his trip to Diagon Alley. Hepreferred to operate alone. The adult Voldemort is thesame. You will hear many of his Death Eatersclaiming that they are in his confidence, that theyalone are close to him, even understand him. Theyare deluded. Lord Voldemort has never had a friend,nor do I believe that he has ever wanted one.

“And lastly — I hope you are not too sleepy to payattention to this, Harry — the young Tom Riddle likedto collect trophies. You saw the box of stolen articleshe had hidden in his room. These were taken fromvictims of his bullying behavior, souvenirs, if you will,of particularly unpleasant bits of magic. Bear in mindthis magpie-like tendency, for this, particularly, willbe important later.

“And now, it really is time for bed.”

Harry got to his feet. As he walked across the room,his eyes fell upon the little table on which MarvoloGaunt’s ring had rested last time, but the ring was nolonger there.

“Yes, Harry?” said Dumbledore, for Harry had come toa halt.

“The ring’s gone,” said Harry, looking around. “But Ithought you might have the mouth organ orsomething.”

Dumbledore beamed at him, peering over the top ofhis half-moon spectacles.

“Very astute, Harry, but the mouth organ was onlyever a mouth organ.”

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

And on that enigmatic note he waved to Harry, whounderstood himself to be dismissed.

Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling



FELIX FELICIS

Harry had Herbology first thing the followingmorning. He had been unable to tell Ron andHermione about his lesson with Dumbledore overbreakfast for fear of being overheard, but he filledthem in as they walked across the vegetable patchtoward the greenhouses. The weekend’s brutal windhad died out at last; the weird mist had returned andit took them a little longer than usual to find thecorrect greenhouse.

“Wow, scary thought, the boy You-Know-Who,” saidRon quietly, as they took their places around one ofthe gnarled Snargaluff stumps that formed this term’sproject, and began pulling on their protective gloves.“But I still don’t get why Dumbledore’s showing youall this. I mean, it’s really interesting and everything,but what’s the point?”

“Dunno,” said Harry, inserting a gum shield. “But hesays it’s all important and it’ll help me survive.”

Page | 313 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I think it’s fascinating,” said Hermione earnestly. “Itmakes absolute sense to know as much aboutVoldemort as possible. How else will you find out hisweaknesses?”

“So how was Slughorn’s latest party?” Harry askedher thickly through the gum shield.

“Oh, it was quite fun, really,” said Hermione, nowputting on protective goggles. “I mean, he drones onabout famous ex-pupils a bit, and he absolutelyfawns on McLaggen because he’s so well-connected,but he gave us some really nice food and heintroduced us to Gwenog Jones.”

“Gwenog Jones?” said Ron, his eyes widening underhis own goggles. “The Gwenog Jones? Captain of theHolyhead Harpies?”

“That’s right,” said Hermione. “Personally, I thoughtshe was a bit full of herself, but —”

“Quite enough chat over here!” said Professor Sproutbriskly, bustling over and looking stern. “You’relagging behind, everybody else has started, andNeville’s already got his first pod!”

They looked around; sure enough, there sat Nevillewith a bloody lip and several nasty scratches alongthe side of his face, but clutching an unpleasantlypulsating green object about the size of a grapefruit.

“Okay, Professor, we’re starting now!” said Ron,adding quietly, when she had turned away again,“should’ve used Muffliato, Harry.”

“No, we shouldn’t!” said Hermione at once, looking, asshe always did, intensely cross at the thought of the

Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Half-Blood Prince and his spells. “Well, come on ...we’d better get going. ...”

She gave the other two an apprehensive look; they alltook deep breaths and then dived at the gnarledstump between them.

It sprang to life at once; long, prickly, bramblelikevines flew out of the top and whipped through the air.One tangled itself in Hermione’s hair, and Ron beat itback with a pair of secateurs; Harry succeeded intrapping a couple of vines and knotting themtogether; a hole opened in the middle of all thetentaclelike branches; Hermione plunged her armbravely into this hole, which closed like a trap aroundher elbow; Harry and Ron tugged and wrenched atthe vines, forcing the hole to open again, andHermione snatched her arm free, clutching in herfingers a pod just like Neville’s. At once, the pricklyvines shot back inside, and the gnarled stump satthere looking like an innocently dead lump of wood.

“You know, I don’t think I’ll be having any of these inmy garden when I’ve got my own place,” said Ron,pushing his goggles up onto his forehead and wipingsweat from his face.

“Pass me a bowl,” said Hermione, holding thepulsating pod at arm’s length; Harry handed one overand she dropped the pod into it with a look of disguston her face.

“Don’t be squeamish, squeeze it out, they’re bestwhen they’re fresh!” called Professor Sprout.

“Anyway,” said Hermione, continuing theirinterrupted conversation as though a lump of woodhad not just attacked them, “Slughorn’s going to havea Christmas party, Harry, and there’s no way you’ll be

Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

able to wriggle out of this one because he actuallyasked me to check your free evenings, so he could besure to have it on a night you can come.”

Harry groaned. Meanwhile, Ron, who was attemptingto burst the pod in the bowl by putting both hands onit, standing up, and squashing it as hard as he could,said angrily, “And this is another party just forSlughorn’s favorites, is it?”

“Just for the Slug Club, yes,” said Hermione.

The pod flew out from under Ron’s fingers and hit thegreenhouse glass, rebounding onto the back ofProfessor Sprout’s head and knocking off her old,patched hat. Harry went to retrieve the pod; when hegot back, Hermione was saying, “Look, / didn’t makeup the name ‘Slug Club’ —”

“ ‘Slug Club,’ ” repeated Ron with a sneer worthy ofMalfoy. “It’s pathetic. Well, I hope you enjoy yourparty. Why don’t you try hooking up with McLaggen,then Slughorn can make you King and Queen Slug —

“We’re allowed to bring guests,” said Hermione, whofor some reason had turned a bright, boiling scarlet,“and I was going to ask you to come, but if you thinkit’s that stupid then I won’t bother!”

Harry suddenly wished the pod had flown a littlefarther, so that he need not have been sitting herewith the pair of them. Unnoticed by either, he seizedthe bowl that contained the pod and began to try andopen it by the noisiest and most energetic means hecould think of; unfortunately, he could still hear everyword of their conversation.

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You were going to ask me?” asked Ron, in acompletely different voice.

“Yes,” said Hermione angrily. “But obviously if you’drather I hooked up with McLaggen ...”

There was a pause while Harry continued to poundthe resilient pod with a trowel.

“No, I wouldn’t,” said Ron, in a very quiet voice.

Harry missed the pod, hit the bowl, and shattered it.

“Reparo,” he said hastily, poking the pieces with hiswand, and the bowl sprang back together again. Thecrash, however, appeared to have awoken Ron andHermione to Harry’s presence. Hermione lookedflustered and immediately started fussing about forher copy of Flesh-Eating Trees of the World to find outthe correct way to juice Snargaluff pods; Ron, on theother hand, looked sheepish but also rather pleasedwith himself.

“Hand that over, Harry,” said Hermione hurriedly. “Itsays we’re supposed to puncture them withsomething sharp. ...”

Harry passed her the pod in the bowl; he and Ronboth snapped their goggles back over their eyes anddived, once more, for the stump.

It was not as though he was really surprised, thoughtHarry, as he wrestled with a thorny vine intent uponthrottling him; he had had an inkling that this mighthappen sooner or later. But he was not sure how hefelt about it. ... He and Cho were now tooembarrassed to look at each other, let alone talk toeach other; what if Ron and Hermione started goingout together, then split up? Could their friendshipPage | 317 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

survive it? Harry remembered the few weeks whenthey had not been talking to each other in the thirdyear; he had not enjoyed trying to bridge the distancebetween them. And then, what if they didn’t split up?What if they became like Bill and Fleur, and itbecame excruciatingly embarrassing to be in theirpresence, so that he was shut out for good?

“Gotcha!” yelled Ron, pulling a second pod from thestump just as Hermione managed to burst the firstone open, so that the bowl was full of tubers wrigglinglike pale green worms.

The rest of the lesson passed without further mentionof Slughorn’s party. Although Harry watched his twofriends more closely over the next few days, Ron andHermione did not seem any different except that theywere a little politer to each other than usual. Harrysupposed he would just have to wait to see whathappened under the influence of butterbeer inSlughorn’s dimly lit room on the night of the party. Inthe meantime, however, he had more pressingworries.

Katie Bell was still in St. Mungo’s Hospital with noprospect of leaving, which meant that the promisingGryffindor team Harry had been training so carefullysince September was one Chaser short. He keptputting off replacing Katie in the hope that she wouldreturn, but their opening match against Slytherin waslooming, and he finally had to accept that she wouldnot be back in time to play.

Harry did not think he could stand another full-House tryout. With a sinking feeling that had little todo with Quidditch, he cornered Dean Thomas afterTransfiguration one day. Most of the class hadalready left, although several twittering yellow birdswere still zooming around the room, all of Hermione’sPage | 318 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

creation; nobody else had succeeded in conjuring somuch as a feather from thin air.

“Are you still interested in playing Chaser?”

“Wha — ? Yeah, of course!” said Dean excitedly. OverDean’s shoulder, Harry saw Seamus Finniganslamming his books into his bag, looking sour. One ofthe reasons why Harry would have preferred not tohave to ask Dean to play was that he knew Seamuswould not like it. On the other hand, he had to dowhat was best for the team, and Dean had outflownSeamus at the tryouts.

“Well then, you’re in,” said Harry. “There’s a practicetonight, seven o’clock.”

“Right,” said Dean. “Cheers, Harry! Blimey, I can’twait to tell Ginny!”

He sprinted out of the room, leaving Harry andSeamus alone together, an uncomfortable momentmade no easier when a bird dropping landed onSeamus’s head as one of Hermione’s canaries whizzedover them.

Seamus was not the only person disgruntled by thechoice of Katie’s substitute. There was muchmuttering in the common room about the fact thatHarry had now chosen two of his classmates for theteam. As Harry had endured much worse mutteringsthan this in his school career, he was not particularlybothered, but all the same, the pressure wasincreasing to provide a win in the upcoming matchagainst Slytherin. If Gryffindor won, Harry knew thatthe whole House would forget that they had criticizedhim and swear that they had always known it was agreat team. If they lost ... well, Harry thought wryly,he had still endured worse mutterings. ...

Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry had no reason to regret his choice once he sawDean fly that evening; he worked well with Ginny andDemelza. The Beaters, Peakes and Coote, were gettingbetter all the time. The only problem was Ron.

Harry had known all along that Ron was aninconsistent player who suffered from nerves and alack of confidence, and unfortunately, the loomingprospect of the opening game of the season seemed tohave brought out all his old insecurities. After lettingin half a dozen goals, most of them scored by Ginny,his technique became wilder and wilder, until hefinally punched an oncoming Demelza Robins in themouth.

“It was an accident, I’m sorry, Demelza, really sorry!”Ron shouted after her as she zigzagged back to theground, dripping blood everywhere. “I just —”

“Panicked,” Ginny said angrily, landing next toDemelza and examining her fat lip. “You prat, Ron,look at the state of her!”

“I can fix that,” said Harry, landing beside the twogirls, pointing his wand at Demelza’s mouth, andsaying “Episkey.” “And Ginny, don’t call Ron a prat,you’re not the Captain of this team —”

“Well, you seemed too busy to call him a prat and Ithought someone should —”

Harry forced himself not to laugh.

“In the air, everyone, let’s go. ...”

Overall it was one of the worst practices they had hadall term, though Harry did not feel that honesty wasthe best policy when they were this close to thematch.

Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Good work, everyone, I think we’ll flatten Slytherin,”he said bracingly and the Chasers and Beaters leftthe changing room looking reasonably happy withthemselves.

“I played like a sack of dragon dung,” said Ron in ahollow voice when the door had swung shut behindGinny.

“No, you didn’t,” said Harry firmly. “You’re the bestKeeper I tried out, Ron. Your only problem is nerves.”

He kept up a relentless flow of encouragement all theway back to the castle, and by the time they reachedthe second floor, Ron was looking marginally morecheerful. When Harry pushed open the tapestry totake their usual shortcut up to Gryffindor Tower,however, they found themselves looking at Dean andGinny, who were locked in a close embrace andkissing fiercely as though glued together.

It was as though something large and scaly eruptedinto life in Harry’s stomach, clawing at his insides:

Hot blood seemed to flood his brain, so that allthought was extinguished, replaced by a savage urgeto jinx Dean into a jelly. Wrestling with this suddenmadness, he heard Ron’s voice as though from a greatdistance away.

“Oi!”

Dean and Ginny broke apart and looked around.“What?” said Ginny.

“I don’t want to find my own sister snogging people inpublic!”

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“This was a deserted corridor till you came buttingin!” said Ginny.

Dean was looking embarrassed. He gave Harry ashifty grin that Harry did not return, as the newbornmonster inside him was roaring for Dean’s instantdismissal from the team.

“Er ... c’mon, Ginny,” said Dean, “let’s go back to thecommon room. ...”

“You go!” said Ginny. “I want a word with my dearbrother!”

Dean left, looking as though he was not sorry todepart the scene.

“Right,” said Ginny, tossing her long red hair out ofher face and glaring at Ron, “let’s get this straightonce and for all. It is none of your business who I goout with or what I do with them, Ron —”

“Yeah, it is!” said Ron, just as angrily. “D’you think Iwant people saying my sister’s a —”

“A what?” shouted Ginny, drawing her wand. “A what,exactly?”

“He doesn’t mean anything, Ginny —” said Harryautomatically, though the monster was roaring itsapproval of Ron’s words.

“Oh yes he does!” she said, flaring up at Harry. “Justbecause he’s never snogged anyone in his life, justbecause the best kiss he’s ever had is from our AuntieMuriel —”

“Shut your mouth!” bellowed Ron, bypassing red andturning maroon.

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No, I will not!” yelled Ginny, beside herself. “I’ve seenyou with Phlegm, hoping shell kiss you on the cheekevery time you see her, it’s pathetic! If you went outand got a bit of snogging done yourself, you wouldn’tmind so much that everyone else does it!”

Ron had pulled out his wand too; Harry steppedswiftly between them.

“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” Ronroared, trying to get a clear shot at Ginny aroundHarry, who was now standing in front of her with hisarms outstretched. “Just because I don’t do it inpublic — !”

Ginny screamed with derisive laughter, trying to pushHarry out of the way.

“Been kissing Pigwidgeon, have you? Or have you gota picture of Auntie Muriel stashed under yourpillow?”

“You—”

A streak of orange light flew under Harry’s left armand missed Ginny by inches; Harry pushed Ron upagainst the wall.

“Don’t be stupid —”

“Harry’s snogged Cho Chang!” shouted Ginny, whosounded close to tears now. “And Hermione snoggedViktor Krum, it’s only you who acts like it’s somethingdisgusting, Ron, and that’s because you’ve got aboutas much experience as a twelve-year-old!”

And with that, she stormed away. Harry quickly let goof Ron; the look on his face was murderous. Theyboth stood there, breathing heavily, until Mrs. Norris,

Page | 323 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Filch’s cat, appeared around the corner, which brokethe tension.

“C’mon,” said Harry, as the sound of Filch’s shufflingfeet reached their ears.

They hurried up the stairs and along a seventh-floorcorridor. “Oi, out of the way!” Ron barked at a smallgirl who jumped in fright and dropped a bottle oftoadspawn.

Harry hardly noticed the sound of shattering glass; hefelt disoriented, dizzy; being struck by a lightning boltmust be something like this. It’s just because she’sRon’s sister, he told himself. You just didn’t like seeingher kissing Dean because she’s Ron’s sister. ...

But unbidden into his mind came an image of thatsame deserted corridor with himself kissing Ginnyinstead. ... The monster in his chest purred ... butthen he saw Ron ripping open the tapestry curtainand drawing his wand on Harry, shouting things like“betrayal of trust” ... “supposed to be my friend” ...

“D’you think Hermione did snog Krum?” Ron askedabruptly, as they approached the Fat Lady. Harrygave a guilty start and wrenched his imaginationaway from a corridor in which no Ron intruded, inwhich he and Ginny were quite alone —

“What?” he said confusedly. “Oh ... er ...”

The honest answer was “yes,” but he did not want togive it. However, Ron seemed to gather the worst fromthe look on Harry’s face.

“Dilligrout,” he said darkly to the Fat Lady, and theyclimbed through the portrait hole into the commonroom.

Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Neither of them mentioned Ginny or Hermione again;indeed, they barely spoke to each other that eveningand got into bed in silence, each absorbed in his ownthoughts.

Harry lay awake for a long time, looking up at thecanopy of his four-poster and trying to convincehimself that his feelings for Ginny were entirely elder-brotherly. They had lived, had they not, like brotherand sister all summer, playing Quidditch, teasingRon, and having a laugh about Bill and Phlegm? Hehad known Ginny for years now. ... It was naturalthat he should feel protective ... natural that heshould want to look out for her ... want to rip Deanlimb from limb for kissing her ... No ... he would haveto control that particular brotherly feeling. ...

Ron gave a great grunting snore.

She’s Ron’s sister, Harry told himself firmly. Ron’ssister. She’s out-of-bounds. He would not risk hisfriendship with Ron for anything. He punched hispillow into a more comfortable shape and waited forsleep to come, trying his utmost not to allow histhoughts to stray anywhere near Ginny.

Harry awoke next morning feeling slightly dazed andconfused by a series of dreams in which Ron hadchased him with a Beater’s bat, but by midday hewould have happily exchanged the dream Ron for thereal one, who was not only cold-shouldering Ginnyand Dean, but also treating a hurt and bewilderedHermione with an icy, sneering indifference. Whatwas more, Ron seemed to have become, overnight, astouchy and ready to lash out as the average Blast-Ended Skrewt. Harry spent the day attempting tokeep the peace between Ron and Hermione with nosuccess; finally, Hermione departed for bed in highdudgeon, and Ron stalked off to the boys’ dormitoryPage | 325 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

after swearing angrily at several frightened first yearsfor looking at him.

To Harry’s dismay, Ron’s new aggression did not wearoff over the next few days. Worse still, it coincidedwith an even deeper dip in his Keeping skills, whichmade him still more aggressive, so that during thefinal Quidditch practice before Saturday’s match, hefailed to save every single goal the Chasers aimed athim, but bellowed at everybody so much that hereduced Demelza Robins to tears.

“You shut up and leave her alone!” shouted Peakes,who was about two-thirds Ron’s height, thoughadmittedly carrying a heavy bat.

“ENOUGH!” bellowed Harry, who had seen Ginnyglowering in Ron’s direction and, remembering herreputation as an accomplished caster of the Bat-Bogey Hex, soared over to intervene before things gotout of hand. “Peakes, go and pack up the Bludgers.Demelza, pull yourself together, you played really welltoday. Ron ...” he waited until the rest of the teamwere out of earshot before saying it, “you’re my bestmate, but carry on treating the rest of them like thisand I’m going to kick you off the team.”

He really thought for a moment that Ron might hithim, but then something much worse happened: Ronseemed to sag on his broom; all the fight went out ofhim and he said, “I resign. I’m pathetic.”

“You’re not pathetic and you’re not resigning!” saidHarry fiercely, seizing Ron by the front of his robes.“You can save anything when you’re on form, it’s amental problem you’ve got!”

“You calling me mental?”

Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, maybe I am!”

They glared at each other for a moment, then Ronshook his head wearily. “I know you haven’t got anytime to find another Keeper, so I’ll play tomorrow, butif we lose, and we will, I’m taking myself off the team.”

Nothing Harry said made any difference. He triedboosting Ron’s confidence all through dinner, but Ronwas too busy being grumpy and surly with Hermioneto notice. Harry persisted in the common room thatevening, but his assertion that the whole team wouldbe devastated if Ron left was somewhat underminedby the fact that the rest of the team was sitting in ahuddle in a distant corner, clearly muttering aboutRon and casting him nasty looks. Finally Harry triedgetting angry again in the hope of provoking Ron intoa defiant, and hopefully goal-saving, attitude, but thisstrategy did not appear to work any better thanencouragement; Ron went to bed as dejected andhopeless as ever.

Harry lay awake for a very long time in the darkness.He did not want to lose the upcoming match; not onlywas it his first as Captain, but he was determined tobeat Draco Malfoy at Quidditch even if he could notyet prove his suspicions about him. Yet if Ron playedas he had done in the last few practices, theirchances of winning were very slim. ...

If only there was something he could do to make Ronpull himself together ... make him play at the top ofhis form ... something that would ensure that Ronhad a really good day. ...

And the answer came to Harry in one, sudden,glorious stroke of inspiration.

Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Breakfast was the usual excitable affair next morning;the Slytherins hissed and booed loudly as everymember of the Gryffindor team entered the GreatHall. Harry glanced at the ceiling and saw a clear,pale blue sky: a good omen.

The Gryffindor table, a solid mass of red and gold,cheered as Harry and Ron approached. Harry grinnedand waved; Ron grimaced weakly and shook his head.

“Cheer up, Ron!” called Lavender. “I know you’ll bebrilliant!”

Ron ignored her.

“Tea?” Harry asked him. “Coffee? Pumpkin juice?”

“Anything,” said Ron glumly, taking a moody bite oftoast.

A few minutes later Hermione, who had become sotired of Ron’s recent unpleasant behavior that shehad not come down to breakfast with them, pausedon her way up the table.

“How are you both feeling?” she asked tentatively, hereyes on the back of Ron’s head.

“Fine,” said Harry, who was concentrating on handingRon a glass of pumpkin juice. “There you go, Ron.Drink up.”

Ron had just raised the glass to his lips whenHermione spoke sharply.

“Don’t drink that, Ron!”

Both Harry and Ron looked up at her.

Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Why not?” said Ron.

Hermione was now staring at Harry as though shecould not believe her eyes.

“You just put something in that drink.”

“Excuse me?” said Harry.

“You heard me. I saw you. You just tipped somethinginto Ron’s drink. You’ve got the bottle in your handright now!”

“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” said Harry,stowing the little bottle hastily in his pocket.

“Ron, I warn you, don’t drink it!” Hermione saidagain, alarmed, but Ron picked up the glass, drainedit in one gulp, and said, “Stop bossing me around,Hermione.”

She looked scandalized. Bending low so that onlyHarry could hear her, she hissed, “You should beexpelled for that. I’d never have believed it of you,Harry!”

“Hark who’s talking,” he whispered back. “Confundedanyone lately?”

She stormed up the table away from them. Harrywatched her go without regret. Hermione had neverreally understood what a serious business Quidditchwas. He then looked around at Ron, who wassmacking his lips.

“Nearly time,” said Harry blithely.

The frosty grass crunched underfoot as they strodedown to the stadium.

Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Pretty lucky the weather’s this good, eh?” Harryasked Ron.

“Yeah,” said Ron, who was pale and sick-looking.

Ginny and Demelza were already wearing theirQuidditch robes and waiting in the changing room.

“Conditions look ideal,” said Ginny, ignoring Ron.

“And guess what? That Slytherin Chaser Vaisey — hetook a Bludger in the head yesterday during theirpractice, and he’s too sore to play! And even betterthan that — Malfoy’s gone off sick too!”

“ What?” said Harry, wheeling around to stare at her.“He’s ill? What’s wrong with him?”

“No idea, but it’s great for us,” said Ginny brightly.“They’re playing Harper instead; he’s in my year andhe’s an idiot.”

Harry smiled back vaguely, but as he pulled on hisscarlet robes his mind was far from Quidditch. Malfoyhad once before claimed he could not play due toinjury, but on that occasion he had made sure thewhole match was rescheduled for a time that suitedthe Slytherins better. Why was he now happy to let asubstitute go on? Was he really ill, or was he faking?

“Fishy, isn’t it?” he said in an undertone to Ron.“Malfoy not playing?”

“Lucky, I call it,” said Ron, looking slightly moreanimated. “And Vaisey off too, he’s their best goalscorer, I didn’t fancy — hey!” he said suddenly,freezing halfway through pulling on his Keeper’sgloves and staring at Harry.

“What?”

Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I ... you ...” Ron had dropped his voice, he lookedboth scared and excited. “My drink ... my pumpkinjuice ... you didn’t ... ?”

Harry raised his eyebrows, but said nothing except,“Well be starting in about five minutes, you’d betterget your boots on.”

They walked out onto the pitch to tumultuous roarsand boos. One end of the stadium was solid red andgold; the other, a sea of green and silver. ManyHufflepuffs and Ravenclaws had taken sides too:Amidst all the yelling and clapping Harry coulddistinctly hear the roar of Luna Lovegood’s famouslion-topped hat.

Harry stepped up to Madam Hooch, the referee, whowas standing ready to release the balls from the crate.

“Captains shake hands,” she said, and Harry had hishand crushed by the new Slytherin Captain,

Urquhart. “Mount your brooms. On the whistle ...three ... two ... one ...”

The whistle sounded, Harry and the others kicked offhard from the frozen ground, and they were away.

Harry soared around the perimeter of the grounds,looking around for the Snitch and keeping one eye onHarper, who was zigzagging far below him. Then avoice that was jarringly different to the usualcommentator’s started up.

“Well, there they go, and I think we’re all surprised tosee the team that Potter’s put together this year.

Many thought, given Ronald Weasley’s patchyperformance as Keeper last year, that he might be offthe team, but of course, a close personal friendshipwith the Captain does help. ...”

Page | 331 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

These words were greeted with jeers and applausefrom the Slytherin end of the pitch. Harry cranedaround on his broom to look toward thecommentator’s podium. A tall, skinny blond boy withan upturned nose was standing there, talking into themagical megaphone that had once been Lee Jordan’s;Harry recognized Zacharias Smith, a Hufflepuff playerwhom he heartily disliked.

“Oh, and here comes Slytherin’s first attempt on goal,it’s Urquhart streaking down the pitch and —”

Harry’s stomach turned over.

“— Weasley saves it, well, he’s bound to get luckysometimes, I suppose. ...”

“That’s right, Smith, he is,” muttered Harry, grinningto himself, as he dived amongst the Chasers with hiseyes searching all around for some hint of the elusiveSnitch.

With half an hour of the game gone, Gryffindor wereleading sixty points to zero, Ron having made sometruly spectacular saves, some by the very tips of hisgloves, and Ginny having scored four of Gryffindor’ssix goals. This effectively stopped Zachariaswondering loudly whether the two Weasleys were onlythere because Harry liked them, and he started onPeakes and Coote instead.

“Of course, Coote isn’t really the usual build for aBeater,” said Zacharias loftily, “they’ve generally got abit more muscle —”

“Hit a Bludger at him!” Harry called to Coote as hezoomed past, but Coote, grinning broadly, chose toaim the next Bludger at Harper instead, who was justpassing Harry in the opposite direction. Harry was

Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

pleased to hear the dull thunk that meant theBludger had found its mark.

It seemed as though Gryffindor could do no wrong.Again and again they scored, and again and again, atthe other end of the pitch, Ron saved goals withapparent ease. He was actually smiling now, andwhen the crowd greeted a particularly good save witha rousing chorus of the old favorite “Weasley Is OurKing,” he pretended to conduct them from on high.

“Thinks he’s something special today, doesn’t he?”said a snide voice, and Harry was nearly knocked offhis broom as Harper collided with him hard anddeliberately. “Your blood-traitor pal ...”

Madam Hooch’s back was turned, and thoughGryffindors below shouted in anger, by the time shelooked around, Harper had already sped off. Hisshoulder aching, Harry raced after him, determined toram him back. ...

“And I think Harper of Slytherin’s seen the Snitch!”said Zacharias Smith through his megaphone. “Yes,he’s certainly seen something Potter hasn’t!”

Smith really was an idiot, thought Harry, hadn’t henoticed them collide? But next moment, his stomachseemed to drop out of the sky — Smith was right andHarry was wrong: Harper had not sped upward atrandom; he had spotted what Harry had not: TheSnitch was speeding along high above them, glintingbrightly against the clear blue sky.

Harry accelerated; the wind was whistling in his earsso that it drowned all sound of Smith’s commentaryor the crowd, but Harper was still ahead of him, andGryffindor was only a hundred points up; if Harper

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

got there first Gryffindor had lost ... and now Harperwas feet from it, his hand outstretched. ...

“Oi, Harper!” yelled Harry in desperation. “How muchdid Malfoy pay you to come on instead of him?”

He did not know what made him say it, but Harperdid a double-take; he fumbled the Snitch, let it slipthrough his fingers, and shot right past it. Harrymade a great swipe for the tiny, fluttering ball andcaught it.

“YES!” Harry yelled. Wheeling around, he hurtledback toward the ground, the Snitch held high in hishand. As the crowd realized what had happened, agreat shout went up that almost drowned the soundof the whistle that signaled the end of the game.

“Ginny, where’re you going?” yelled Harry, who hadfound himself trapped in the midst of a mass midairhug with the rest of the team, but Ginny sped righton past them until, with an almighty crash, shecollided with the commentator’s podium. As thecrowd shrieked and laughed, the Gryffindor teamlanded beside the wreckage of wood under whichZacharias was feebly stirring; Harry heard Ginnysaying blithely to an irate Professor McGonagall,“Forgot to brake, Professor, sorry.”

Laughing, Harry broke free of the rest of the team andhugged Ginny, but let go very quickly. Avoiding hergaze, he clapped a cheering Ron on the back insteadas, all enmity forgotten, the Gryffindor team left thepitch arm in arm, punching the air and waving totheir supporters.

The atmosphere in the changing room was jubilant.

Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Party up in the common room, Seamus said!” yelledDean exuberantly. “C’mon, Ginny, Demelza!”

Ron and Harry were the last two in the changingroom. They were just about to leave when Hermioneentered. She was twisting her Gryffindor scarf in herhands and looked upset but determined.

“I want a word with you, Harry.” She took a deepbreath. “You shouldn’t have done it. You heardSlughorn, it’s illegal.”

“What are you going to do, turn us in?” demandedRon.

“What are you two talking about?” asked Harry,turning away to hang up his robes so that neither ofthem would see him grinning.

“You know perfectly well what we’re talking about!”said Hermione shrilly. “You spiked Ron’s juice withlucky potion at breakfast! Felix Felicis!”

“No, I didn’t,” said Harry, turning back to face themboth.

“Yes you did, Harry, and that’s why everything wentright, there were Slytherin players missing and Ronsaved everything!”

“I didn’t put it in!” said Harry, grinning broadly. Heslipped his hand inside his jacket pocket and drewout the tiny bottle that Hermione had seen in hishand that morning. It was full of golden potion andthe cork was still tightly sealed with wax. “I wantedRon to think I’d done it, so I faked it when I knew youwere looking.” He looked at Ron. “You savedeverything because you felt lucky. You did it allyourself.”

Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He pocketed the potion again.

“There really wasn’t anything in my pumpkin juice?”Ron said, astounded. “But the weather’s good ... andVaisey couldn’t play. ... I honestly haven’t been givenlucky potion?”

Harry shook his head. Ron gaped at him for amoment, then rounded on Hermione, imitating hervoice. “ You added Felix Felicis to Ron’s juice thismorning, that’s why he saved everything\ See! I cansave goals without help, Hermione!”

“I never said you couldn’t — Ron, you thought you’dbeen given it too!”

But Ron had already strode past her out of the doorwith his broomstick over his shoulder.

“Er,” said Harry into the sudden silence; he had notexpected his plan to backfire like this, “shall ... shallwe go up to the party, then?”

“You go!” said Hermione, blinking back tears. “I’msick of Ron at the moment, I don’t know what I’msupposed to have done. ...”

And she stormed out of the changing room too.

Harry walked slowly back up the grounds toward thecastle through the crowd, many of whom shoutedcongratulations at him, but he felt a great sense ofletdown; he had been sure that if Ron won the match,he and Hermione would be friends again immediately.He did not see how he could possibly explain toHermione that what she had done to offend Ron waskiss Viktor Krum, not when the offense had occurredso long ago.

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry could not see Hermione at the Gryffindorcelebration party, which was in full swing when hearrived. Renewed cheers and clapping greeted hisappearance, and he was soon surrounded by a mob ofpeople congratulating him. What with trying to shakeoff the Creevey brothers, who wanted a blow-by-blowmatch analysis, and the large group of girls thatencircled him, laughing at his least amusingcomments and batting their eyelids, it was some timebefore he could try and find Ron. At last, heextricated himself from Romilda Vane, who washinting heavily that she would like to go to Slughorn’sChristmas party with him. As he was ducking towardthe drinks table, he walked straight into Ginny,

Arnold the Pygmy Puff riding on her shoulder andCrookshanks mewing hopefully at her heels.

“Looking for Ron?” she asked, smirking. “He’s overthere, the filthy hypocrite.”

Harry looked into the corner she was indicating.

There, in full view of the whole room, stood Ronwrapped so closely around Lavender Brown it washard to tell whose hands were whose.

“It looks like he’s eating her face, doesn’t it?” saidGinny dispassionately. “But I suppose he’s got torefine his technique somehow. Good game, Harry.”

She patted him on the arm; Harry felt a swoopingsensation in his stomach, but then she walked off tohelp herself to more butterbeer. Crookshanks trottedafter her, his yellow eyes fixed upon Arnold.

Harry turned away from Ron, who did not look like hewould be surfacing soon, just as the portrait hole wasclosing. With a sinking feeling, he thought he saw amane of bushy brown hair whipping out of sight.

Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He darted forward, sidestepped Romilda Vane again,and pushed open the portrait of the Fat Lady. Thecorridor outside seemed to be deserted.

“Hermione?”

He found her in the first unlocked classroom he tried.She was sitting on the teacher’s desk, alone except fora small ring of twittering yellow birds circling herhead, which she had clearly just conjured out ofmidair. Harry could not help admiring her spell-workat a time like this.

“Oh, hello, Harry,” she said in a brittle voice. “I wasjust practicing.”

“Yeah ... they’re — er — really good. ...” said Harry.

He had no idea what to say to her. He was justwondering whether there was any chance that shehad not noticed Ron, that she had merely left theroom because the party was a little too rowdy, whenshe said, in an unnaturally high-pitched voice, “Ronseems to be enjoying the celebrations.”

“Er ... does he?” said Harry.

“Don’t pretend you didn’t see him,” said Hermione.

“He wasn’t exactly hiding it, was — ?”

The door behind them burst open. To Harry’s horror,Ron came in, laughing, pulling Lavender by the hand.

“Oh,” he said, drawing up short at the sight of Harryand Hermione.

“Oops!” said Lavender, and she backed out of theroom, giggling. The door swung shut behind her.

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There was a horrible, swelling, billowing silence.Hermione was staring at Ron, who refused to look ather, but said with an odd mixture of bravado andawkwardness, “Hi, Harry! Wondered where you’d gotto!”

Hermione slid off the desk. The little flock of goldenbirds continued to twitter in circles around her headso that she looked like a strange, feathery model ofthe solar system.

“You shouldn’t leave Lavender waiting outside,” shesaid quietly. “She’ll wonder where you’ve gone.”

She walked very slowly and erectly toward the door.Harry glanced at Ron, who was looking relieved thatnothing worse had happened.

“Oppugno\” came a shriek from the doorway.

Harry spun around to see Hermione pointing herwand at Ron, her expression wild: The little flock ofbirds was speeding like a hail of fat golden bulletstoward Ron, who yelped and covered his face with hishands, but the birds attacked, pecking and clawing atevery bit of flesh they could reach.

“Gerremoffme!” he yelled, but with one last look ofvindictive fury, Hermione wrenched open the doorand disappeared through it. Harry thought he heard asob before it slammed.

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





THE UNBREAKABLE VOW

Snow was swirling against the icy windows oncemore; Christmas was approaching fast. Hagrid hadalready single-handedly delivered the usual twelveChristmas trees for the Great Hall; garlands of hollyand tinsel had been twisted around the banisters ofthe stairs; everlasting candles glowed from inside thehelmets of suits of armor and great bunches ofmistletoe had been hung at intervals along thecorridors. Large groups of girls tended to convergeunderneath the mistletoe bunches every time Harrywent past, which caused blockages in the corridors;fortunately, however, Harry’s frequent nighttimewanderings had given him an unusually goodknowledge of the castle’s secret passageways, so thathe was able, without too much difficulty, to navigatemistletoe-free routes between classes.

Ron, who might once have found the necessity ofthese detours a cause for jealousy rather thanhilarity, simply roared with laughter about it all.Although Harry much preferred this new laughing,

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

joking Ron to the moody, aggressive model he hadbeen enduring for the last few weeks, the improvedRon came at a heavy price. Firstly, Harry had to putup with the frequent presence of Lavender Brown,who seemed to regard any moment that she was notkissing Ron as a moment wasted; and secondly,

Harry found himself once more the best friend of twopeople who seemed unlikely ever to speak to eachother again.

Ron, whose hands and forearms still bore scratchesand cuts from Hermione’s bird attack, was taking adefensive and resentful tone.

“She can’t complain,” he told Harry. “She snoggedKrum. So she’s found out someone wants to snog metoo. Well, it’s a free country. I haven’t done anythingwrong.”

Harry did not answer, but pretended to be absorbedin the book they were supposed to have read beforeCharms next morning (Quintessence: A Quest).Determined as he was to remain friends with bothRon and Hermione, he was spending a lot of time withhis mouth shut tight.

“I never promised Hermione anything,” Ron mumbled.“I mean, all right, I was going to go to Slughorn’sChristmas party with her, but she never said ... justas friends ... I’m a free agent. ...”

Harry turned a page of Quintessence, aware that Ronwas watching him. Ron’s voice tailed away in mutters,barely audible over the loud crackling of the fire,though Harry thought he caught the words “Krum”and “can’t complain” again.

Hermione’s schedule was so full that Harry could onlytalk to her properly in the evenings, when Ron was, in

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

any case, so tightly wrapped around Lavender that hedid not notice what Harry was doing. Hermionerefused to sit in the common room while Ron wasthere, so Harry generally joined her in the library,which meant that their conversations were held inwhispers.

“He’s at perfect liberty to kiss whomever he likes,”said Hermione, while the librarian, Madam Pince,prowled the shelves behind them. “I really couldn’tcare less.”

She raised her quill and dotted an i so ferociouslythat she punctured a hole in her parchment. Harrysaid nothing. He thought his voice might soon vanishfrom lack of use. He bent a little lower over AdvancedPotion-Making and continued to make notes onEverlasting Elixirs, occasionally pausing to decipherthe Prince’s useful additions to Libatius Borage’s text.

“And incidentally,” said Hermione, after a fewmoments, “you need to be careful.”

“For the last time,” said Harry, speaking in a slightlyhoarse whisper after three-quarters of an hour ofsilence, “I am not giving back this book, I’ve learnedmore from the Half-Blood Prince than Snape orSlughorn have taught me in —”

“I’m not talking about your stupid so-called Prince,”said Hermione, giving his book a nasty look as thoughit had been rude to her. “I’m talking about earlier. Iwent into the girls’ bathroom just before I came inhere and there were about a dozen girls in there,including that Romilda Vane, trying to decide how toslip you a love potion. They’re all hoping they’re goingto get you to take them to Slughorn’s party, and theyall seem to have bought Fred and George’s lovepotions, which I’m afraid to say probably work —”Page | 342 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Why didn’t you confiscate them then?” demandedHarry. It seemed extraordinary that Hermione’s maniafor upholding rules could have abandoned her at thiscrucial juncture.

“They didn’t have the potions with them in thebathroom,” said Hermione scornfully. “They were justdiscussing tactics. As I doubt whether even the Half-Blood Prince” — she gave the book another nasty look— “could dream up an antidote for a dozen differentlove potions at once, I’d just invite someone to go withyou, thatll stop all the others thinking they’ve still gota chance. It’s tomorrow night, they’re gettingdesperate.”

“There isn’t anyone I want to invite,” mumbled Harry,who was still trying not to think about Ginny anymore than he could help, despite the fact that shekept cropping up in his dreams in ways that madehim devoutly thankful that Ron could not performLegilimency.

“Well, just be careful what you drink, becauseRomilda Vane looked like she meant business,” saidHermione grimly.

She hitched up the long roll of parchment on whichshe was writing her Arithmancy essay and continuedto scratch away with her quill. Harry watched herwith his mind a long way away.

“Hang on a moment,” he said slowly. “I thought Filchhad banned anything bought at Weasleys’ WizardWheezes?”

“And when has anyone ever paid attention to whatFilch has banned?” asked Hermione, stillconcentrating on her essay.

Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But I thought all the owls were being searched. Sohow come these girls are able to bring love potionsinto school?”

“Fred and George send them disguised as perfumesand cough potions,” said Hermione. “It’s part of theirOwl Order Service.”

“You know a lot about it.”

Hermione gave him the kind of nasty look she hadjust given his copy of Advanced Potion-Making.

“It was all on the back of the bottles they showedGinny and me in the summer,” she said coldly. “Idon’t go around putting potions in people’s drinks ...or pretending to, either, which is just as bad. ...”

“Yeah, well, never mind that,” said Harry quickly.

“The point is, Filch is being fooled, isn’t he? Thesegirls are getting stuff into the school disguised assomething else! So why couldn’t Malfoy have broughtthe necklace into the school — ?”

“Oh, Harry ... not that again ...”

“Come on, why not?” demanded Harry.

“Look,” sighed Hermione, “Secrecy Sensors detectjinxes, curses, and concealment charms, don’t they?They’re used to find Dark Magic and Dark objects.They’d have picked up a powerful curse, like the oneon that necklace, within seconds. But somethingthat’s just been put in the wrong bottle wouldn’tregister — and anyway, love potions aren’t Dark ordangerous —”

“Easy for you to say,” muttered Harry, thinking ofRomilda Vane.

Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“— so it would be down to Filch to realize it wasn’t acough potion, and he’s not a very good wizard, I doubthe can tell one potion from —”

Hermione stopped dead; Harry had heard it too.Somebody had moved close behind them among thedark bookshelves. They waited, and a moment laterthe vulturelike countenance of Madam Pinceappeared around the corner, her sunken cheeks, herskin like parchment, and her long hooked noseilluminated unflatteringly by the lamp she wascarrying.

“The library is now closed,” she said. “Mind youreturn anything you have borrowed to the correct —what have you been doing to that book, you depravedboy?”

“It isn’t the library’s, it’s mine!” said Harry hastily,snatching his copy of Advanced Potion-Making off thetable as she lunged at it with a clawlike hand.

“Despoiled!” she hissed. “Desecrated! Befouled!”

“It’s just a book that’s been written on!” said Harry,tugging it out of her grip.

She looked as though she might have a seizure;Hermione, who had hastily packed her things,grabbed Harry by the arm and frogmarched himaway.

“She’ll ban you from the library if you’re not careful.Why did you have to bring that stupid book?”

“It’s not my fault she’s barking mad, Hermione. Ord’you think she overheard you being rude aboutFilch? I’ve always thought there might be somethinggoing on between them. ...”

Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, ha ha ...”

Enjoying the fact that they could speak normallyagain, they made their way along the deserted, lamp-lit corridors back to the common room, arguing aboutwhether or not Filch and Madam Pince were secretlyin love with each other.

“Baubles,” said Harry to the Fat Lady, this being thenew, festive password.

“Same to you,” said the Fat Lady with a roguish grin,and she swung forward to admit them.

“Hi, Harry!” said Romilda Vane, the moment he hadclimbed through the portrait hole. “Fancy agillywater?”

Hermione gave him a “what-did-I-tell-you?” look overher shoulder.

“No thanks,” said Harry quickly. “I don’t like it much.”

“Well, take these anyway,” said Romilda, thrusting abox into his hands. “Chocolate Cauldrons, they’ve gotfirewhisky in them. My gran sent them to me, but Idon’t like them.”

“Oh — right — thanks a lot,” said Harry, who couldnot think what else to say. “Er — I’m just going overhere with ...”

He hurried off behind Hermione, his voice tailingaway feebly.

“Told you,” said Hermione succinctly. “Sooner you asksomeone, sooner they’ll all leave you alone and youcan —”

Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

But her face suddenly turned blank; she had justspotted Ron and Lavender, who were entwined in thesame armchair.

“Well, good night, Harry,” said Hermione, though itwas only seven o’clock in the evening, and she left forthe girls’ dormitory without another word.

Harry went to bed comforting himself that there wasonly one more day of lessons to struggle through,plus Slughorn’s party, after which he and Ron woulddepart together for the Burrow. It now seemedimpossible that Ron and Hermione would make upwith each other before the holidays began, butperhaps, somehow, the break would give them time tocalm down, think better of their behavior. ...

But his hopes were not high, and they sank still lowerafter enduring a Transfiguration lesson with themboth next day. They had just embarked upon theimmensely difficult topic of human Transfiguration;working in front of mirrors, they were supposed to bechanging the color of their own eyebrows. Hermionelaughed unkindly at Ron’s disastrous first attempt,during which he somehow managed to give himself aspectacular handlebar mustache; Ron retaliated bydoing a cruel but accurate impression of Hermionejumping up and down in her seat every time ProfessorMcGonagall asked a question, which Lavender andParvati found deeply amusing and which reducedHermione to the verge of tears again. She raced out ofthe classroom on the bell, leaving half her thingsbehind; Harry, deciding that her need was greaterthan Ron’s just now, scooped up her remainingpossessions and followed her.

He finally tracked her down as she emerged from agirls’ bathroom on the floor below. She was

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

accompanied by Luna Lovegood, who was patting hervaguely on the back.

“Oh, hello, Harry,” said Luna. “Did you know one ofyour eyebrows is bright yellow?”

“Hi, Luna. Hermione, you left your stuff. ...”

He held out her books.

“Oh yes,” said Hermione in a choked voice, taking herthings and turning away quickly to hide the fact thatshe was wiping her eyes on her pencil case. “Thankyou, Harry. Well, I’d better get going. ...”

And she hurried off, without giving Harry any time tooffer words of comfort, though admittedly he couldnot think of any.

“She’s a bit upset,” said Luna. “I thought at first itwas Moaning Myrtle in there, but it turned out to beHermione. She said something about that RonWeasley. ...”

“Yeah, they’ve had a row,” said Harry.

“He says very funny things sometimes, doesn’t he?”said Luna, as they set off down the corridor together.“But he can be a bit unkind. I noticed that last year.”

“I s’pose,” said Harry. Luna was demonstrating herusual knack of speaking uncomfortable truths; hehad never met anyone quite like her. “So have youhad a good term?”

“Oh, it’s been all right,” said Luna. “A bit lonelywithout the D.A. Ginny’s been nice, though. Shestopped two boys in our Transfiguration class callingme ‘Loony’ the other day —”

Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“How would you like to come to Slughorn’s party withme tonight?”

The words were out of Harry’s mouth before he couldstop them; he heard himself say them as though itwere a stranger speaking.

Luna turned her protuberant eyes upon him insurprise.

“Slughorn’s party? With you?”

“Yeah,” said Harry. “We’re supposed to bring guests,so I thought you might like ... I mean ...” He was keento make his intentions perfectly clear. “I mean, just asfriends, you know. But if you don’t want to ...”

He was already half hoping that she didn’t want to.

“Oh, no, I’d love to go with you as friends!” said Luna,beaming as he had never seen her beam before.“Nobody’s ever asked me to a party before, as a friend!Is that why you dyed your eyebrow, for the party?Should I do mine too?”

“No,” said Harry firmly, “that was a mistake. I’ll getHermione to put it right for me. So, I’ll meet you inthe entrance hall at eight o’clock then.”

“AHA!” screamed a voice from overhead and both ofthem jumped; unnoticed by either of them, they hadjust passed right underneath Peeves, who washanging upside down from a chandelier and grinningmaliciously at them.

“Potty asked Loony to go to the partyl Potty lurvesLoony! Potty luuuuurves LooooooonyV’

Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

And he zoomed away, cackling and shrieking, “Pottyloves Loony!”

“Nice to keep these things private,” said Harry. Andsure enough, in no time at all the whole schoolseemed to know that Harry Potter was taking LunaLovegood to Slughorn’s party.

“You could’ve taken anyonel” said Ron in disbeliefover dinner. “Anyonel And you chose LoonyLovegood?”

“Don’t call her that, Ron,” snapped Ginny, pausingbehind Harry on her way to join friends. “I’m reallyglad you’re taking her, Harry, she’s so excited.”

And she moved on down the table to sit with Dean.Harry tried to feel pleased that Ginny was glad he wastaking Luna to the party, but could not quite manageit. A long way along the table, Hermione was sittingalone, playing with her stew. Harry noticed Ronlooking at her furtively.

“You could say sorry,” suggested Harry bluntly.

“What, and get attacked by another flock ofcanaries?” muttered Ron.

“What did you have to imitate her for?”

“She laughed at my mustache!”

“So did I, it was the stupidest thing I’ve ever seen.”

But Ron did not seem to have heard; Lavender hadjust arrived with Parvati. Squeezing herself inbetween Harry and Ron, Lavender flung her armsaround Ron’s neck.

Page | 350 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Hi, Harry,” said Parvati who, like him, looked faintlyembarrassed and bored by the behavior of their twofriends.

“Hi,” said Harry. “How’re you? You’re staying atHogwarts, then? I heard your parents wanted you toleave.”

“I managed to talk them out of it for the time being,”said Parvati. “That Katie thing really freaked themout, but as there hasn’t been anything since ... Oh,hi, Hermione!”

Parvati positively beamed. Harry could tell that shewas feeling guilty for having laughed at Hermione inTransfiguration. He looked around and saw thatHermione was beaming back, if possible even morebrightly. Girls were very strange sometimes.

“Hi, Parvati!” said Hermione, ignoring Ron andLavender completely. “Are you going to Slughorn’sparty tonight?”

“No invite,” said Parvati gloomily. “I’d love to go,though, it sounds like it’s going to be really good. ...You’re going, aren’t you?”

“Yes, I’m meeting Cormac at eight, and we’re —”

There was a noise like a plunger being withdrawnfrom a blocked sink and Ron surfaced. Hermioneacted as though she had not seen or heard anything.

“— we’re going up to the party together.”

“Cormac?” said Parvati. “Cormac McLaggen, youmean?”

Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“That’s right,” said Hermione sweetly. “The one whoalmost’ — she put a great deal of emphasis on theword — “became Gryffindor Keeper.”

“Are you going out with him, then?” asked Parvati,wide-eyed.

“Oh — yes — didn’t you know?” said Hermione, with amost un-Hermione-ish giggle.

“No!” said Parvati, looking positively agog at this pieceof gossip. “Wow, you like your Quidditch players,don’t you? First Krum, then McLaggen ...”

“I like really good Quidditch players,” Hermionecorrected her, still smiling. “Well, see you ... Got to goand get ready for the party. ...”

She left. At once Lavender and Parvati put their headstogether to discuss this new development, witheverything they had ever heard about McLaggen, andall they had ever guessed about Hermione. Ronlooked strangely blank and said nothing. Harry wasleft to ponder in silence the depths to which girlswould sink to get revenge.

When he arrived in the entrance hall at eight o’clockthat night, he found an unusually large number ofgirls lurking there, all of whom seemed to be staringat him resentfully as he approached Luna. She waswearing a set of spangled silver robes that wereattracting a certain amount of giggles from theonlookers, but otherwise she looked quite nice. Harrywas glad, in any case, that she had left off her radishearrings, her butterbeer cork necklace, and herSpectrespecs.

“Hi,” he said. “Shall we get going then?”

Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh yes,” she said happily. “Where is the party?”

“Slughorn’s office,” said Harry, leading her up themarble staircase away from all the staring andmuttering. “Did you hear, there’s supposed to be avampire coming?”

“Rufus Scrimgeour?” asked Luna.

“I — what?” said Harry, disconcerted. “You mean theMinister of Magic?”

“Yes, he’s a vampire,” said Luna matter-of-factly.“Father wrote a very long article about it whenScrimgeour first took over from Cornelius Fudge, buthe was forced not to publish by somebody from theMinistry. Obviously, they didn’t want the truth to getout!”

Harry, who thought it most unlikely that RufusScrimgeour was a vampire, but who was used to Lunarepeating her father’s bizarre views as though theywere fact, did not reply; they were alreadyapproaching Slughorn’s office and the sounds oflaughter, music, and loud conversation were growinglouder with every step they took.

Whether it had been built that way, or because hehad used magical trickery to make it so, Slughorn’soffice was much larger than the usual teacher’sstudy. The ceiling and walls had been draped withemerald, crimson, and gold hangings, so that itlooked as though they were all inside a vast tent. Theroom was crowded and stuffy and bathed in the redlight cast by an ornate golden lamp dangling from thecenter of the ceiling in which real fairies werefluttering, each a brilliant speck of light. Loud singingaccompanied by what sounded like mandolins issuedfrom a distant corner; a haze of pipe smoke hung overPage | 353 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

several elderly warlocks deep in conversation, and anumber of house-elves were negotiating their waysqueakily through the forest of knees, obscured bythe heavy silver platters of food they were bearing, sothat they looked like little roving tables.

“Harry, m’boy!” boomed Slughorn, almost as soon asHarry and Luna had squeezed in through the door.“Come in, come in, so many people I’d like you tomeet!”

Slughorn was wearing a tasseled velvet hat to matchhis smoking jacket. Gripping Harry’s arm so tightly hemight have been hoping to Disapparate with him,Slughorn led him purposefully into the party; Harryseized Luna’s hand and dragged her along with him.

“Harry, I’d like you to meet Eldred Worple, an oldstudent of mine, author of Blood Brothers: My LifeAmongst the Vampires — and, of course, his friendSanguini.”

Worple, who was a small, stout, bespectacled man,grabbed Harry’s hand and shook it enthusiastically;the vampire Sanguini, who was tall and emaciatedwith dark shadows under his eyes, merely nodded. Helooked rather bored. A gaggle of girls was standingclose to him, looking curious and excited.

“Harry Potter, I am simply delighted!” said Worple,peering shortsightedly up into Harry’s face. “I wassaying to Professor Slughorn only the other day,‘Where is the biography of Harry Potter for which wehave all been waiting?’ ”

“Er,” said Harry, “were you?”

“Just as modest as Horace described!” said Worple.“But seriously” — his manner changed; it became

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

suddenly businesslike — “I would be delighted towrite it myself — people are craving to know moreabout you, dear boy, craving! If you were prepared togrant me a few interviews, say in four- or five-hoursessions, why, we could have the book finished withinmonths. And all with very little effort on your part, Iassure you — ask Sanguini here if it isn’t quite —Sanguini, stay here\” added Worple, suddenly stern,for the vampire had been edging toward the nearbygroup of girls, a rather hungry look in his eye. “Here,have a pasty,” said Worple, seizing one from a passingelf and stuffing it into Sanguini’s hand before turninghis attention back to Harry.

“My dear boy, the gold you could make, you have noidea —”

“I’m definitely not interested,” said Harry firmly, “andI’ve just seen a friend of mine, sorry.”

He pulled Luna after him into the crowd; he hadindeed just seen a long mane of brown hair disappearbetween what looked like two members of the WeirdSisters.

“Hermione! HermioneV’

“Harry! There you are, thank goodness! Hi, Luna!”

“What’s happened to you?” asked Harry, for Hermionelooked distinctly disheveled, rather as though she hadjust fought her way out of a thicket of Devil’s Snare.

“Oh, I’ve just escaped — I mean, I’ve just leftCormac,” she said. “Under the mistletoe,” she addedin explanation, as Harry continued to lookquestioningly at her.

Page | 355 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Serves you right for coming with him,” he told herseverely.

“I thought he’d annoy Ron most,” said Hermionedispassionately. “I debated for a while aboutZacharias Smith, but I thought, on the whole —”

“You considered Smith?” said Harry, revolted.

“Yes, I did, and I’m starting to wish I’d chosen him,McLaggen makes Grawp look a gentleman. Let’s gothis way, we’ll be able to see him coming, he’s so tall.

The three of them made their way over to the otherside of the room, scooping up goblets of mead on theway, realizing too late that Professor Trelawney wasstanding there alone.

“Hello,” said Luna politely to Professor Trelawney.

“Good evening, my dear,” said Professor Trelawney,focusing upon Luna with some difficulty. Harry couldsmell cooking sherry again. “I haven’t seen you in myclasses lately. ...”

“No, I’ve got Firenze this year,” said Luna.

“Oh, of course,” said Professor Trelawney with anangry, drunken titter. “Or Dobbin, as I prefer to thinkof him. You would have thought, would you not, thatnow I am returned to the school ProfessorDumbledore might have got rid of the horse? But no... we share classes. ... It’s an insult, frankly, aninsult. Do you know ...”

Professor Trelawney seemed too tipsy to haverecognized Harry. Under cover of her furiouscriticisms of Firenze, Harry drew closer to Hermione

Page | 356 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

and said, “Let’s get something straight. Are youplanning to tell Ron that you interfered at Keepertryouts?”

Hermione raised her eyebrows. “Do you really thinkI’d stoop that low?”

Harry looked at her shrewdly. “Hermione, if you canask out McLaggen —”

“There’s a difference,” said Hermione with dignity.

“I’ve got no plans to tell Ron anything about whatmight, or might not, have happened at Keepertryouts.”

“Good,” said Harry fervently. “Because he’ll just fallapart again, and we’ll lose the next match —”

“Quidditch!” said Hermione angrily. “Is that all boyscare about? Cormac hasn’t asked me one singlequestion about myself, no, I’ve just been treated to ‘AHundred Great Saves Made by Cormac McLaggen’nonstop ever since — oh no, here he comes!”

She moved so fast it was as though she hadDisapparated; one moment she was there, the next,she had squeezed between two guffawing witches andvanished.

“Seen Hermione?” asked McLaggen, forcing his waythrough the throng a minute later.

“No, sorry,” said Harry, and he turned quickly to joinin Luna’s conversation, forgetting for a split second towhom she was talking.

“Harry Potter!” said Professor Trelawney in deep,vibrant tones, noticing him for the first time.

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, hello,” said Harry unenthusiastically.

“My dear boy!” she said in a very carrying whisper.“The rumors! The stories! The Chosen One’! Ofcourse, I have known for a very long time. ... Theomens were never good, Harry. ... But why have younot returned to Divination? For you, of all people, thesubject is of the utmost importance!”

“Ah, Sybill, we all think our subject’s mostimportant!” said a loud voice, and Slughorn appearedat Professor Trelawney’s other side, his face very red,his velvet hat a little askew, a glass of mead in onehand and an enormous mince pie in the other. “But Idon’t think I’ve ever known such a natural atPotions!” said Slughorn, regarding Harry with a fond,if bloodshot, eye. “Instinctive, you know — like hismother! I’ve only ever taught a few with this kind ofability, I can tell you that, Sybill — why even Severus

And to Harry’s horror, Slughorn threw out an armand seemed to scoop Snape out of thin air towardthem.

“Stop skulking and come and join us, Severus!”hiccuped Slughorn happily. “I was just talking aboutHarry’s exceptional potion-making! Some credit mustgo to you, of course, you taught him for five years!”

Trapped, with Slughorn’s arm around his shoulders,Snape looked down his hooked nose at Harry, hisblack eyes narrowed.

“Funny, I never had the impression that I managed toteach Potter anything at all.”

“Well, then, it’s natural ability!” shouted Slughorn.“You should have seen what he gave me, first lesson,

Page | 358 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Draught of Living Death — never had a studentproduce finer on a first attempt, I don’t think evenyou, Severus —”

“Really?” said Snape quietly, his eyes still boring intoHarry, who felt a certain disquiet. The last thing hewanted was for Snape to start investigating thesource of his newfound brilliance at Potions.

“Remind me what other subjects you’re taking,

Harry?” asked Slughorn.

“Defense Against the Dark Arts, Charms,Transfiguration, Herbology ...”

“All the subjects required, in short, for an Auror,” saidSnape, with the faintest sneer.

“Yeah, well, that’s what I’d like to do,” said Harrydefiantly.

“And a great one you’ll make too!” boomed Slughorn.

“I don’t think you should be an Auror, Harry,” saidLuna unexpectedly. Everybody looked at her. “TheAurors are part of the Rotfang Conspiracy, I thoughteveryone knew that. They’re working to bring downthe Ministry of Magic from within using acombination of Dark Magic and gum disease.”

Harry inhaled half his mead up his nose as he startedto laugh. Really, it had been worth bringing Luna justfor this. Emerging from his goblet, coughing, soppingwet but still grinning, he saw something calculated toraise his spirits even higher: Draco Malfoy beingdragged by the ear toward them by Argus Filch.

“Professor Slughorn,” wheezed Filch, his jowls aquiverand the maniacal light of mischief-detection in his

Page | 359 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

bulging eyes, “I discovered this boy lurking in anupstairs corridor. He claims to have been invited toyour party and to have been delayed in setting out.

Did you issue him with an invitation?”

Malfoy pulled himself free of Filch’s grip, lookingfurious.

“All right, I wasn’t invited!” he said angrily. “I wastrying to gatecrash, happy?”

“No, I’m not!” said Filch, a statement at complete oddswith the glee on his face. “You’re in trouble, you are!Didn’t the headmaster say that nighttime prowling’sout, unless you’ve got permission, didn’t he, eh?”

“That’s all right, Argus, that’s all right,” saidSlughorn, waving a hand. “It’s Christmas, and it’s nota crime to want to come to a party. Just this once,we’ll forget any punishment; you may stay, Draco.”

Filch’s expression of outraged disappointment wasperfectly predictable; but why, Harry wondered,watching him, did Malfoy look almost equallyunhappy? And why was Snape looking at Malfoy asthough both angry and ... was it possible? ... a littleafraid?

But almost before Harry had registered what he hadseen, Filch had turned and shuffled away, mutteringunder his breath; Malfoy had composed his face intoa smile and was thanking Slughorn for his generosity,and Snape’s face was smoothly inscrutable again.

“It’s nothing, nothing,” said Slughorn, waving awayMalfoy’s thanks. “I did know your grandfather, afterall. ...”

Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“He always spoke very highly of you, sir,” said Malfoyquickly. “Said you were the best potion-maker he’dever known. ...”

Harry stared at Malfoy. It was not the sucking-up thatintrigued him; he had watched Malfoy do that toSnape for a long time. It was the fact that Malfoy did,after all, look a little ill. This was the first time he hadseen Malfoy close up for ages; he now saw that Malfoyhad dark shadows under his eyes and a distinctlygrayish tinge to his skin.

“I’d like a word with you, Draco,” said Snapesuddenly.

“Oh, now, Severus,” said Slughorn, hiccuping again,“it’s Christmas, don’t be too hard —”

“I’m his Head of House, and I shall decide how hard,or otherwise, to be,” said Snape curtly. “Follow me,Draco.”

They left, Snape leading the way, Malfoy lookingresentful. Harry stood there for a moment, irresolute,then said, “I’ll be back in a bit, Luna — er —bathroom.”

“All right,” she said cheerfully, and he thought heheard her, as he hurried off into the crowd, resumethe subject of the Rotfang Conspiracy with ProfessorTrelawney, who seemed sincerely interested.

It was easy, once out of the party, to pull hisInvisibility Cloak out of his pocket and throw it overhimself, for the corridor was quite deserted. What wasmore difficult was finding Snape and Malfoy. Harryran down the corridor, the noise of his feet masked bythe music and loud talk still issuing from Slughorn’soffice behind him. Perhaps Snape had taken Malfoy toPage | 361 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

his office in the dungeons ... or perhaps he wasescorting him back to the Slytherin common room. ...Harry pressed his ear against door after door as hedashed down the corridor until, with a great jolt ofexcitement, he crouched down to the keyhole of thelast classroom in the corridor and heard voices.

"... cannot afford mistakes, Draco, because if you areexpelled —”

“I didn’t have anything to do with it, all right?”

“I hope you are telling the truth, because it was bothclumsy and foolish. Already you are suspected ofhaving a hand in it.”

“Who suspects me?” said Malfoy angrily. “For the lasttime, I didn’t do it, okay? That Bell girl must’ve hadan enemy no one knows about — don’t look at me likethat! I know what you’re doing, I’m not stupid, but itwon’t work — I can stop you!”

There was a pause and then Snape said quietly, “Ah... Aunt Bellatrix has been teaching you Occlumency,

I see. What thoughts are you trying to conceal fromyour master, Draco?”

“I’m not trying to conceal anything from him, I justdon’t want you butting in!”

Harry pressed his ear still more closely against thekeyhole. ... What had happened to make Malfoy speakto Snape like this — Snape, toward whom he hadalways shown respect, even liking?

“So that is why you have been avoiding me this term?You have feared my interference? You realize that,had anybody else failed to come to my office when Ihad told them repeatedly to be there, Draco —”

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“So put me in detention! Report me to Dumbledore!”jeered Malfoy.

There was another pause. Then Snape said, “Youknow perfectly well that I do not wish to do either ofthose things.”

“You’d better stop telling me to come to your officethen!”

“Listen to me,” said Snape, his voice so low now thatHarry had to push his ear very hard against thekeyhole to hear. “I am trying to help you. I swore toyour mother I would protect you. I made theUnbreakable Vow, Draco —”

“Looks like you 11 have to break it, then, because Idon’t need your protection! It’s my job, he gave it tome and I’m doing it, I’ve got a plan and it’s going towork, it’s just taking a bit longer than I thought itwould!”

“What is your plan?”

“It’s none of your business!”

“If you tell me what you are trying to do, I can assistyou —”

“I’ve got all the assistance I need, thanks, I’m notalone!”

“You were certainly alone tonight, which was foolishin the extreme, wandering the corridors withoutlookouts or backup, these are elementary mistakes —

“I would’ve had Crabbe and Goyle with me if youhadn’t put them in detention!”

Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Keep your voice down!” spat Snape, for Malfoy’s voicehad risen excitedly. “If your friends Crabbe and Goyleintend to pass their Defense Against the Dark ArtsO.W.L. this time around, they will need to work alittle harder than they are doing at pres —”

“What does it matter?” said Malfoy. “Defense Againstthe Dark Arts — it’s all just a joke, isn’t it, an act?Like any of us need protecting against the Dark Arts

“It is an act that is crucial to success, Draco!” saidSnape. “Where do you think I would have been allthese years, if I had not known how to act? Now listento me! You are being incautious, wandering around atnight, getting yourself caught, and if you are placingyour reliance in assistants like Crabbe and Goyle —”

“They’re not the only ones, I’ve got other people on myside, better people!”

“Then why not confide in me, and I can —”

“I know what you’re up to! You want to steal myglory!”

There was another pause, then Snape said coldly,“You are speaking like a child. I quite understandthat your father’s capture and imprisonment hasupset you, but —”

Harry had barely a second’s warning; he heardMalfoy’s footsteps on the other side of the door andflung himself out of the way just as it burst open;Malfoy was striding away down the corridor, past theopen door of Slughorn’s office, around the distantcorner, and out of sight.

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hardly daring to breathe, Harry remained croucheddown as Snape emerged slowly from the classroom.His expression unfathomable, he returned to theparty. Harry remained on the floor, hidden beneaththe cloak, his mind racing.

Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





A VERY FROSTY CHRISTMAS

“So Snape was offering to help him? He was definitelyoffering to help him?”

“If you ask that once more,” said Harry, “I’m going tostick this sprout —”

“I’m only checking!” said Ron. They were standingalone at the Burrow’s kitchen sink, peeling amountain of sprouts for Mrs. Weasley. Snow wasdrifting past the window in front of them.

“Yes, Snape was offering to help himl” said Harry. “Hesaid he’d promised Malfoy’s mother to protect him,that he’d made an Unbreakable Oath or something —

“An Unbreakable Vow?” said Ron, looking stunned.“Nah, he can’t have. ... Are you sure?”

“Yes, I’m sure,” said Harry. “Why, what does itmean?”

Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, you can’t break an Unbreakable Vow. ...”

“I’d worked that much out for myself, funnily enough.What happens if you break it, then?”

“You die,” said Ron simply. “Fred and George tried toget me to make one when I was about five. I nearlydid too, I was holding hands with Fred and everythingwhen Dad found us. He went mental,” said Ron, witha reminiscent gleam in his eyes. “Only time I’ve everseen Dad as angry as Mum. Fred reckons his leftbuttock has never been the same since.”

“Yeah, well, passing over Fred’s left buttock —”

“I beg your pardon?” said Fred’s voice as the twinsentered the kitchen.

“Aaah, George, look at this. They’re using knives andeverything. Bless them.”

“I’ll be seventeen in two and a bit months’ time,” saidRon grumpily, “and then I’ll be able to do it by magic!”

“But meanwhile,” said George, sitting down at thekitchen table and putting his feet up on it, “we canenjoy watching you demonstrate the correct use of a— whoops-a-daisy!”

“You made me do that!” said Ron angrily, sucking hiscut thumb. “You wait, when I’m seventeen —”

“I’m sure you’ll dazzle us all with hithertounsuspected magical skills,” yawned Fred.

“And speaking of hitherto unsuspected skills,

Ronald,” said George, “what is this we hear fromGinny about you and a young lady called — unlessour information is faulty — Lavender Brown?”

Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron turned a little pink, but did not look displeasedas he turned back to the sprouts. “Mind your ownbusiness.”

“What a snappy retort,” said Fred. “I really don’t knowhow you think of them. No, what we wanted to knowwas ... how did it happen?”

“What d’you mean?”

“Did she have an accident or something?”

“What?”

“Well, how did she sustain such extensive braindamage? Careful, now!”

Mrs. Weasley entered the room just in time to see Ronthrow the sprout knife at Fred, who had turned it intoa paper airplane with one lazy flick of his wand.

“Ronl” she said furiously. “Don’t you ever let me seeyou throwing knives again!”

“I won’t,” said Ron, “let you see,” he added under hisbreath, as he turned back to the sprout mountain.

“Fred, George, I’m sorry, dears, but Remus is arrivingtonight, so Bill will have to squeeze in with you two.”

“No problem,” said George.

“Then, as Charlie isn’t coming home, that just leavesHarry and Ron in the attic, and if Fleur shares withGinny —”

“— that’ll make Ginny’s Christmas —” muttered Fred.

Page | 368 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“— everyone should be comfortable. Well, they’ll havea bed, anyway,” said Mrs. Weasley, sounding slightlyharassed.

“Percy definitely not showing his ugly face, then?”asked Fred.

Mrs. Weasley turned away before she answered. “No,he’s busy, I expect, at the Ministry.”

“Or he’s the world’s biggest prat,” said Fred, as Mrs.Weasley left the kitchen. “One of the two. Well, let’sget going, then, George.”

“What are you two up to?” asked Ron. “Can’t you helpus with these sprouts? You could just use your wandand then well be free too!”

“No, I don’t think we can do that,” said Fred seriously.“It’s very character-building stuff, learning to peelsprouts without magic, makes you appreciate howdifficult it is for Muggles and Squibs —”

“— and if you want people to help you, Ron,” addedGeorge, throwing the paper airplane at him, “Iwouldn’t chuck knives at them. Just a little hint.We’re off to the village, there’s a very pretty girlworking in the paper shop who thinks my card tricksare something marvelous ... almost like real magic.

“Gits,” said Ron darkly, watching Fred and Georgesetting off across the snowy yard. “Would’ve onlytaken them ten seconds and then we could’ve gonetoo.”

“I couldn’t,” said Harry. “I promised Dumbledore Iwouldn’t wander off while I’m staying here.”

Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh yeah,” said Ron. He peeled a few more sproutsand then said, “Are you going to tell Dumbledore whatyou heard Snape and Malfoy saying to each other?”

“Yep,” said Harry. “I’m going to tell anyone who canput a stop to it, and Dumbledore’s top of the list. Imight have another word with your dad too.”

“Pity you didn’t hear what Malfoy’s actually doing,though.”

“I couldn’t have done, could I? That was the wholepoint, he was refusing to tell Snape.”

There was silence for a moment or two, then Ronsaid, “ ’Course, you know what they’ll all say? Dadand Dumbledore and all of them? They’ll say Snapeisn’t really trying to help Malfoy, he was just trying tofind out what Malfoy’s up to.”

“They didn’t hear him,” said Harry flatly. “No one’sthat good an actor, not even Snape.”

“Yeah ... I’m just saying, though,” said Ron.

Harry turned to face him, frowning. “You think I’mright, though?”

“Yeah, I do!” said Ron hastily. “Seriously, I do! Butthey’re all convinced Snape’s in the Order, aren’tthey?”

Harry said nothing. It had already occurred to himthat this would be the most likely objection to his newevidence; he could hear Hermione now: Obviously,Harry, he was pretending to offer help so he could trickMalfoy into telling him what he’s doing. ...

Page | 370 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

This was pure imagination, however, as he had hadno opportunity to tell Hermione what he hadoverheard. She had disappeared from Slughorn’sparry before he returned to it, or so he had beeninformed by an irate McLaggen, and she had alreadygone to bed by the time he returned to the commonroom. As he and Ron had left for the Burrow early thenext day, he had barely had time to wish her a happyChristmas and to tell her that he had some veryimportant news when they got back from theholidays. He was not entirely sure that she had heardhim, though; Ron and Lavender had been saying athoroughly nonverbal good-bye just behind him at thetime.

Still, even Hermione would not be able to deny onething: Malfoy was definitely up to something, andSnape knew it, so Harry felt fully justified in saying “Itold you so,” which he had done several times to Ronalready.

Harry did not get the chance to speak to Mr. Weasley,who was working very long hours at the Ministry,until Christmas Eve night. The Weasleys and theirguests were sitting in the living room, which Ginnyhad decorated so lavishly that it was rather likesitting in a paper-chain explosion. Fred, George,

Harry, and Ron were the only ones who knew that theangel on top of the tree was actually a garden gnomethat had bitten Fred on the ankle as he pulled upcarrots for Christmas dinner. Stupefied, painted gold,stuffed into a miniature tutu and with small wingsglued to its back, it glowered down at them all, theugliest angel Harry had ever seen, with a large baldhead like a potato and rather hairy feet.

They were all supposed to be listening to a Christmasbroadcast by Mrs. Weasley’s favorite singer, CelestinaWarbeck, whose voice was warbling out of the large

Page | 371 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

wooden wireless set. Fleur, who seemed to findCelestina very dull, was talking so loudly in thecorner that a scowling Mrs. Weasley kept pointing herwand at the volume control, so that Celestina grewlouder and louder. Under cover of a particularly jazzynumber called “A Cauldron Full of Hot, Strong Love,”Fred and George started a game of Exploding Snapwith Ginny. Ron kept shooting Bill and Fleur covertlooks, as though hoping to pick up tips. Meanwhile,Remus Lupin, who was thinner and more ragged-looking than ever, was sitting beside the fire, staringinto its depths as though he could not hearCelestina’s voice.

Oh, come and stir my cauldron,

And if you do it right,

I’ll boil you up some hot strong loveTo keep you warm tonight.

“We danced to this when we were eighteen!” said Mrs.Weasley, wiping her eyes on her knitting. “Do youremember, Arthur?”

“Mphf?” said Mr. Weasley, whose head had beennodding over the satsuma he was peeling. “Oh yes ...marvelous tune ...”

With an effort, he sat up a little straighter and lookedaround at Harry, who was sitting next to him.

“Sorry about this,” he said, jerking his head towardthe wireless as Celestina broke into the chorus. “Beover soon.”

“No problem,” said Harry, grinning. “Has it been busyat the Ministry?”

“Very,” said Mr. Weasley. “I wouldn’t mind if we weregetting anywhere, but of the three arrests we’ve made

Page | 372 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

in the last couple of months, I doubt that one of themis a genuine Death Eater — only don’t repeat that,Harry,” he added quickly, looking much more awakeall of a sudden.

“They’re not still holding Stan Shunpike, are they?”asked Harry.

“I’m afraid so,” said Mr. Weasley. “I knowDumbledore’s tried appealing directly to Scrimgeourabout Stan. ... I mean, anybody who has actuallyinterviewed him agrees that he’s about as much aDeath Eater as this satsuma ... but the top levelswant to look as though they’re making some progress,and ‘three arrests’ sounds better than ‘three mistakenarrests and releases’... but again, this is all topsecret. ...”

“I won’t say anything,” said Harry. He hesitated for amoment, wondering how best to embark on what hewanted to say; as he marshaled his thoughts,Celestina Warbeck began a ballad called “YouCharmed the Heart Right Out of Me.”

“Mr. Weasley, you know what I told you at the stationwhen we were setting off for school?”

“I checked, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley at once. “I wentand searched the Malfoys’ house. There was nothing,either broken or whole, that shouldn’t have beenthere.”

“Yeah, I know, I saw in the Prophet that you’d looked... but this is something different. ... Well, somethingmore ...”

And he told Mr. Weasley everything he had overheardbetween Malfoy and Snape. As Harry spoke, he sawLupin’s head turn a little toward him, taking in every

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

word. When he had finished, there was silence, exceptfor Celestina’s crooning.

Oh, my poor heart, where has it gone?

It’s left me for a spell ...

“Has it occurred to you, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley,“that Snape was simply pretending — ?”

“Pretending to offer help, so that he could find outwhat Malfoy’s up to?” said Harry quickly. “Yeah, Ithought you’d say that. But how do we know?”

“It isn’t our business to know,” said Lupinunexpectedly. He had turned his back on the fire nowand faced Harry across Mr. Weasley. “It’sDumbledore’s business. Dumbledore trusts Severus,and that ought to be good enough for all of us.”

“But,” said Harry, “just say —just say Dumbledore’swrong about Snape —”

“People have said it, many times. It comes down towhether or not you trust Dumbledore’s judgment. Ido; therefore, I trust Severus.”

“But Dumbledore can make mistakes,” argued Harry.“He says it himself. And you” — he looked Lupinstraight in the eye — “do you honestly like Snape?”

“I neither like nor dislike Severus,” said Lupin. “No,Harry, I am speaking the truth,” he added, as Harrypulled a skeptical expression. “We shall never bebosom friends, perhaps; after all that happenedbetween James and Sirius and Severus, there is toomuch bitterness there. But I do not forget that duringthe year I taught at Hogwarts, Severus made theWolfsbane Potion for me every month, made itPage | 374 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

perfectly, so that I did not have to suffer as I usuallydo at the full moon.”

“But he ‘accidentally’ let it slip that you’re a werewolf,so you had to leave!” said Harry angrily.

Lupin shrugged. “The news would have leaked outanyway. We both know he wanted my job, but hecould have wreaked much worse damage on me bytampering with the potion. He kept me healthy. Imust be grateful.”

“Maybe he didn’t dare mess with the potion withDumbledore watching him!” said Harry.

“You are determined to hate him, Harry,” said Lupinwith a faint smile. “And I understand; with James asyour father, with Sirius as your godfather, you haveinherited an old prejudice. By all means tellDumbledore what you have told Arthur and me, butdo not expect him to share your view of the matter; donot even expect him to be surprised by what you tellhim. It might have been on Dumbledore’s orders thatSeverus questioned Draco.”

... and now you’ve torn it quite apart

I’ll thank you to give back my heart!

Celestina ended her song on a very long, high-pitchednote and loud applause issued out of the wireless,which Mrs. Weasley joined in with enthusiastically.

“Eez eet over?” said Fleur loudly. “Thank goodness,what an ’orrible —”

“Shall we have a nightcap, then?” asked Mr. Weasleyloudly, leaping to his feet. “Who wants eggnog?”

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What have you been up to lately?” Harry askedLupin, as Mr. Weasley bustled off to fetch the eggnog,and everybody else stretched and broke intoconversation.

“Oh, I’ve been underground,” said Lupin. “Almostliterally. That’s why I haven’t been able to write,

Harry; sending letters to you would have beensomething of a giveaway.”

“What do you mean?”

“I’ve been living among my fellows, my equals,” saidLupin. “Werewolves,” he added, at Harry’s look ofincomprehension. “Nearly all of them are onVoldemort’s side. Dumbledore wanted a spy and hereI was ... ready-made.”

He sounded a little bitter, and perhaps realized it, forhe smiled more warmly as he went on, “I am notcomplaining; it is necessary work and who can do itbetter than I? However, it has been difficult gainingtheir trust. I bear the unmistakable signs of havingtried to live among wizards, you see, whereas theyhave shunned normal society and live on the margins,stealing — and sometimes killing — to eat.”

“How come they like Voldemort?”

“They think that, under his rule, they will have abetter life,” said Lupin. “And it is hard to argue withGrey back out there. ...”

“Who’s Grey back?”

“You haven’t heard of him?” Lupin’s hands closedconvulsively in his lap. “Fenrir Greyback is, perhaps,the most savage werewolf alive today. He regards it ashis mission in life to bite and to contaminate as many

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

people as possible; he wants to create enoughwerewolves to overcome the wizards. Voldemort haspromised him prey in return for his services.

Greyback specializes in children. ... Bite them young,he says, and raise them away from their parents,raise them to hate normal wizards. Voldemort hasthreatened to unleash him upon people’s sons anddaughters; it is a threat that usually produces goodresults.”

Lupin paused and then said, “It was Greyback whobit me.”

“What?” said Harry, astonished. “When — when youwere a kid, you mean?”

“Yes. My father had offended him. I did not know, fora very long time, the identity of the werewolf who hadattacked me; I even felt pity for him, thinking that hehad had no control, knowing by then how it felt totransform. But Greyback is not like that. At the fullmoon, he positions himself close to victims, ensuringthat he is near enough to strike. He plans it all. Andthis is the man Voldemort is using to marshal thewerewolves. I cannot pretend that my particularbrand of reasoned argument is making muchheadway against Greyback’s insistence that wewerewolves deserve blood, that we ought to revengeourselves on normal people.”

“But you are normal!” said Harry fiercely. “You’ve justgot a — a problem —”

Lupin burst out laughing. “Sometimes you remind mea lot of James. He called it my ‘furry little problem’ incompany. Many people were under the impressionthat I owned a badly behaved rabbit.”

Page | 377 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He accepted a glass of eggnog from Mr. Weasley witha word of thanks, looking slightly more cheerful.Harry, meanwhile, felt a rush of excitement: This lastmention of his father had reminded him that therewas something he had been looking forward to askingLupin.

“Have you ever heard of someone called the Half-Blood Prince?”

“The Half-Blood what?”

“Prince,” said Harry, watching him closely for signs ofrecognition.

“There are no Wizarding princes,” said Lupin, nowsmiling. “Is this a title you’re thinking of adopting? Ishould have thought being ‘the Chosen One’ would beenough.”

“It’s nothing to do with me!” said Harry indignantly.“The Half-Blood Prince is someone who used to go toHogwarts, I’ve got his old Potions book. He wrotespells all over it, spells he invented. One of them wasLevicorpus —”

“Oh, that one had a great vogue during my time atHogwarts,” said Lupin reminiscently. “There were afew months in my fifth year when you couldn’t movefor being hoisted into the air by your ankle.”

“My dad used it,” said Harry. “I saw him in thePensieve, he used it on Snape.”

He tried to sound casual, as though this was athrowaway comment of no real importance, but hewas not sure he had achieved the right effect; Lupin’ssmile was a little too understanding.

Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” he said, “but he wasn’t the only one. As I say, itwas very popular. ... You know how these spells comeand go. ...”

“But it sounds like it was invented while you were atschool,” Harry persisted.

“Not necessarily,” said Lupin. “Jinxes go in and out offashion like everything else.”

He looked into Harry’s face and then said quietly,“James was a pureblood, Harry, and I promise you,he never asked us to call him ‘Prince.’ ”

Abandoning pretense, Harry said, “And it wasn’tSirius? Or you?”

“Definitely not.”

“Oh.” Harry stared into the fire. “I just thought —well, he’s helped me out a lot in Potions classes, thePrince has.”

“How old is this book, Harry?”

“I dunno, I’ve never checked.”

“Well, perhaps that will give you some clue as to whenthe Prince was at Hogwarts,” said Lupin.

Shortly after this, Fleur decided to imitate Celestinasinging “A Cauldron Full of Hot, Strong Love,” whichwas taken by everyone, once they had glimpsed Mrs.Weasley’s expression, to be the cue to go to bed.

Harry and Ron climbed all the way up to Ron’s atticbedroom, where a camp bed had been added forHarry.

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron fell asleep almost immediately, but Harry delvedinto his trunk and pulled out his copy of AdvancedPotion-Making before getting into bed. There he turnedits pages, searching, until he finally found, at thefront of the book, the date that it had been published.It was nearly fifty years old. Neither his father, nor hisfather’s friends, had been at Hogwarts fifty years ago.Feeling disappointed, Harry threw the book back intohis trunk, turned off the lamp, and rolled over,thinking of werewolves and Snape, Stan Shunpikeand the Half-Blood Prince, and finally falling into anuneasy sleep full of creeping shadows and the cries ofbitten children. ...

“She’s got to be joking. ...”

Harry woke with a start to find a bulging stockinglying over the end of his bed. He put on his glassesand looked around; the tiny window was almostcompletely obscured with snow and, in front of it, Ronwas sitting bolt upright in bed and examining whatappeared to be a thick gold chain.

“What’s that?” asked Harry.

“It’s from Lavender,” said Ron, sounding revolted.

“She can’t honestly think I’d wear ...”

Harry looked more closely and let out a shout oflaughter. Dangling from the chain in large gold letterswere the words:

My Sweetheart

“Nice,” he said. “Classy. You should definitely wear itin front of Fred and George.”

Page | 380 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“If you tell them,” said Ron, shoving the necklace outof sight under his pillow, “I — I — 111 —”

“Stutter at me?” said Harry, grinning. “Come on,would I?”

“How could she think I’d like something like that,though?” Ron demanded of thin air, looking rathershocked.

“Well, think back,” said Harry. “Have you ever let itslip that you’d like to go out in public with the words‘My Sweetheart’ round your neck?”

“Well ... we don’t really talk much,” said Ron. “It’smainly ...”

“Snogging,” said Harry.

“Well, yeah,” said Ron. He hesitated a moment, thensaid, “Is Hermione really going out with McLaggen?”

“I dunno,” said Harry. “They were at Slughorn’s partytogether, but I don’t think it went that well.”

Ron looked slightly more cheerful as he delved deeperinto his stocking.

Harry’s presents included a sweater with a largeGolden Snitch worked onto the front, hand-knitted byMrs. Weasley, a large box of Weasleys’ WizardWheezes products from the twins, and a slightlydamp, moldy-smelling package that came with a labelreading TO MASTER, FROM KREACHER.

Harry stared at it. “D’you reckon this is safe to open?”he asked.

Page | 381 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Can’t be anything dangerous, all our mail’s stillbeing searched at the Ministry,” replied Ron, thoughhe was eyeing the parcel suspiciously.

“I didn’t think of giving Kreacher anything. Do peopleusually give their house-elves Christmas presents?”asked Harry, prodding the parcel cautiously.

“Hermione would,” said Ron. “But let’s wait and seewhat it is before you start feeling guilty.”

A moment later, Harry had given a loud yell and leaptout of his camp bed; the package contained a largenumber of maggots.

“Nice,” said Ron, roaring with laughter. “Verythoughtful.”

“I’d rather have them than that necklace,” said Harry,which sobered Ron up at once.

Everybody was wearing new sweaters when they allsat down for Christmas lunch, everyone except Fleur(on whom, it appeared, Mrs. Weasley had not wantedto waste one) and Mrs. Weasley herself, who wassporting a brand-new midnight blue witch’s hatglittering with what looked like tiny starlikediamonds, and a spectacular golden necklace.

“Fred and George gave them to me! Aren’t theybeautiful?”

“Well, we find we appreciate you more and more,Mum, now we’re washing our own socks,” saidGeorge, waving an airy hand. “Parsnips, Remus?”

“Harry, you’ve got a maggot in your hair,” said Ginnycheerfully, leaning across the table to pick it out;

Page | 382 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry felt goose bumps erupt up his neck that hadnothing to do with the maggot.

“ ’Ow ’orrible,” said Fleur, with an affected littleshudder.

“Yes, isn’t it?” said Ron. “Gravy, Fleur?”

In his eagerness to help her, he knocked the gravyboat flying; Bill waved his wand and the gravy soaredup in the air and returned meekly to the boat.

“You are as bad as zat Tonks,” said Fleur to Ron,when she had finished kissing Bill in thanks. “She isalways knocking —”

“I invited dear Tonks to come along today,” said Mrs.Weasley, setting down the carrots with unnecessaryforce and glaring at Fleur. “But she wouldn’t come.Have you spoken to her lately, Remus?”

“No, I haven’t been in contact with anybody verymuch,” said Lupin. “But Tonks has got her ownfamily to go to, hasn’t she?”

“Hmmm,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Maybe. I got theimpression she was planning to spend Christmasalone, actually.”

She gave Lupin an annoyed look, as though it was allhis fault she was getting Fleur for a daughter-in-lawinstead of Tonks, but Harry, glancing across at Fleur,who was now feeding Bill bits of turkey off her ownfork, thought that Mrs. Weasley was fighting a long-lost battle. He was, however, reminded of a questionhe had with regard to Tonks, and who better to askthan Lupin, the man who knew all about Patronuses?

Page | 383 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Tonks’s Patronus has changed its form,” he told him.“Snape said so anyway. I didn’t know that couldhappen. Why would your Patronus change?”

Lupin took his time chewing his turkey andswallowing before saying slowly, “Sometimes ... agreat shock ... an emotional upheaval ...”

“It looked big, and it had four legs,” said Harry,struck by a sudden thought and lowering his voice.“Hey ... it couldn’t be — ?”

“Arthur!” said Mrs. Weasley suddenly. She had risenfrom her chair; her hand was pressed over her heartand she was staring out of the kitchen window.“Arthur — it’s Percy!”

“What?”

Mr. Weasley looked around. Everybody looked quicklyat the window; Ginny stood up for a better look.

There, sure enough, was Percy Weasley, stridingacross the snowy yard, his horn-rimmed glassesglinting in the sunlight. He was not, however, alone.

“Arthur, he’s — he’s with the Minister!”

And sure enough, the man Harry had seen in theDaily Prophet was following along in Percy’s wake,limping slightly, his mane of graying hair and hisblack cloak flecked with snow. Before any of themcould say anything, before Mr. and Mrs. Weasleycould do more than exchange stunned looks, the backdoor opened and there stood Percy.

There was a moment’s painful silence. Then Percysaid rather stiffly, “Merry Christmas, Mother.”

Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, Percy\” said Mrs. Weasley, and she threw herselfinto his arms.

Rufus Scrimgeour paused in the doorway, leaning onhis walking stick and smiling as he observed thisaffecting scene.

“You must forgive this intrusion,” he said, when Mrs.Weasley looked around at him, beaming and wipingher eyes. “Percy and I were in the vicinity — working,you know — and he couldn’t resist dropping in andseeing you all.”

But Percy showed no sign of wanting to greet any ofthe rest of the family. He stood, poker-straight andawkward-looking, and stared over everybody else’sheads. Mr. Weasley, Fred, and George were allobserving him, stony-faced.

“Please, come in, sit down, Minister!” fluttered Mrs.Weasley, straightening her hat. “Have a little purkey,or some tooding. ... I mean —”

“No, no, my dear Molly,” said Scrimgeour. Harryguessed that he had checked her name with Percybefore they entered the house. “I don’t want tointrude, wouldn’t be here at all if Percy hadn’t wantedto see you all so badly. ...”

“Oh, Perce!” said Mrs. Weasley tearfully, reaching upto kiss him.

"... We’ve only looked in for five minutes, so I’ll have astroll around the yard while you catch up with Percy.No, no, I assure you I don’t want to butt in! Well, ifanybody cared to show me your charming garden ...Ah, that young man’s finished, why doesn’t he take astroll with me?”

Page | 385 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The atmosphere around the table changedperceptibly. Everybody looked from Scrimgeour toHarry. Nobody seemed to find Scrimgeour s pretensethat he did not know Harry’s name convincing, or findit natural that he should be chosen to accompany theMinister around the garden when Ginny, Fleur, andGeorge also had clean plates.

“Yeah, all right,” said Harry into the silence.

He was not fooled; for all Scrimgeour’s talk that theyhad just been in the area, that Percy wanted to lookup his family, this must be the real reason that theyhad come, so that Scrimgeour could speak to Harryalone.

“It’s fine,” he said quietly, as he passed Lupin, whohad half risen from his chair. “Fine,” he added, as Mr.Weasley opened his mouth to speak.

“Wonderful!” said Scrimgeour, standing back to letHarry pass through the door ahead of him. “We’ll justtake a turn around the garden, and Percy and I’ll beoff. Carry on, everyone!”

Harry walked across the yard toward the Weasleys’overgrown, snow-covered garden, Scrimgeour limpingslightly at his side. He had, Harry knew, been Head ofthe Auror office; he looked tough and battle-scarred,very different from portly Fudge in his bowler hat.

“Charming,” said Scrimgeour, stopping at the gardenfence and looking out over the snowy lawn and theindistinguishable plants. “Charming.”

Harry said nothing. He could tell that Scrimgeour waswatching him.

Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I’ve wanted to meet you for a very long time,” saidScrimgeour, after a few moments. “Did you knowthat?”

“No,” said Harry truthfully.

“Oh yes, for a very long time. But Dumbledore hasbeen very protective of you,” said Scrimgeour.“Natural, of course, natural, after what you’ve beenthrough. ... Especially what happened at the Ministry

He waited for Harry to say something, but Harry didnot oblige, so he went on, “I have been hoping for anoccasion to talk to you ever since I gained office, butDumbledore has — most understandably, as I say —prevented this.”

Still, Harry said nothing, waiting.

“The rumors that have flown around!” saidScrimgeour. “Well, of course, we both know how thesestories get distorted ... all these whispers of aprophecy ... of you being ‘the Chosen One’...”

They were getting near it now, Harry thought, thereason Scrimgeour was here.

"... I assume that Dumbledore has discussed thesematters with you?”

Harry deliberated, wondering whether he ought to lieor not. He looked at the little gnome prints all aroundthe flowerbeds, and the scuffed-up patch that markedthe spot where Fred had caught the gnome nowwearing the tutu at the top of the Christmas tree.Finally, he decided on the truth ... or a bit of it.

“Yeah, we’ve discussed it.”

Page | 387 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Have you, have you ...” said Scrimgeour. Harry couldsee, out of the corner of his eye, Scrimgeour squintingat him, so he pretended to be very interested in agnome that had just poked its head out fromunderneath a frozen rhododendron. “And what hasDumbledore told you, Harry?”

“Sorry, but that’s between us,” said Harry. He kepthis voice as pleasant as he could, and Scrimgeour’stone, too, was light and friendly as he said, “Oh, ofcourse, if it’s a question of confidences, I wouldn’twant you to divulge ... no, no ... and in any case, doesit really matter whether you are ‘the Chosen One’ ornot?” ”

Harry had to mull that one over for a few secondsbefore responding. “I don’t really know what youmean, Minister.”

“Well, of course, to you it will matter enormously,”said Scrimgeour with a laugh. “But to the Wizardingcommunity at large ... it’s all perception, isn’t it? It’swhat people believe that’s important.”

Harry said nothing. He thought he saw, dimly, wherethey were heading, but he was not going to helpScrimgeour get there. The gnome under therhododendron was now digging for worms at its roots,and Harry kept his eyes fixed upon it.

“People believe you are ‘the Chosen One,’you see,”said Scrimgeour. “They think you quite the hero —which, of course, you are, Harry, chosen or not! Howmany times have you faced He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named now? Well, anyway,” he pressed on, withoutwaiting for a reply, “the point is, you are a symbol ofhope for many, Harry. The idea that there issomebody out there who might be able, who mighteven be destined, to destroy He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Named — well, naturally, it gives people a lift. And Ican’t help but feel that, once you realize this, youmight consider it, well, almost a duty, to standalongside the Ministry, and give everyone a boost.”

The gnome had just managed to get hold of a worm. Itwas now tugging very hard on it, trying to get it out ofthe frozen ground. Harry was silent so long thatScrimgeour said, looking from Harry to the gnome,“Funny little chaps, aren’t they? But what say you,Harry?”

“I don’t exactly understand what you want,” saidHarry slowly. “ ‘Stand alongside the Ministry’ ... Whatdoes that mean?”

“Oh, well, nothing at all onerous, I assure you,” saidScrimgeour. “If you were to be seen popping in andout of the Ministry from time to time, for instance,that would give the right impression. And of course,while you were there, you would have ampleopportunity to speak to Gawain Robards, mysuccessor as Head of the Auror office. DoloresUmbridge has told me that you cherish an ambitionto become an Auror. Well, that could be arranged veryeasily. ...”

Harry felt anger bubbling in the pit of his stomach: SoDolores Umbridge was still at the Ministry, was she?

“So basically,” he said, as though he just wanted toclarify a few points, “you’d like to give the impressionthat I’m working for the Ministry?”

“It would give everyone a lift to think you were moreinvolved, Harry,” said Scrimgeour, sounding relievedthat Harry had cottoned on so quickly. “ The ChosenOne,’you know ... It’s all about giving people hope,the feeling that exciting things are happening. ...”Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But if I keep running in and out of the Ministry,”said Harry, still endeavoring to keep his voice friendly,“won’t that seem as though I approve of what theMinistry’s up to?”

“Well,” said Scrimgeour, frowning slightly, “well, yes,that’s partly why we’d like —”

“No, I don’t think that’ll work,” said Harry pleasantly.“You see, I don’t like some of the things the Ministry’sdoing. Locking up Stan Shunpike, for instance.”

Scrimgeour did not speak for a moment but hisexpression hardened instantly. “I would not expectyou to understand,” he said, and he was not assuccessful at keeping anger out of his voice as Harryhad been. “These are dangerous times, and certainmeasures need to be taken. You are sixteen years old

“Dumbledore’s a lot older than sixteen, and he doesn’tthink Stan should be in Azkaban either,” said Harry.“You’re making Stan a scapegoat, just like you wantto make me a mascot.”

They looked at each other, long and hard. FinallyScrimgeour said, with no pretense at warmth, “I see.You prefer — like your hero, Dumbledore — todisassociate yourself from the Ministry?”

“I don’t want to be used,” said Harry.

“Some would say it’s your duty to be used by theMinistry!”

“Yeah, and others might say it’s your duty to checkthat people really are Death Eaters before you chuckthem in prison,” said Harry, his temper rising now.“You’re doing what Barty Crouch did. You never get it

Page | 390 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

right, you people, do you? Either we’ve got Fudge,pretending everything’s lovely while people getmurdered right under his nose, or we’ve got you,chucking the wrong people into jail and trying topretend you’ve got ‘the Chosen One’ working for you!”

“So you’re not ‘the Chosen One’?” said Scrimgeour.

“I thought you said it didn’t matter either way?” saidHarry, with a bitter laugh. “Not to you anyway.”

“I shouldn’t have said that,” said Scrimgeour quickly.“It was tactless —”

“No, it was honest,” said Harry. “One of the onlyhonest things you’ve said to me. You don’t carewhether I live or die, but you do care that I help youconvince everyone you’re winning the war againstVoldemort. I haven’t forgotten, Minister. ...”

He raised his right fist. There, shining white on theback of his cold hand, were the scars which DoloresUmbridge had forced him to carve into his own flesh: /must not tell lies.

“I don’t remember you rushing to my defense when Iwas trying to tell everyone Voldemort was back. TheMinistry wasn’t so keen to be pals last year.”

They stood in silence as icy as the ground beneaththeir feet. The gnome had finally managed to extricatehis worm and was now sucking on it happily, leaningagainst the bottommost branches of therhododendron bush.

“What is Dumbledore up to?” said Scrimgeourbrusquely. “Where does he go when he is absent fromHogwarts?”

Page | 391 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No idea,” said Harry.

“And you wouldn’t tell me if you knew,” saidScrimgeour, “would you?”

“No, I wouldn’t,” said Harry.

“Well, then, I shall have to see whether I can’t find outby other means.”

“You can try,” said Harry indifferently. “But you seemcleverer than Fudge, so I’d have thought you’d havelearned from his mistakes. He tried interfering atHogwarts. You might have noticed he’s not Ministeranymore, but Dumbledore’s still headmaster. I’d leaveDumbledore alone, if I were you.”

There was a long pause.

“Well, it is clear to me that he has done a very goodjob on you,” said Scrimgeour, his eyes cold and hardbehind his wire-rimmed glasses. “Dumbledore’s manthrough and through, aren’t you, Potter?”

“Yeah, I am,” said Harry. “Glad we straightened thatout.”

And turning his back on the Minister of Magic, hestrode back toward the house.

Page | 392 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





A SLUGGISH MEMORY

Late in the afternoon, a few days after New Year,Harry, Ron, and Ginny lined up beside the kitchenfire to return to Hogwarts. The Ministry had arrangedthis one-off connection to the Floo Network to returnstudents quickly and safely to the school. Only Mrs.Weasley was there to say good-bye, as Mr. Weasley,Fred, George, Bill, and Fleur were all at work. Mrs.Weasley dissolved into tears at the moment of parting.Admittedly, it took very little to set her off lately; shehad been crying on and off ever since Percy hadstormed from the house on Christmas Day with hisglasses splattered with mashed parsnip (for whichFred, George, and Ginny all claimed credit).

“Don’t cry, Mum,” said Ginny, patting her on the backas Mrs. Weasley sobbed into her shoulder. “It’s okay.

“Yeah, don’t worry about us,” said Ron, permitting hismother to plant a very wet kiss on his cheek, “or

Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

about Percy. He’s such a prat, it’s not really a loss, isit?”

Mrs. Weasley sobbed harder than ever as sheenfolded Harry in her arms.

“Promise me you’ll look after yourself. ... Stay out oftrouble. ...”

“I always do, Mrs. Weasley,” said Harry. “I like a quietlife, you know me.”

She gave a watery chuckle and stood back. “Be good,then, all of you. ...”

Harry stepped into the emerald fire and shouted“Hogwarts!” He had one last fleeting view of theWeasleys’ kitchen and Mrs. Weasley’s tearful facebefore the flames engulfed him; spinning very fast, hecaught blurred glimpses of other Wizarding rooms,which were whipped out of sight before he could get aproper look; then he was slowing down, finallystopping squarely in the fireplace in ProfessorMcGonagall’s office. She barely glanced up from herwork as he clambered out over the grate.

“Evening, Potter. Try not to get too much ash on thecarpet.”

“No, Professor.”

Harry straightened his glasses and flattened his hairas Ron came spinning into view. When Ginny hadarrived, all three of them trooped out of McGonagall’soffice and off toward Gryffindor Tower. Harry glancedout of the corridor windows as they passed; the sunwas already sinking over grounds carpeted in deepersnow than had lain over the Burrow garden. In the

Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

distance, he could see Hagrid feeding Buckbeak infront of his cabin.

“Baubles,” said Ron confidently, when they reachedthe Fat Lady, who was looking rather paler thanusual and winced at his loud voice.

“No,” she said.

“What d’you mean, ‘no’?”

“There is a new password,” she said. “And pleasedon’t shout.”

“But we’ve been away, how’re we supposed to — ?”“Harry! Ginny!”

Hermione was hurrying toward them, very pink-facedand wearing a cloak, hat, and gloves.

“I got back a couple of hours ago, I’ve just been downto visit Hagrid and Buck — I mean Witherwings,” shesaid breathlessly. “Did you have a good Christmas?”

“Yeah,” said Ron at once, “pretty eventful, RufusScrim —”

“I’ve got something for you, Harry,” said Hermione,neither looking at Ron nor giving any sign that shehad heard him. “Oh, hang on — password.Abstinence.”

“Precisely,” said the Fat Lady in a feeble voice, andswung forward to reveal the portrait hole.

“What’s up with her?” asked Harry.

Page | 395 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Overindulged over Christmas, apparently,” saidHermione, rolling her eyes as she led the way into thepacked common room. “She and her friend Violetdrank their way through all the wine in that picture ofdrunk monks down by the Charms corridor. Anyway

She rummaged in her pocket for a moment, thenpulled out a scroll of parchment with Dumbledore’swriting on it.

“Great,” said Harry, unrolling it at once to discoverthat his next lesson with Dumbledore was scheduledfor the following night. “I’ve got loads to tell him —and you. Let’s sit down —”

But at that moment there was a loud squeal of “Won-Won!” and Lavender Brown came hurtling out ofnowhere and flung herself into Ron’s arms. Severalonlookers sniggered; Hermione gave a tinkling laughand said, “There’s a table over here. ... Coming,Ginny?”

“No, thanks, I said I’d meet Dean,” said Ginny,though Harry could not help noticing that she did notsound very enthusiastic. Leaving Ron and Lavenderlocked in a kind of vertical wrestling match, Harry ledHermione over to the spare table.

“So how was your Christmas?”

“Oh, fine,” she shrugged. “Nothing special. How was itat Won-Won’s?”

“I’ll tell you in a minute,” said Harry. “Look,

Hermione, can’t you — ?”

“No, I can’t,” she said flatly. “So don’t even ask.”

Page | 396 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I thought maybe, you know, over Christmas —”

“It was the Fat Lady who drank a vat of five-hundred-year-old wine, Harry, not me. So what was thisimportant news you wanted to tell me?”

She looked too fierce to argue with at that moment, soHarry dropped the subject of Ron and recounted allthat he had overheard between Malfoy and Snape.When he had finished, Hermione sat in thought for amoment and then said, “Don’t you think — ?”

“— he was pretending to offer help so that he couldtrick Malfoy into telling him what he’s doing?”

“Well, yes,” said Hermione.

“Ron’s dad and Lupin think so,” Harry saidgrudgingly. “But this definitely proves Malfoy’splanning something, you can’t deny that.”

“No, I can’t,” she answered slowly.

“And he’s acting on Voldemort’s orders, just like Isaid!”

“Hmm ... did either of them actually mentionVoldemort’s name?”

Harry frowned, trying to remember. “I’m not sure ...Snape definitely said your master,’ and who elsewould that be?”

“I don’t know,” said Hermione, biting her lip. “Maybehis father?”

She stared across the room, apparently lost inthought, not even noticing Lavender tickling Ron.“How’s Lupin?”

Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Not great,” said Harry, and he told her all aboutLupin’s mission among the werewolves and thedifficulties he was facing. “Have you heard of thisFenrir Grey back?”

“Yes, I have!” said Hermione, sounding startled. “Andso have you, Harry!”

“When, History of Magic? You know full well I neverlistened ...”

“No, no, not History of Magic — Malfoy threatenedBorgin with him!” said Hermione. “Back in KnockturnAlley, don’t you remember? He told Borgin thatGrey back was an old family friend and that he’d bechecking up on Borgin’s progress!”

Harry gaped at her. “I forgot! But this proves Malfoy’sa Death Eater, how else could he be in contact withGreyback and telling him what to do?”

“It is pretty suspicious,” breathed Hermione. “Unless

“Oh, come on,” said Harry in exasperation, “you can’tget round this one!”

“Well ... there is the possibility it was an emptythreat.”

“You’re unbelievable, you are,” said Harry, shakinghis head. “We’ll see who’s right. ... You’ll be eatingyour words, Hermione, just like the Ministry. Ohyeah, I had a row with Rufus Scrimgeour as well. ...”

And the rest of the evening passed amicably with bothof them abusing the Minister of Magic, for Hermione,like Ron, thought that after all the Ministry had put

Page | 398 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry through the previous year, they had a greatdeal of nerve asking him for help now.

The new term started next morning with a pleasantsurprise for the sixth years: a large sign had beenpinned to the common room notice boards overnight.

APPARITION LESSONS

If you are seventeen years of age, or will turnseventeen on or before the 31st August next, you areeligible for a twelve-week course of Apparition Lessonsfrom a Ministry of Magic Apparition instructor. Pleasesign below if you would like to participate. Cost: 12Galleons.

Harry and Ron joined the crowd that was jostlingaround the notice and taking it in turns to write theirnames at the bottom. Ron was just taking out hisquill to sign after Hermione when Lavender crept upbehind him, slipped her hands over his eyes, andtrilled, “Guess who, Won-Won?” Harry turned to seeHermione stalking off; he caught up with her, havingno wish to stay behind with Ron and Lavender, but tohis surprise, Ron caught up with them only a littleway beyond the portrait hole, his ears bright red andhis expression disgruntled. Without a word, Hermionesped up to walk with Neville.

“So — Apparition,” said Ron, his tone making itperfectly plain that Harry was not to mention whathad just happened. “Should be a laugh, eh?”

“I dunno,” said Harry. “Maybe it’s better when you doit yourself, I didn’t enjoy it much when Dumbledoretook me along for the ride.”

Page | 399 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I forgot you’d already done it. ... I’d better pass mytest first time,” said Ron, looking anxious. “Fred andGeorge did.”

“Charlie failed, though, didn’t he?”

“Yeah, but Charlie’s bigger than me” — Ron held hisarms out from his body as though he was a gorilla —“so Fred and George didn’t go on about it much ... notto his face anyway ...”

“When can we take the actual test?”

“Soon as we’re seventeen. That’s only March for me!”

“Yeah, but you wouldn’t be able to Apparate in here,not in the castle ...”

“Not the point, is it? Everyone would know I couldApparate if I wanted.”

Ron was not the only one to be excited at the prospectof Apparition. All that day there was much talk aboutthe forthcoming lessons; a great deal of store was setby being able to vanish and reappear at will.

“How cool will it be when we can just —” Seamusclicked his fingers to indicate disappearance. “Mecousin Fergus does it just to annoy me, you wait till Ican do it back ... He’ll never have another peacefulmoment. ...”

Lost in visions of this happy prospect, he flicked hiswand a little too enthusiastically, so that instead ofproducing the fountain of pure water that was theobject of today’s Charms lesson, he let out a hoselikejet that ricocheted off the ceiling and knockedProfessor Flitwick flat on his face.

Page | 400 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Harry’s already Apparated,” Ron told a slightlyabashed Seamus, after Professor Flitwick had driedhimself off with a wave of his wand and set Seamuslines: “I am a wizard, not a baboon brandishing astick.” “Dum — er — someone took him. Side-Along-Apparition, you know.”

“Whoa!” whispered Seamus, and he, Dean, andNeville put their heads a little closer to hear whatApparition felt like. For the rest of the day, Harry wasbesieged with requests from the other sixth years todescribe the sensation of Apparition. All of themseemed awed, rather than put off, when he told themhow uncomfortable it was, and he was still answeringdetailed questions at ten to eight that evening, whenhe was forced to lie and say that he needed to returna book to the library, so as to escape in time for hislesson with Dumbledore.

The lamps in Dumbledore’s office were lit, theportraits of previous headmasters were snoring gentlyin their frames, and the Pensieve was ready upon thedesk once more. Dumbledore’s hands lay on eitherside of it, the right one as blackened and burnt-looking as ever. It did not seem to have healed at alland Harry wondered, for perhaps the hundredth time,what had caused such a distinctive injury, but didnot ask; Dumbledore had said that he would knoweventually and there was, in any case, anothersubject he wanted to discuss. But before Harry couldsay anything about Snape and Malfoy, Dumbledorespoke.

“I hear that you met the Minister of Magic overChristmas?”

“Yes,” said Harry. “He’s not very happy with me.”

Page | 401 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“No,” sighed Dumbledore. “He is not very happy withme either. We must try not to sink beneath ouranguish, Harry, but battle on.”

Harry grinned.

“He wanted me to tell the Wizarding community thatthe Ministry’s doing a wonderful job.”

Dumbledore smiled.

“It was Fudge’s idea originally, you know. During hislast days in office, when he was trying desperately tocling to his post, he sought a meeting with you,hoping that you would give him your support —”

“After everything Fudge did last year?” said Harryangrily. “After Umbridge?”

“I told Cornelius there was no chance of it, but theidea did not die when he left office. Within hours ofScrimgeour’s appointment we met and he demandedthat I arrange a meeting with you —”

“So that’s why you argued!” Harry blurted out. “It wasin the Daily Prophet”

“The Prophet is bound to report the truthoccasionally,” said Dumbledore, “if only accidentally.Yes, that was why we argued. Well, it appears thatRufus found a way to corner you at last.”

“He accused me of being ‘Dumbledore’s man throughand through.’ ”

“How very rude of him.”

“I told him I was.”

Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore opened his mouth to speak and thenclosed it again. Behind Harry, Fawkes the phoenix letout a low, soft, musical cry. To Harry’s intenseembarrassment, he suddenly realized thatDumbledore’s bright blue eyes looked rather watery,and stared hastily at his own knees. WhenDumbledore spoke, however, his voice was quitesteady.

“I am very touched, Harry.”

“Scrimgeour wanted to know where you go whenyou’re not at Hogwarts,” said Harry, still lookingfixedly at his knees.

“Yes, he is very nosy about that,” said Dumbledore,now sounding cheerful, and Harry thought it safe tolook up again. “He has even attempted to have mefollowed. Amusing, really. He set Dawlish to tail me. Itwasn’t kind. I have already been forced to jinxDawlish once; I did it again with the greatest regret.”

“So they still don’t know where you go?” asked Harry,hoping for more information on this intriguingsubject, but Dumbledore merely smiled over the topof his half-moon spectacles.

“No, they don’t, and the time is not quite right for youto know either. Now, I suggest we press on, unlessthere’s anything else — ?”

“There is, actually, sir,” said Harry. “It’s about Malfoyand Snape.”

“Professor Snape, Harry.”

“Yes, sir. I overheard them during ProfessorSlughorn’s party ... well, I followed them, actually. ...”

Page | 403 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore listened to Harry’s story with animpassive face. When Harry had finished he did notspeak for a few moments, then said, “Thank you fortelling me this, Harry, but I suggest that you put itout of your mind. I do not think that it is of greatimportance.”

“Not of great importance?” repeated Harryincredulously. “Professor, did you understand — ?”

“Yes, Harry, blessed as I am with extraordinarybrainpower, I understood everything you told me,”said Dumbledore, a little sharply. “I think you mighteven consider the possibility that I understood morethan you did. Again, I am glad that you have confidedin me, but let me reassure you that you have not toldme anything that causes me disquiet.”

Harry sat in seething silence, glaring at Dumbledore.What was going on? Did this mean that Dumbledorehad indeed ordered Snape to find out what Malfoywas doing, in which case he had already heardeverything Harry had just told him from Snape? Orwas he really worried by what he had heard, butpretending not to be?

“So, sir,” said Harry, in what he hoped was a polite,calm voice, “you definitely still trust — ?”

“I have been tolerant enough to answer that questionalready,” said Dumbledore, but he did not sound verytolerant anymore. “My answer has not changed.”

“I should think not,” said a snide voice; PhineasNigellus was evidently only pretending to be asleep.Dumbledore ignored him.

Page | 404 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“And now, Harry, I must insist that we press on. Ihave more important things to discuss with you thisevening.”

Harry sat there feeling mutinous. How would it be ifhe refused to permit the change of subject, if heinsisted upon arguing the case against Malfoy? Asthough he had read Harry’s mind, Dumbledore shookhis head.

“Ah, Harry, how often this happens, even between thebest of friends! Each of us believes that what he hasto say is much more important than anything theother might have to contribute!”

“I don’t think what you’ve got to say is unimportant,sir,” said Harry stiffly.

“Well, you are quite right, because it is not,” saidDumbledore briskly. “I have two more memories toshow you this evening, both obtained with enormousdifficulty, and the second of them is, I think, the mostimportant I have collected.”

Harry did not say anything to this; he still felt angryat the reception his confidences had received, butcould not see what was to be gained by arguingfurther.

“So,” said Dumbledore, in a ringing voice, “we meetthis evening to continue the tale of Tom Riddle, whomwe left last lesson poised on the threshold of his yearsat Hogwarts. You will remember how excited he wasto hear that he was a wizard, that he refused mycompany on a trip to Diagon Alley, and that I, in turn,warned him against continued thievery when hearrived at school.

Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, the start of the school year arrived and with itcame Tom Riddle, a quiet boy in his secondhandrobes, who lined up with the other first years to besorted. He was placed in Slytherin House almost themoment that the Sorting Hat touched his head,”continued Dumbledore, waving his blackened handtoward the shelf over his head where the Sorting Hatsat, ancient and unmoving. “How soon Riddle learnedthat the famous founder of the House could talk tosnakes, I do not know — perhaps that very evening.The knowledge can only have excited him andincreased his sense of self-importance.

“However, if he was frightening or impressing fellowSlytherins with displays of Parseltongue in theircommon room, no hint of it reached the staff. Heshowed no sign of outward arrogance or aggression atall. As an unusually talented and very good-lookingorphan, he naturally drew attention and sympathyfrom the staff almost from the moment of his arrival.He seemed polite, quiet, and thirsty for knowledge.Nearly all were most favorably impressed by him.”

“Didn’t you tell them, sir, what he’d been like whenyou met him at the orphanage?” asked Harry.

“No, I did not. Though he had shown no hint ofremorse, it was possible that he felt sorry for how hehad behaved before and was resolved to turn over afresh leaf. I chose to give him that chance.”

Dumbledore paused and looked inquiringly at Harry,who had opened his mouth to speak. Here, again, wasDumbledore’s tendency to trust people in spite ofoverwhelming evidence that they did not deserve it!But then Harry remembered something. ...

“But you didn’t really trust him, sir, did you? He toldme ... the Riddle who came out of that diary said,

Page | 406 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

‘Dumbledore never seemed to like me as much as theother teachers did.’ ”

“Let us say that I did not take it for granted that hewas trustworthy,” said Dumbledore. “I had, as I havealready indicated, resolved to keep a close eye uponhim, and so I did. I cannot pretend that I gleaned agreat deal from my observations at first. He was veryguarded with me; he felt, I am sure, that in the thrillof discovering his true identity he had told me a littletoo much. He was careful never to reveal as muchagain, but he could not take back what he had let slipin his excitement, nor what Mrs. Cole had confided inme. However, he had the sense never to try andcharm me as he charmed so many of my colleagues.

“As he moved up the school, he gathered about him agroup of dedicated friends; I call them that, for wantof a better term, although as I have already indicated,Riddle undoubtedly felt no affection for any of them.This group had a kind of dark glamour within thecastle. They were a motley collection; a mixture of theweak seeking protection, the ambitious seeking someshared glory, and the thuggish gravitating toward aleader who could show them more refined forms ofcruelty. In other words, they were the forerunners ofthe Death Eaters, and indeed some of them becamethe first Death Eaters after leaving Hogwarts.

“Rigidly controlled by Riddle, they were never detectedin open wrongdoing, although their seven years atHogwarts were marked by a number of nastyincidents to which they were never satisfactorilylinked, the most serious of which was, of course, theopening of the Chamber of Secrets, which resulted inthe death of a girl. As you know, Hagrid was wronglyaccused of that crime.

Page | 407 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I have not been able to find many memories of Riddleat Hogwarts,” said Dumbledore, placing his witheredhand on the Pensieve. “Few who knew him then areprepared to talk about him; they are too terrified.What I know, I found out after he had left Hogwarts,after much painstaking effort, after tracing those fewwho could be tricked into speaking, after searchingold records and questioning Muggle and wizardwitnesses alike.

“Those whom I could persuade to talk told me thatRiddle was obsessed with his parentage. This isunderstandable, of course; he had grown up in anorphanage and naturally wished to know how hecame to be there. It seems that he searched in vainfor some trace of Tom Riddle senior on the shields inthe trophy room, on the lists of prefects in the oldschool records, even in the books of Wizardinghistory. Finally he was forced to accept that his fatherhad never set foot in Hogwarts. I believe that it wasthen that he dropped the name forever, assumed theidentity of Lord Voldemort, and began hisinvestigations into his previously despised mother’sfamily — the woman whom, you will remember, hehad thought could not be a witch if she hadsuccumbed to the shameful human weakness ofdeath.

“All he had to go upon was the single name ‘Marvolo,’which he knew from those who ran the orphanagehad been his mother’s father’s name. Finally, afterpainstaking research through old books of Wizardingfamilies, he discovered the existence of Slytherin’ssurviving line. In the summer of his sixteenth year, heleft the orphanage to which he returned annually andset off to find his Gaunt relatives. And now, Harry, ifyou will stand ...”

Page | 408 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore rose, and Harry saw that he was againholding a small crystal bottle filled with swirling,pearly memory.

“I was very lucky to collect this,” he said, as hepoured the gleaming mass into the Pensieve. “As youwill understand when we have experienced it. Shallwe?”

Harry stepped up to the stone basin and bowedobediently until his face sank through the surface ofthe memory; he felt the familiar sensation of fallingthrough nothingness and then landed upon a dirtystone floor in almost total darkness.

It took him several seconds to recognize the place, bywhich time Dumbledore had landed beside him. TheGaunts’ house was now more indescribably filthythan anywhere Harry had ever seen. The ceiling wasthick with cobwebs, the floor coated in grime; moldyand rotting food lay upon the table amidst a mass ofcrusted pots. The only light came from a singleguttering candle placed at the feet of a man with hairand beard so overgrown Harry could see neither eyesnor mouth. He was slumped in an armchair by thefire, and Harry wondered for a moment whether hewas dead. But then there came a loud knock on thedoor and the man jerked awake, raising a wand in hisright hand and a short knife in his left.

The door creaked open. There on the threshold,holding an old-fashioned lamp, stood a boy Harryrecognized at once: tall, pale, dark-haired, andhandsome — the teenage Voldemort.

Voldemort’s eyes moved slowly around the hovel andthen found the man in the armchair. For a fewseconds they looked at each other, then the man

Page | 409 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

staggered upright, the many empty bottles at his feetclattering and tinkling across the floor.

“YOU!” he bellowed. “YOU!”

And he hurtled drunkenly at Riddle, wand and knifeheld aloft.

“Stop.”

Riddle spoke in Parseltongue. The man skidded intothe table, sending moldy pots crashing to the floor. Hestared at Riddle. There was a long silence while theycontemplated each other. The man broke it.

“ You speak it?”

“Yes, I speak it,” said Riddle. He moved forward intothe room, allowing the door to swing shut behindhim. Harry could not help but feel a resentfuladmiration for Voldemort’s complete lack of fear. Hisface merely expressed disgust and, perhaps,disappointment.

“Where is Marvolo?” he asked.

“Dead,” said the other. “Died years ago, didn’t he?”Riddle frowned.

“ Who are you, then?”

“I’m Morfin, ain’t 1?”

“Marvolo’s son?”

“ ’Course I am, then ...”

Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

Morfin pushed the hair out of his dirty face, the betterto see Riddle, and Harry saw that he wore Marvolo’sblack-stoned ring on his right hand.

“I thought you was that Muggle,” whispered Morfin.

“ You look mighty like that Muggle.”

“What Muggle?” said Riddle sharply.

“That Muggle what my sister took a fancy to, thatMuggle what lives in the big house over the way,” saidMorfin, and he spat unexpectedly upon the floorbetween them. “You look right like him. Riddle. Buthe’s older now, in ’e? He’s older’n you, now I think onit. ...”

Morfin looked slightly dazed and swayed a little, stillclutching the edge of the table for support. “He comeback, see,” he added stupidly.

Voldemort was gazing at Morfin as though appraisinghis possibilities. Now he moved a little closer andsaid, “Riddle came back?”

“Ar, he left her, and serve her right, marrying filth\”said Morfin, spitting on the floor again. “Robbed us,mind, before she ran off! Where’s the locket, eh,where’s Slytherin’s locket?”

Voldemort did not answer. Morfin was workinghimself into a rage again; he brandished his knife andshouted, “Dishonored us, she did, that little slut! Andwho’re you, coming here and asking questions aboutall that? It’s over, innit. ... It’s over. ...”

He looked away, staggering slightly, and Voldemortmoved forward. As he did so, an unnatural darknessfell, extinguishing Voldemort’s lamp and Morfin’scandle, extinguishing everything. ...

Page | 411 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore’s fingers closed tightly around Harry’sarm and they were soaring back into the presentagain. The soft golden light in Dumbledore’s officeseemed to dazzle Harry’s eyes after that impenetrabledarkness.

“Is that all?” said Harry at once. “Why did it go dark,what happened?”

“Because Morfin could not remember anything fromthat point onward,” said Dumbledore, gesturing Harryback into his seat. “When he awoke next morning, hewas lying on the floor, quite alone. Marvolo’s ring hadgone.

“Meanwhile, in the village of Little Hangleton, a maidwas running along the High Street, screaming thatthere were three bodies lying in the drawing room ofthe big house: Tom Riddle Senior and his mother andfather.

“The Muggle authorities were perplexed. As far as Iam aware, they do not know to this day how theRiddles died, for the Avada Kedavra curse does notusually leave any sign of damage. ... The exceptionsits before me,” Dumbledore added, with a nod toHarry’s scar. “The Ministry, on the other hand, knewat once that this was a wizard’s murder. They alsoknew that a convicted Muggle-hater lived across thevalley from the Riddle house, a Muggle-hater who hadalready been imprisoned once for attacking one of themurdered people.

“So the Ministry called upon Morfin. They did notneed to question him, to use Veritaserum orLegilimency. He admitted to the murder on the spot,giving details only the murderer could know. He wasproud, he said, to have killed the Muggles, had beenawaiting his chance all these years. He handed overPage | 412 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

his wand, which was proved at once to have beenused to kill the Riddles. And he permitted himself tobe led off to Azkaban without a fight. All thatdisturbed him was the fact that his father’s ring haddisappeared. ‘He’ll kill me for losing it,’ he told hiscaptors over and over again. ‘He’ll kill me for losinghis ring. ’ And that, apparently, was all he ever saidagain. He lived out the remainder of his life inAzkaban, lamenting the loss of Marvolo’s lastheirloom, and is buried beside the prison, alongsidethe other poor souls who have expired within itswalls.”

“So Voldemort stole Morfin’s wand and used it?” saidHarry, sitting up straight.

“That’s right,” said Dumbledore. “We have nomemories to show us this, but I think we can be fairlysure what happened. Voldemort Stupefied his uncle,took his wand, and proceeded across the valley to ‘thebig house over the way. ’ There he murdered theMuggle man who had abandoned his witch mother,and, for good measure, his Muggle grandparents,thus obliterating the last of the unworthy Riddle lineand revenging himself upon the father who neverwanted him. Then he returned to the Gaunt hovel,performed the complex bit of magic that wouldimplant a false memory in his uncle’s mind, laidMorfin’s wand beside its unconscious owner,pocketed the ancient ring he wore, and departed.”

“And Morfin never realized he hadn’t done it?”

“Never,” said Dumbledore. “He gave, as I say, a fulland boastful confession.”

“But he had this real memory in him all the time!”

Page | 413 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“Yes, but it took a great deal of skilled Legilimency tocoax it out of him,” said Dumbledore, “and whyshould anybody delve further into Morfin’s mindwhen he had already confessed to the crime?

However, I was able to secure a visit to Morfin in thelast weeks of his life, by which time I was attemptingto discover as much as I could about Voldemort’spast. I extracted this memory with difficulty. When Isaw what it contained, I attempted to use it to secureMorfin’s release from Azkaban. Before the Ministryreached their decision, however, Morfin had died.”

“But how come the Ministry didn’t realize thatVoldemort had done all that to Morfin?” Harry askedangrily. “He was underage at the time, wasn’t he? Ithought they could detect underage magic!”

“You are quite right — they can detect magic, but notthe perpetrator: You will remember that you wereblamed by the Ministry for the Hover Charm that was,in fact, cast by —”

“Dobby,” growled Harry; this injustice still rankled.

“So if you’re underage and you do magic inside anadult witch or wizard’s house, the Ministry won’tknow?”

“They will certainly be unable to tell who performedthe magic,” said Dumbledore, smiling slightly at thelook of great indignation on Harry’s face. “They relyon witch and wizard parents to enforce theiroffspring’s obedience while within their walls.”

“Well, that’s rubbish,” snapped Harry. “Look whathappened here, look what happened to Morfin!”

“I agree,” said Dumbledore. “Whatever Morfin was, hedid not deserve to die as he did, blamed for murders

Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

he had not committed. But it is getting late, and Iwant you to see this other memory before we part. ...”

Dumbledore took from an inside pocket anothercrystal phial and Harry fell silent at once,remembering that Dumbledore had said it was themost important one he had collected. Harry noticedthat the contents proved difficult to empty into thePensieve, as though they had congealed slightly; didmemories go bad?

“This will not take long,” said Dumbledore, when hehad finally emptied the phial. “We shall be backbefore you know it. Once more into the Pensieve, then

And Harry fell again through the silver surface,landing this time right in front of a man he recognizedat once.

It was a much younger Horace Slughorn. Harry wasso used to him bald that he found the sight ofSlughorn with thick, shiny, straw-colored hair quitedisconcerting; it looked as though he had had hishead thatched, though there was already a shinyGalleon-sized bald patch on his crown. His mustache,less massive than it was these days, was gingery-blond. He was not quite as rotund as the SlughornHarry knew, though the golden buttons on his richlyembroidered waistcoat were taking a fair amount ofstrain. His little feet resting upon a velvet pouffe, hewas sitting well back in a comfortable wingedarmchair, one hand grasping a small glass of wine,the other searching through a box of crystalizedpineapple.

Harry looked around as Dumbledore appeared besidehim and saw that they were standing in Slughorn’soffice. Half a dozen boys were sitting around

Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Slughorn, all on harder or lower seats than his, andall in their mid-teens. Harry recognized Voldemort atonce. His was the most handsome face and he lookedthe most relaxed of all the boys. His right hand laynegligently upon the arm of his chair; with a jolt,Harry saw that he was wearing Marvolo’s gold-and-black ring; he had already killed his father.

“Sir, is it true that Professor Merrythought isretiring?” he asked.

“Tom, Tom, if I knew I couldn’t tell you,” saidSlughorn, wagging a reproving, sugar-covered fingerat Riddle, though ruining the effect slightly bywinking. “I must say, I’d like to know where you getyour information, boy, more knowledgeable than halfthe staff, you are.”

Riddle smiled; the other boys laughed and cast himadmiring looks.

“What with your uncanny ability to know things youshouldn’t, and your careful flattery of the people whomatter — thank you for the pineapple, by the way,you’re quite right, it is my favorite —”

As several of the boys tittered, something very oddhappened. The whole room was suddenly filled with athick white fog, so that Harry could see nothing butthe face of Dumbledore, who was standing besidehim. Then Slughorn’s voice rang out through themist, unnaturally loudly, “ You’ll go wrong, boy, markmy words.”

The fog cleared as suddenly as it had appeared andyet nobody made any allusion to it, nor did anybodylook as though anything unusual had just happened.Bewildered, Harry looked around as a small golden

Page | 416 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

clock standing upon Slughorn’s desk chimed eleveno’clock.

“Good gracious, is it that time already?” saidSlughorn. “You’d better get going, boys, or we’ll all bein trouble. Lestrange, I want your essay by tomorrowor it’s detention. Same goes for you, Avery.”

Slughorn pulled himself out of his armchair andcarried his empty glass over to his desk as the boysfiled out. Voldemort, however, stayed behind. Harrycould tell he had dawdled deliberately, wanting to belast in the room with Slughorn.

“Look sharp, Tom,” said Slughorn, turning aroundand finding him still present. “You don’t want to becaught out of bed out of hours, and you a prefect ...”

“Sir, I wanted to ask you something.”

“Ask away, then, m’boy, ask away. ...”

“Sir, I wondered what you know about ... aboutHorcruxes?”

And it happened all over again: The dense fog filledthe room so that Harry could not see Slughorn orVoldemort at all; only Dumbledore, smiling serenelybeside him. Then Slughorn’s voice boomed out again,just as it had done before.

“I don’t know anything about Horcruxes and I wouldn’ttell you if I did! Now get out of here at once and don’tlet me catch you mentioning them again\”

“Well, that’s that,” said Dumbledore placidly besideHarry. “Time to go.”

Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

And Harry’s feet left the floor to fall, seconds later,back onto the mg in front of Dumbledore’s desk.

“That’s all there is?” said Harry blankly.

Dumbledore had said that this was the mostimportant memory of all, but he could not see whatwas so significant about it. Admittedly the fog, andthe fact that nobody seemed to have noticed it, wasodd, but other than that nothing seemed to havehappened except that Voldemort had asked aquestion and failed to get an answer.

“As you might have noticed,” said Dumbledore,reseating himself behind his desk, “that memory hasbeen tampered with.”

“Tampered with?” repeated Harry, sitting back downtoo.

“Certainly,” said Dumbledore. “Professor Slughornhas meddled with his own recollections.”

“But why would he do that?”

“Because, I think, he is ashamed of what heremembers,” said Dumbledore. “He has tried torework the memory to show himself in a better light,obliterating those parts which he does not wish me tosee. It is, as you will have noticed, very crudely done,and that is all to the good, for it shows that the truememory is still there beneath the alterations.

“And so, for the first time, I am giving you homework,Harry. It will be your job to persuade ProfessorSlughorn to divulge the real memory, which willundoubtedly be our most crucial piece of informationof all.”

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry stared at him.

“But surely, sir,” he said, keeping his voice asrespectful as possible, “you don’t need me — youcould use Legilimency ... or Veritaserum. ...”

“Professor Slughorn is an extremely able wizard whowill be expecting both,” said Dumbledore. “He ismuch more accomplished at Occlumency than poorMorfin Gaunt, and I would be astonished if he hasnot carried an antidote to Veritaserum with him eversince I coerced him into giving me this travesty of arecollection.

“No, I think it would be foolish to attempt to wrest thetruth from Professor Slughorn by force, and might domuch more harm than good; I do not wish him toleave Hogwarts. However, he has his weaknesses likethe rest of us, and I believe that you are the oneperson who might be able to penetrate his defenses. Itis most important that we secure the true memory,Harry. ... How important, we will only know when wehave seen the real thing. So, good luck ... and goodnight.”

A little taken aback by the abrupt dismissal, Harrygot to his feet quickly. “Good night, sir.”

As he closed the study door behind him, he distinctlyheard Phineas Nigellus say, “I can’t see why the boyshould be able to do it better than you, Dumbledore.”

“I wouldn’t expect you to, Phineas,” repliedDumbledore, and Fawkes gave another low, musicalcry.

Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





BIRTHDAY SURPRISES

The next day Harry confided in both Ron andHermione the task that Dumbledore had set him,though separately, for Hermione still refused toremain in Ron’s presence longer than it took to givehim a contemptuous look.

Ron thought that Harry was unlikely to have anytrouble with Slughorn at all.

“He loves you,” he said over breakfast, waving an airyforkful of fried egg. “Won’t refuse you anything, willhe? Not his little Potions Prince. Just hang back afterclass this afternoon and ask him.”

Hermione, however, took a gloomier view. “He mustbe determined to hide what really happened ifDumbledore couldn’t get it out of him,” she said in alow voice, as they stood in the deserted, snowycourtyard at break. “Horcruxes ... Horcruxes ... I’venever even heard of them. ...”

Page | 420 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You haven’t?” Harry was disappointed; he had hopedthat Hermione might have been able to give him aclue as to what Horcruxes were.

“They must be really advanced Dark Magic, or whywould Voldemort have wanted to know about them? Ithink it’s going to be difficult to get the information,Harry, you’ll have to be very careful about how youapproach Slughorn, think out a strategy. ...”

“Ron reckons I should just hang back after Potionsthis afternoon. ...”

“Oh, well, if Won-Won thinks that, you’d better do it,”she said, flaring up at once. “After all, when has Won-Won’s judgment ever been faulty?”

“Hermione, can’t you — ?”

“iVo!” she said angrily, and stormed away, leavingHarry alone and ankle-deep in snow.

Potions lessons were uncomfortable enough thesedays, seeing as Harry, Ron, and Hermione had toshare a desk. Today, Hermione moved her cauldronaround the table so that she was close to Ernie, andignored both Harry and Ron.

“What’ve you done?” Ron muttered to Harry, lookingat Hermione’s haughty profile.

But before Harry could answer, Slughorn was callingfor silence from the front of the room.

“Settle down, settle down, please! Quickly, now, lotsof work to get through this afternoon! Golpalott’sThird Law ... who can tell me — ? But Miss Grangercan, of course!”

Page | 421 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hermione recited at top speed: “Golpalott’s-Third-Law-states-that-the-antidote-for-a-blended-poison-will-be-equal-to-more-than-the-sum-of-the-antidotes-for-each-of-the-separate-components.”

“Precisely!” beamed Slughorn. “Ten points forGryffindor! Now, if we accept Golpalott’s Third Law astrue ...”

Harry was going to have to take Slughorn’s word for itthat Golpalott’s Third Law was true, because he hadnot understood any of it. Nobody apart fromHermione seemed to be following what Slughorn saidnext either.

"... which means, of course, that assuming we haveachieved correct identification of the potion’singredients by Scarpin’s Revelaspell, our primary aimis not the relatively simple one of selecting antidotesto those ingredients in and of themselves, but to findthat added component that will, by an almostalchemical process, transform these disparateelements —”

Ron was sitting beside Harry with his mouth halfopen, doodling absently on his new copy of AdvancedPotion-Making. Ron kept forgetting that he could nolonger rely on Hermione to help him out of troublewhen he failed to grasp what was going on.

"... and so,” finished Slughorn, “I want each of you tocome and take one of these phials from my desk. Youare to create an antidote for the poison within itbefore the end of the lesson. Good luck, and don’tforget your protective gloves!”

Hermione had left her stool and was halfway towardSlughorn’s desk before the rest of the class hadrealized it was time to move, and by the time Harry,

Page | 422 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron, and Ernie returned to the table, she had alreadytipped the contents of her phial into her cauldron andwas kindling a fire underneath it.

“It’s a shame that the Prince won’t be able to help youmuch with this, Harry,” she said brightly as shestraightened up. “You have to understand theprinciples involved this time. No shortcuts or cheats!”

Annoyed, Harry uncorked the poison he had takenfrom Slughorn’s desk, which was a garish shade ofpink, tipped it into his cauldron, and lit a fireunderneath it. He did not have the faintest idea whathe was supposed to do next. He glanced around atRon, who was now standing there looking rathergormless, having copied everything Harry had done.

“You sure the Prince hasn’t got any tips?” Ronmuttered to Harry.

Harry pulled out his trusty copy of Advanced Potion-Making and turned to the chapter on antidotes. Therewas Golpalott’s Third Law, stated word for word asHermione had recited it, but not a single illuminatingnote in the Prince’s hand to explain what it meant.Apparently the Prince, like Hermione, had had nodifficulty understanding it.

“Nothing,” said Harry gloomily.

Hermione was now waving her wand enthusiasticallyover her cauldron. Unfortunately, they could not copythe spell she was doing because she was now so goodat nonverbal incantations that she did not need to saythe words aloud. Ernie Macmillan, however, wasmuttering, “Specialis Reveliol” over his cauldron,which sounded impressive, so Harry and Ronhastened to imitate him.

Page | 423 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

It took Harry only five minutes to realize that hisreputation as the best potion-maker in the class wascrashing around his ears. Slughorn had peeredhopefully into his cauldron on his first circuit of thedungeon, preparing to exclaim in delight as heusually did, and instead had withdrawn his headhastily, coughing, as the smell of bad eggsoverwhelmed him. Hermione’s expression could nothave been any smugger; she had loathed beingoutperformed in every Potions class. She was nowdecanting the mysteriously separated ingredients ofher poison into ten different crystal phials. More toavoid watching this irritating sight than anythingelse, Harry bent over the Half-Blood Prince’s book andturned a few pages with unnecessary force.

And there it was, scrawled right across a long list ofantidotes:

Just shove a bezoar down their throats.

Harry stared at these words for a moment. Hadn’t heonce, long ago, heard of bezoars? Hadn’t Snapementioned them in their first-ever Potions lesson? “Astone taken from the stomach of a goat, which willprotect from most poisons.”

It was not an answer to the Golpalott problem, andhad Snape still been their teacher, Harry would nothave dared do it, but this was a moment for desperatemeasures. He hastened toward the store cupboardand rummaged within it, pushing aside unicornhorns and tangles of dried herbs until he found, atthe very back, a small cardboard box on which hadbeen scribbled the word bezoars.

He opened the box just as Slughorn called, “Twominutes left, everyone!” Inside were half a dozen

Page | 424 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

shriveled brown objects, looking more like dried-upkidneys than real stones. Harry seized one, put thebox back in the cupboard, and hurried back to hiscauldron.

“Time’s ... UP!” called Slughorn genially. “Well, let’ssee how you’ve done! Blaise ... what have you got forme?”

Slowly, Slughorn moved around the room, examiningthe various antidotes. Nobody had finished the task,although Hermione was trying to cram a few moreingredients into her bottle before Slughorn reachedher. Ron had given up completely, and was merelytrying to avoid breathing in the putrid fumes issuingfrom his cauldron. Harry stood there waiting, thebezoar clutched in a slightly sweaty hand.

Slughorn reached their table last. He sniffed Ernie’spotion and passed on to Ron’s with a grimace. He didnot linger over Ron’s cauldron, but backed awayswiftly, retching slightly.

“And you, Harry,” he said. “What have you got toshow me?”

Harry held out his hand, the bezoar sitting on hispalm.

Slughorn looked down at it for a full ten seconds.Harry wondered, for a moment, whether he was goingto shout at him. Then he threw back his head androared with laughter.

“You’ve got nerve, boy!” he boomed, taking the bezoarand holding it up so that the class could see it. “Oh,you’re like your mother. ... Well, I can’t fault you. ... Abezoar would certainly act as an antidote to all thesepotions!”

Page | 425 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hermione, who was sweaty-faced and had soot on hernose, looked livid. Her half-finished antidote,comprising fifty-two ingredients, including a chunk ofher own hair, bubbled sluggishly behind Slughorn,who had eyes for nobody but Harry.

“And you thought of a bezoar all by yourself, did you,Harry?” she asked through gritted teeth.

“That’s the individual spirit a real potion-makerneeds!” said Slughorn happily, before Harry couldreply. “Just like his mother, she had the sameintuitive grasp of potion-making, it’s undoubtedlyfrom Lily he gets it. ... Yes, Harry, yes, if you’ve got abezoar to hand, of course that would do the trick ...although as they don’t work on everything, and arepretty rare, it’s still worth knowing how to mixantidotes. ...”

The only person in the room looking angrier thanHermione was Malfoy, who, Harry was pleased to see,had spilled something that looked like cat-sick overhimself. Before either of them could express their furythat Harry had come top of the class by not doing anywork, however, the bell rang.

“Time to pack up!” said Slughorn. “And an extra tenpoints to Gryffindor for sheer cheek!”

Still chuckling, he waddled back to his desk at thefront of the dungeon.

Harry dawdled behind, taking an inordinate amountof time to do up his bag. Neither Ron nor Hermionewished him luck as they left; both looked ratherannoyed. At last Harry and Slughorn were the onlytwo left in the room.

Page | 426 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Come on, now, Harry, you’ll be late for your nextlesson,” said Slughorn affably, snapping the goldclasps shut on his dragon-skin briefcase.

“Sir,” said Harry, reminding himself irresistibly ofVoldemort, “I wanted to ask you something.”

“Ask away, then, my dear boy, ask away. ...”

“Sir, I wondered what you know about ... aboutHorcruxes?”

Slughorn froze. His round face seemed to sink inupon itself. He licked his lips and said hoarsely,

“What did you say?”

“I asked whether you know anything aboutHorcruxes, sir. You see —”

“Dumbledore put you up to this,” whisperedSlughorn. His voice had changed completely. It wasnot genial anymore, but shocked, terrified. Hefumbled in his breast pocket and pulled out ahandkerchief, mopping his sweating brow.“Dumbledore’s shown you that — that memory. Well?Hasn’t he?”

“Yes,” said Harry, deciding on the spot that it wasbest not to lie.

“Yes, of course,” said Slughorn quietly, still dabbingat his white face. “Of course ... well, if you’ve seenthat memory, Harry, you’ll know that I don’t knowanything — anything” — he repeated the wordforcefully — “about Horcruxes.”

He seized his dragon-skin briefcase, stuffed hishandkerchief back into his pocket, and marched tothe dungeon door.

Page | 427 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Sir,” said Harry desperately, “I just thought theremight be a bit more to the memory —”

“Did you?” said Slughorn. “Then you were wrong,weren’t you? WRONG!”

He bellowed the last word and, before Harry could sayanother word, slammed the dungeon door behindhim.

Neither Ron nor Hermione was at all sympatheticwhen Harry told them of this disastrous interview.Hermione was still seething at the way Harry hadtriumphed without doing the work properly. Ron wasresentful that Harry hadn’t slipped him a bezoar too.

“It would’ve just looked stupid if we’d both done it!”said Harry irritably. “Look, I had to try and soften himup so I could ask him about Voldemort, didn’t I? Oh,will you get a grip\” he added in exasperation, as Ronwinced at the sound of the name.

Infuriated by his failure and by Ron’s and Hermione’sattitudes, Harry brooded for the next few days overwhat to do next about Slughorn. He decided that, forthe time being, he would let Slughorn think that hehad forgotten all about Horcruxes; it was surely bestto lull him into a false sense of security beforereturning to the attack.

When Harry did not question Slughorn again, thePotions master reverted to his usual affectionatetreatment of him, and appeared to have put thematter from his mind. Harry awaited an invitation toone of his little evening parties, determined to acceptthis time, even if he had to reschedule Quidditchpractice. Unfortunately, however, no such invitationarrived. Harry checked with Hermione and Ginny:Neither of them had received an invitation and nor, asPage | 428 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

far as they knew, had anybody else. Harry could nothelp wondering whether this meant that Slughornwas not quite as forgetful as he appeared, simplydetermined to give Harry no additional opportunitiesto question him.

Meanwhile, the Hogwarts library had failed Hermionefor the first time in living memory. She was soshocked, she even forgot that she was annoyed atHarry for his trick with the bezoar.

“I haven’t found one single explanation of whatHorcruxes do!” she told him. “Not a single one! I’vebeen right through the restricted section and even inthe most horrible books, where they tell you how tobrew the most gruesome potions — nothing! All Icould find was this, in the introduction to MagickMoste Evile — listen — ‘Of the Horcrux, wickedest ofmagical inventions, we shall not speak nor givedirection. ...’I mean, why mention it then?” she saidimpatiently, slamming the old book shut; it let out aghostly wail. “Oh, shut up,” she snapped, stuffing itback into her bag.

The snow melted around the school as Februaryarrived, to be replaced by cold, dreary wetness.Purplish-gray clouds hung low over the castle and aconstant fall of chilly rain made the lawns slipperyand muddy. The upshot of this was that the sixthyears’ first Apparition lesson, which was scheduledfor a Saturday morning so that no normal lessonswould be missed, took place in the Great Hall insteadof in the grounds.

When Harry and Hermione arrived in the Hall (Ronhad come down with Lavender), they found that thetables had disappeared. Rain lashed against the highwindows and the enchanted ceiling swirled darklyabove them as they assembled in front of ProfessorsPage | 429 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

McGonagall, Snape, Flitwick, and Sprout — theHeads of Houses — and a small wizard whom Harrytook to be the Apparition instructor from the Ministry.He was oddly colorless, with transparent eyelashes,wispy hair, and an insubstantial air, as though asingle gust of wind might blow him away. Harrywondered whether constant disappearances andreappearances had somehow diminished hissubstance, or whether this frail build was ideal foranyone wishing to vanish.

“Good morning,” said the Ministry wizard, when allthe students had arrived and the Heads of Houseshad called for quiet. “My name is Wilkie Twycross andI shall be your Ministry Apparition instructor for thenext twelve weeks. I hope to be able to prepare you foryour Apparition Tests in this time —”

“Malfoy, be quiet and pay attention!” barked ProfessorMcGonagall.

Everybody looked around. Malfoy had flushed a dullpink; he looked furious as he stepped away fromCrabbe, with whom he appeared to have been havinga whispered argument. Harry glanced quickly atSnape, who also looked annoyed, though Harrystrongly suspected that this was less because ofMalfoy’s rudeness than the fact that McGonagall hadreprimanded one of his House.

“— by which time, many of you may be ready to takeyour tests,” Twycross continued, as though there hadbeen no interruption.

“As you may know, it is usually impossible toApparate or Disapparate within Hogwarts. Theheadmaster has lifted this enchantment, purelywithin the Great Hall, for one hour, so as to enableyou to practice. May I emphasize that you will not bePage | 430 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

able to Apparate outside the walls of this Hall, andthat you would be unwise to try.

“I would like each of you to place yourselves now sothat you have a clear five feet of space in front ofyou.”

There was a great scrambling and jostling as peopleseparated, banged into each other, and orderedothers out of their space. The Heads of Houses movedamong the students, marshaling them into positionand breaking up arguments.

“Harry, where are you going?” demanded Hermione.

But Harry did not answer; he was moving quicklythrough the crowd, past the place where ProfessorFlitwick was making squeaky attempts to position afew Ravenclaws, all of whom wanted to be near thefront, past Professor Sprout, who was chivying theHufflepuffs into line, until, by dodging around ErnieMacmillan, he managed to position himself right atthe back of the crowd, directly behind Malfoy, whowas taking advantage of the general upheaval tocontinue his argument with Crabbe, standing five feetaway and looking mutinous.

“I don’t know how much longer, all right?” Malfoyshot at him, oblivious to Harry standing right behindhim. “It’s taking longer than I thought it would.”

Crabbe opened his mouth, but Malfoy appeared tosecond-guess what he was going to say. “Look, it’snone of your business what I’m doing, Crabbe, youand Goyle just do as you’re told and keep a lookout!”

“I tell my friends what I’m up to, if I want them tokeep a lookout for me,” Harry said, just loud enoughfor Malfoy to hear him.

Page | 431 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

Malfoy spun around on the spot, his hand flying tohis wand, but at that precise moment the four Headsof House shouted, “Quiet!” and silence fell again.Malfoy turned slowly to face the front again.

“Thank you,” said Twycross. “Now then ...”

He waved his wand. Old-fashioned wooden hoopsinstantly appeared on the floor in front of everystudent.

“The important things to remember when Apparatingare the three D’s!” said Twycross. “Destination,Determination, Deliberation!

“Step one: Fix your mind firmly upon the desireddestination,” said Twycross. “In this case, the interiorof your hoop. Kindly concentrate upon thatdestination now.”

Everybody looked around furtively to check thateveryone else was staring into their hoop, then hastilydid as they were told. Harry gazed at the circularpatch of dusty floor enclosed by his hoop and triedhard to think of nothing else. This proved impossible,as he couldn’t stop puzzling over what Malfoy wasdoing that needed lookouts.

“Step two,” said Twycross, “focus your determinationto occupy the visualized space! Let your yearning toenter it flood from your mind to every particle of yourbody!”

Harry glanced around surreptitiously. A little way tohis left, Ernie Macmillan was contemplating his hoopso hard that his face had turned pink; it looked asthough he was straining to lay a Quaffle-sized egg.Harry bit back a laugh and hastily returned his gazeto his own hoop.

Page | 432 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Step three,” called Twycross, “and only when I givethe command ... Turn on the spot, feeling your wayinto nothingness, moving with deliberation,! On mycommand, now ... one —”

Harry glanced around again; lots of people werelooking positively alarmed at being asked to Apparateso quickly.

“— two —”

Harry tried to fix his thoughts on his hoop again; hehad already forgotten what the three D’s stood for.

THREE!”

Harry spun on the spot, lost balance, and nearly fellover. He was not the only one. The whole Hall wassuddenly full of staggering people; Neville was flat onhis back; Ernie Macmillan, on the other hand, haddone a kind of pirouetting leap into his hoop andlooked momentarily thrilled, until he caught sight ofDean Thomas roaring with laughter at him.

“Never mind, never mind,” said Twycross dryly, whodid not seem to have expected anything better.

“Adjust your hoops, please, and back to your originalpositions. ...”

The second attempt was no better than the first. Thethird was just as bad. Not until the fourth didanything exciting happen. There was a horriblescreech of pain and everybody looked around,terrified, to see Susan Bones of Hufflepuff wobbling inher hoop with her left leg still standing five feet awaywhere she had started.

The Heads of House converged on her; there was agreat bang and a puff of purple smoke, which cleared

Page | 433 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

to reveal Susan sobbing, reunited with her leg butlooking horrified.

“Splinching, or the separation of random body parts,”said Wilkie Twycross dispassionately, “occurs whenthe mind is insufficiently determined. You mustconcentrate continuously upon your destination, andmove, without haste, but with deliberation ... thus.”

Twycross stepped forward, turned gracefully on thespot with his arms outstretched, and vanished in aswirl of robes, reappearing at the back of the Hall.

“Remember the three D’s,” he said, “and try again ...one — two — three —”

But an hour later, Susan’s Splinching was still themost interesting thing that had happened. Twycrossdid not seem discouraged. Fastening his cloak at hisneck, he merely said, “Until next Saturday,everybody, and do not forget: Destination.Determination. Deliberation.”

With that, he waved his wand, Vanishing the hoops,and walked out of the Hall accompanied by ProfessorMcGonagall. Talk broke out at once as people beganmoving toward the entrance hall.

“How did you do?” asked Ron, hurrying toward Harry.“I think I felt something the last time I tried — a kindof tingling in my feet.”

“I expect your trainers are too small, Won-Won,” saida voice behind them, and Hermione stalked past,smirking.

“I didn’t feel anything,” said Harry, ignoring thisinterruption. “But I don’t care about that now —”

Page | 434 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What d’you mean, you don’t care? Don’t you want tolearn to Apparate?” said Ron incredulously.

“I’m not fussed, really, I prefer flying,” said Harry,glancing over his shoulder to see where Malfoy was,and speeding up as they came into the entrance hall.“Look, hurry up, will you, there’s something I want todo. ...”

Perplexed, Ron followed Harry back to the GryffindorTower at a run. They were temporarily detained byPeeves, who had jammed a door on the fourth floorshut and was refusing to let anyone pass until theyset fire to their own pants, but Harry and Ron simplyturned back and took one of their trusted shortcuts.Within five minutes, they were climbing through theportrait hole.

“Are you going to tell me what we’re doing, then?”asked Ron, panting slightly.

“Up here,” said Harry, and he crossed the commonroom and led the way through the door to the boys’staircase.

Their dormitory was, as Harry had hoped, empty. Heflung open his trunk and began to rummage in it,while Ron watched impatiently.

“Harry ...”

“Malfoy’s using Crabbe and Goyle as lookouts. He wasarguing with Crabbe just now. I want to know —aha.”

He had found it, a folded square of apparently blankparchment, which he now smoothed out and tappedwith the tip of his wand.

Page | 435 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I solemnly swear that I am up to no good ... or Malfoyis anyway.”

At once, the Marauder’s Map appeared on theparchment’s surface. Here was a detailed plan ofevery one of the castle’s floors and, moving around it,the tiny, labeled black dots that signified each of thecastle’s occupants.

“Help me find Malfoy,” said Harry urgently.

He laid the map upon his bed, and he and Ron leanedover it, searching.

“There!” said Ron, after a minute or so. “He’s in theSlytherin common room, look ... with Parkinson andZabini and Crabbe and Goyle ...”

Harry looked down at the map, disappointed, butrallied almost at once.

“Well, I’m keeping an eye on him from now on,” hesaid firmly. “And the moment I see him lurkingsomewhere with Crabbe and Goyle keeping watchoutside, it’ll be on with the old Invisibility Cloak andoff to find out what he’s —”

He broke off as Neville entered the dormitory, bringingwith him a strong smell of singed material, and beganrummaging in his trunk for a fresh pair of pants.

Despite his determination to catch Malfoy out, Harryhad no luck at all over the next couple of weeks.Although he consulted the map as often as he could,sometimes making unnecessary visits to thebathroom between lessons to search it, he did notonce see Malfoy anywhere suspicious. Admittedly, hespotted Crabbe and Goyle moving around the castleon their own more often than usual, sometimesPage | 436 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

remaining stationary in deserted corridors, but atthese times Malfoy was not only nowhere near them,but impossible to locate on the map at all. This wasmost mysterious. Harry toyed with the possibility thatMalfoy was actually leaving the school grounds, butcould not see how he could be doing it, given the veryhigh level of security now operating within the castle.He could only suppose that he was missing Malfoyamongst the hundreds of tiny black dots upon themap. As for the fact that Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyleappeared to be going their different ways when theywere usually inseparable, these things happened aspeople got older — Ron and Hermione, Harry reflectedsadly, were living proof.

February moved toward March with no change in theweather except that it became windy as well as wet.

To general indignation, a sign went up on all commonroom notice boards that the next trip into Hogsmeadehad been canceled. Ron was furious.

“It was on my birthday!” he said. “I was lookingforward to that!”

“Not a big surprise, though, is it?” said Harry. “Notafter what happened to Katie.”

She had still not returned from St. Mungo’s. Whatwas more, further disappearances had been reportedin the Daily Prophet, including several relatives ofstudents at Hogwarts.

“But now all I’ve got to look forward to is stupidApparition!” said Ron grumpily. “Big birthday treat ...”

Three lessons on, Apparition was proving as difficultas ever, though a few more people had managed toSplinch themselves. Frustration was running highand there was a certain amount of ill-feeling toward

Page | 437 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Wilkie Twycross and his three D’s, which had inspireda number of nicknames for him, the politest of whichwere Dogbreath and Dunghead.

“Happy birthday, Ron,” said Harry, when they werewoken on the first of March by Seamus and Deanleaving noisily for breakfast. “Have a present.”

He threw the package across onto Ron’s bed, where itjoined a small pile of them that must, Harry assumed,have been delivered by house-elves in the night.

“Cheers,” said Ron drowsily and, as he ripped off thepaper, Harry got out of bed, opened his own trunk,and began rummaging in it for the Marauder’s Map,which he hid after every use. He turfed out half thecontents of his trunk before he found it hidingbeneath the rolled-up socks in which he was stillkeeping his bottle of lucky potion, Felix Felicis.

“Right,” he murmured, taking it back to bed with him,tapping it quietly and murmuring, “I solemnly swearthat I am up to no good,” so that Neville, who waspassing the foot of his bed at the time, would nothear.

“Nice one, Harry!” said Ron enthusiastically, wavingthe new pair of Quidditch Keeper’s gloves Harry hadgiven him.

“No problem,” said Harry absentmindedly, as hesearched the Slytherin dormitory closely for Malfoy.“Hey ... I don’t think he’s in his bed. ...”

Ron did not answer; he was too busy unwrappingpresents, every now and then letting out anexclamation of pleasure.

Page | 438 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Seriously good haul this year!” he announced,holding up a heavy gold watch with odd symbolsaround the edge and tiny moving stars instead ofhands. “See what Mum and Dad got me? Blimey, Ithink I’ll come of age next year too. ...”

“Cool,” muttered Harry, sparing the watch a glancebefore peering more closely at the map. Where wasMalfoy? He did not seem to be at the Slytherin tablein the Great Hall, eating breakfast. ... He wasnowhere near Snape, who was sitting in his study. ...He wasn’t in any of the bathrooms or in the hospitalwing. ...

“Want one?” said Ron thickly, holding out a box ofChocolate Cauldrons.

“No thanks,” said Harry, looking up. “Malfoy’s goneagain!”

“Can’t have done,” said Ron, stuffing a secondCauldron into his mouth as he slid out of bed to getdressed. “Come on, if you don’t hurry up, you’ll haveto Apparate on an empty stomach. ... Might make iteasier, I suppose ...” Ron looked thoughtfully at thebox of Chocolate Cauldrons, then shrugged andhelped himself to a third.

Harry tapped the map with his wand, muttered,“Mischief managed,” though it hadn’t been, and gotdressed, thinking hard. There had to be anexplanation for Malfoy’s periodic disappearances, buthe simply could not think what it could be. The bestway of finding out would be to tail him, but even withthe Invisibility Cloak this was an impractical idea:Harry had lessons, Quidditch practice, homework,and Apparition; he could not follow Malfoy aroundschool all day without his absence being remarkedupon.

Page | 439 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Ready?” he said to Ron.

He was halfway to the dormitory door when herealized that Ron had not moved, but was leaning onhis bedpost, staring out of the rain-washed windowwith a strangely unfocused look on his face.

“Ron? Breakfast.”

“I’m not hungry.”

Harry stared at him.

“I thought you just said — ?”

“Well, all right, I’ll come down with you,” sighed Ron,“but I don’t want to eat.”

Harry scrutinized him suspiciously.

“You’ve just eaten half a box of Chocolate Cauldrons,haven’t you?”

“It’s not that,” Ron sighed again. “You ... you wouldn’tunderstand.”

“Fair enough,” said Harry, albeit puzzled, as heturned to open the door.

“Harry!” said Ron suddenly.

“What?”

“Harry, I can’t stand it!”

“You can’t stand what?” asked Harry, now starting tofeel definitely alarmed. Ron was rather pale andlooked as though he was about to be sick.

Page | 440 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I can’t stop thinking about her!” said Ron hoarsely.

Harry gaped at him. He had not expected this andwas not sure he wanted to hear it. Friends they mightbe, but if Ron started calling Lavender “Lav-Lav,” hewould have to put his foot down.

“Why does that stop you having breakfast?” Harryasked, trying to inject a note of common sense intothe proceedings.

“I don’t think she knows I exist,” said Ron with adesperate gesture.

“She definitely knows you exist,” said Harry,bewildered. “She keeps snogging you, doesn’t she?”

Ron blinked. “Who are you talking about?”

“Who are you talking about?” said Harry, with anincreasing sense that all reason had dropped out ofthe conversation.

“Romilda Vane,” said Ron softly, and his whole faceseemed to illuminate as he said it, as though hit by aray of purest sunlight.

They stared at each other for almost a whole minute,before Harry said, “This is a joke, right? You’rejoking.”

“I think ... Harry, I think I love her,” said Ron in astrangled voice.

“Okay,” said Harry, walking up to Ron to get a betterlook at the glazed eyes and the pallid complexion,“okay... Say that again with a straight face.”

Page | 441 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I love her,” repeated Ron breathlessly. “Have youseen her hair, it’s all black and shiny and silky ... andher eyes? Her big dark eyes? And her —”

“This is really funny and everything,” said Harryimpatiently, “but joke’s over, all right? Drop it.”

He turned to leave; he had got two steps toward thedoor when a crashing blow hit him on the right ear.Staggering, he looked around. Ron’s fist was drawnright back; his face was contorted with rage; he wasabout to strike again.

Harry reacted instinctively; his wand was out of hispocket and the incantation sprang to mind withoutconscious thought: Levicorpus\

Ron yelled as his heel was wrenched upward oncemore; he dangled helplessly, upside down, his robeshanging off him.

“What was that for?” Harry bellowed.

“You insulted her, Harry! You said it was a joke!”shouted Ron, who was slowly turning purple in theface as all the blood rushed to his head.

“This is insane!” said Harry. “What’s got into — ?”

And then he saw the box lying open on Ron’s bed,and the truth hit him with the force of a stampedingtroll.

“Where did you get those Chocolate Cauldrons?”

“They were a birthday present!” shouted Ron,revolving slowly in midair as he struggled to get free.

“I offered you one, didn’t I?”

Page | 442 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You just picked them up off the floor, didn’t you?”

“They’d fallen off my bed, all right? Let me go!”

“They didn’t fall off your bed, you prat, don’t youunderstand? They were mine, I chucked them out ofmy trunk when I was looking for the map, they’re theChocolate Cauldrons Romilda gave me beforeChristmas, and they’re all spiked with love potion!”

But only one word of this seemed to have registeredwith Ron.

“Romilda?” he repeated. “Did you say Romilda? Harry— do you know her? Can you introduce me?”

Harry stared at the dangling Ron, whose face nowlooked tremendously hopeful, and fought a strongdesire to laugh. A part of him — the part closest tohis throbbing right ear — was quite keen on the ideaof letting Ron down and watching him run amok untilthe effects of the potion wore off. ... But on the otherhand, they were supposed to be friends, Ron had notbeen himself when he had attacked, and Harrythought that he would deserve another punching if hepermitted Ron to declare undying love for RomildaVane.

“Yeah, I’ll introduce you,” said Harry, thinking fast.“I’m going to let you down now, okay?”

He sent Ron crashing back to the floor (his ear didhurt quite a lot), but Ron simply bounded to his feetagain, grinning.

“She’ll be in Slughorn’s office,” said Harry confidently,leading the way to the door.

Page | 443 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Why will she be in there?” asked Ron anxiously,hurrying to keep up.

“Oh, she has extra Potions lessons with him,” saidHarry, inventing wildly.

“Maybe I could ask if I can have them with her?” saidRon eagerly.

“Great idea,” said Harry.

Lavender was waiting beside the portrait hole, acomplication Harry had not foreseen.

“You’re late, Won-Won!” she pouted. “I’ve got you abirthday —”

“Leave me alone,” said Ron impatiently. “Harry’s goingto introduce me to Romilda Vane.”

And without another word to her, he pushed his wayout of the portrait hole. Harry tried to make anapologetic face to Lavender, but it might have turnedout simply amused, because she looked moreoffended than ever as the Fat Lady swung shutbehind them.

Harry had been slightly worried that Slughorn mightbe at breakfast, but he answered his office door at thefirst knock, wearing a green velvet dressing gown andmatching nightcap and looking rather bleary-eyed.

“Harry,” he mumbled. “This is very early for a call. ... Igenerally sleep late on a Saturday. ...”

“Professor, I’m really sorry to disturb you,” said Harryas quietly as possible, while Ron stood on tiptoe,attempting to see past Slughorn into his room, “butmy friend Ron’s swallowed a love potion by mistake.

Page | 444 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

You couldn’t make him an antidote, could you? I’dtake him to Madam Pomfrey, but we’re not supposedto have anything from Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes and,you know ... awkward questions ...”

“I’d have thought you could have whipped him up aremedy, Harry, an expert potioneer like you?” askedSlughorn.

“Er,” said Harry, somewhat distracted by the fact thatRon was now elbowing him in the ribs in an attemptto force his way into the room, “well, I’ve never mixedan antidote for a love potion, sir, and by the time I getit right, Ron might’ve done something serious —”

Helpfully, Ron chose this moment to moan, “I can’tsee her, Harry — is he hiding her?”

“Was this potion within date?” asked Slughorn, noweyeing Ron with professional interest. “They canstrengthen, you know, the longer they’re kept.”

“That would explain a lot,” panted Harry, nowpositively wrestling with Ron to keep him fromknocking Slughorn over. “It’s his birthday, Professor,”he added imploringly.

“Oh, all right, come in, then, come in,” said Slughorn,relenting. “I’ve got the necessary here in my bag, it’snot a difficult antidote. ...”

Ron burst through the door into Slughorn’soverheated, crowded study, tripped over a tasseledfootstool, regained his balance by seizing Harryaround the neck, and muttered, “She didn’t see that,did she?”

Page | 445 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“She’s not here yet,” said Harry, watching Slughornopening his potion kit and adding a few pinches ofthis and that to a small crystal bottle.

“That’s good,” said Ron fervently. “How do I look?”

“Very handsome,” said Slughorn smoothly, handingRon a glass of clear liquid. “Now drink that up, it’s atonic for the nerves, keep you calm when she arrives,you know.”

“Brilliant,” said Ron eagerly, and he gulped theantidote down noisily.

Harry and Slughorn watched him. For a moment, Ronbeamed at them. Then, very slowly, his grin saggedand vanished, to be replaced by an expression ofutmost horror.

“Back to normal, then?” said Harry, grinning.Slughorn chuckled. “Thanks a lot, Professor.”

“Don’t mention it, m’boy, don’t mention it,” saidSlughorn, as Ron collapsed into a nearby armchair,looking devastated. “Pick-me-up, that’s what heneeds,” Slughorn continued, now bustling over to atable loaded with drinks. “I’ve got butterbeer, I’ve gotwine, I’ve got one last bottle of this oak-matured mead... hmm ... meant to give that to Dumbledore forChristmas ... ah, well ...” He shrugged. “He can’t misswhat he’s never had! Why don’t we open it now andcelebrate Mr. Weasley’s birthday? Nothing like a finespirit to chase away the pangs of disappointed love.

He chortled again, and Harry joined in. This was thefirst time he had found himself almost alone withSlughorn since his disastrous first attempt to extractthe true memory from him. Perhaps, if he could just

Page | 446 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

keep Slughorn in a good mood ... perhaps if they gotthrough enough of the oak-matured mead ...

“There you are then,” said Slughorn, handing Harryand Ron a glass of mead each before raising his own.“Well, a very happy birthday, Ralph —”

“Ron —” whispered Harry.

But Ron, who did not appear to be listening to thetoast, had already thrown the mead into his mouthand swallowed it.

There was one second, hardly more than a heartbeat,in which Harry knew there was something terriblywrong and Slughorn, it seemed, did not.

“— and may you have many more —”

“Ron\”

Ron had dropped his glass; he half-rose from hischair and then crumpled, his extremities jerkinguncontrollably. Foam was dribbling from his mouth,and his eyes were bulging from their sockets.

“Professor!” Harry bellowed. “Do something!”

But Slughorn seemed paralyzed by shock. Rontwitched and choked: His skin was turning blue.

“What — but —” spluttered Slughorn.

Harry leapt over a low table and sprinted towardSlughorn’s open potion kit, pulling out jars andpouches, while the terrible sound of Ron’s garglingbreath filled the room. Then he found it — theshriveled kidneylike stone Slughorn had taken fromhim in Potions.

Page | 447 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He hurtled back to Ron’s side, wrenched open hisjaw, and thrust the bezoar into his mouth. Ron gave agreat shudder, a rattling gasp, and his body becamelimp and still.

Page | 448 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling



ELF TAILS

“So, all in all, not one of Ron’s better birthdays?” saidFred.

It was evening; the hospital wing was quiet, thewindows curtained, the lamps lit. Ron’s was the onlyoccupied bed. Harry, Hermione, and Ginny weresitting around him; they had spent all day waitingoutside the double doors, trying to see insidewhenever somebody went in or out. Madam Pomfreyhad only let them enter at eight o’clock. Fred andGeorge had arrived at ten past.

“This isn’t how we imagined handing over ourpresent,” said George grimly, putting down a largewrapped gift on Ron’s bedside cabinet and sittingbeside Ginny.

“Yeah, when we pictured the scene, he wasconscious,” said Fred.

“There we were in Hogsmeade, waiting to surprisehim —” said George.

Page | 449 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You were in Hogsmeade?” asked Ginny, looking up.

“We were thinking of buying Zonko’s,” said Fredgloomily. “A Hogsmeade branch, you know, but a fatlot of good it’ll do us if you lot aren’t allowed out atweekends to buy our stuff anymore. ... But nevermind that now.”

He drew up a chair beside Harry and looked at Ron’spale face.

“How exactly did it happen, Harry?”

Harry retold the story he had already recounted, it feltlike a hundred times to Dumbledore, to McGonagall,to Madam Pomfrey, to Hermione, and to Ginny.

"... and then I got the bezoar down his throat and hisbreathing eased up a bit, Slughorn ran for help,McGonagall and Madam Pomfrey turned up, and theybrought Ron up here. They reckon he’ll be all right.Madam Pomfrey says hell have to stay here a week orso ... keep taking essence of rue ...”

“Blimey, it was lucky you thought of a bezoar,” saidGeorge in a low voice.

“Lucky there was one in the room,” said Harry, whokept turning cold at the thought of what would havehappened if he had not been able to lay hands on thelittle stone.

Hermione gave an almost inaudible sniff. She hadbeen exceptionally quiet all day. Having hurtled,white-faced, up to Harry outside the hospital wingand demanded to know what had happened, she hadtaken almost no part in Harry and Ginny’s obsessivediscussion about how Ron had been poisoned, butmerely stood beside them, clench-jawed andPage | 450 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

frightened-looking, until at last they had been allowedin to see him.

“Do Mum and Dad know?” Fred asked Ginny.

“They’ve already seen him, they arrived an hour ago— they’re in Dumbledore’s office now, but they’ll beback soon. ...”

There was a pause while they all watched Ronmumble a little in his sleep.

“So the poison was in the drink?” said Fred quietly.

“Yes,” said Harry at once; he could think of nothingelse and was glad for the opportunity to startdiscussing it again. “Slughorn poured it out —”

“Would he have been able to slip something into Ron’sglass without you seeing?”

“Probably,” said Harry, “but why would Slughornwant to poison Ron?”

“No idea,” said Fred, frowning. “You don’t think hecould have mixed up the glasses by mistake? Meaningto get you?”

“Why would Slughorn want to poison Harry?” askedGinny.

“I dunno,” said Fred, “but there must be loads ofpeople who’d like to poison Harry, mustn’t there? TheChosen One’ and all that?”

“So you think Slughorn’s a Death Eater?” said Ginny.“Anything’s possible,” said Fred darkly.

Page | 451 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“He could be under the Imperius Curse,” said George.

“Or he could be innocent,” said Ginny. “The poisoncould have been in the bottle, in which case it wasprobably meant for Slughorn himself.”

“Who’d want to kill Slughorn?”

“Dumbledore reckons Voldemort wanted Slughorn onhis side,” said Harry. “Slughorn was in hiding for ayear before he came to Hogwarts. And ...” He thoughtof the memory Dumbledore had not yet been able toextract from Slughorn. “And maybe Voldemort wantshim out of the way, maybe he thinks he could bevaluable to Dumbledore.”

“But you said Slughorn had been planning to givethat bottle to Dumbledore for Christmas,” Ginnyreminded him. “So the poisoner could just as easilyhave been after Dumbledore.”

“Then the poisoner didn’t know Slughorn very well,”said Hermione, speaking for the first time in hoursand sounding as though she had a bad head cold.“Anyone who knew Slughorn would have known therewas a good chance he’d keep something that tasty forhimself.”

“Er-my-nee,” croaked Ron unexpectedly from betweenthem.

They all fell silent, watching him anxiously, but aftermuttering incomprehensibly for a moment he merelystarted snoring.

The dormitory doors flew open, making them alljump: Hagrid came striding toward them, his hairrain-flecked, his bearskin coat flapping behind him, a

Page | 452 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

crossbow in his hand, leaving a trail of muddydolphin-sized footprints all over the floor.

“Bin in the forest all day!” he panted. “Aragog’s worse,I bin readin’ to him — didn’ get up ter dinner till jus’now an’ then Professor Sprout told me abou’ Ron!

How is he?”

“Not bad,” said Harry. “They say he’ll be okay.”

“No more than six visitors at a time!” said MadamPomfrey, hurrying out of her office.

“Hagrid makes six,” George pointed out.

“Oh ... yes ...” said Madam Pomfrey, who seemed tohave been counting Hagrid as several people due tohis vastness. To cover her confusion, she hurried offto clear up his muddy footprints with her wand.

“I don’ believe this,” said Hagrid hoarsely, shaking hisgreat shaggy head as he stared down at Ron. “Jus’don’ believe it ... Look at him lyin’ there. ... Who’dwant ter hurt him, eh?”

“That’s just what we were discussing,” said Harry.

“We don’t know.”

“Someone couldn’ have a grudge against theGryffindor Quidditch team, could they?” said Hagridanxiously. “Firs’ Katie, now Ron ...”

“I can’t see anyone trying to bump off a Quidditchteam,” said George.

“Wood might’ve done the Slytherins if he could’ve gotaway with it,” said Fred fairly.

Page | 453 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, I don’t think it’s Quidditch, but I think there’s aconnection between the attacks,” said Hermionequietly.

“How d’you work that out?” asked Fred.

“Well, for one thing, they both ought to have beenfatal and weren’t, although that was pure luck. Andfor another, neither the poison nor the necklaceseems to have reached the person who was supposedto be killed. Of course,” she added broodingly, “thatmakes the person behind this even more dangerousin a way, because they don’t seem to care how manypeople they finish off before they actually reach theirvictim.”

Before anybody could respond to this ominouspronouncement, the dormitory doors opened againand Mr. and Mrs. Weasley hurried up the ward. Theyhad done no more than satisfy themselves that Ronwould make a full recovery on their last visit to theward; now Mrs. Weasley seized hold of Harry andhugged him very tightly. “Dumbledore’s told us howyou saved him with the bezoar,” she sobbed. “Oh,Harry, what can we say? You saved Ginny ... yousaved Arthur ... now you’ve saved Ron ...”

“Don’t be ... I didn’t ...” muttered Harry awkwardly.

“Half our family does seem to owe you their lives, nowI stop and think about it,” Mr. Weasley said in aconstricted voice. “Well, all I can say is that it was alucky day for the Weasleys when Ron decided to sit inyour compartment on the Hogwarts Express, Harry.”

Harry could not think of any reply to this and wasalmost glad when Madam Pomfrey reminded themthat there were only supposed to be six visitorsaround Ron’s bed; he and Hermione rose at once to

Page | 454 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

leave and Hagrid decided to go with them, leaving Ronwith his family.

“It’s terrible,” growled Hagrid into his beard, as thethree of them walked back along the corridor to themarble staircase. “All this new security, an’ kids arestill gettin’ hurt. ... Dumbledore’s worried sick. ... Hedon’ say much, but I can tell. ...”

“Hasn’t he got any ideas, Hagrid?” asked Hermionedesperately.

“I ’spect he’s got hundreds of ideas, brain like his,”said Hagrid. “But he doesn’ know who sent thatnecklace nor put poison in that wine, or they’d’ve bincaught, wouldn’ they? Wha’ worries me,” said Hagrid,lowering his voice and glancing over his shoulder(Harry, for good measure, checked the ceiling forPeeves), “is how long Hogwarts can stay open if kidsare bein’ attacked. Chamber o’ Secrets all over again,isn’ it? There’ll be panic, more parents takin’ theirkids outta school, an’ nex’ thing yeh know the boardo’ governors ...”

Hagrid stopped talking as the ghost of a long-hairedwoman drifted serenely past, then resumed in ahoarse whisper, "... the board o’ governors’ll be talkin’about shuttin’ us up fer good.”

“Surely not?” said Hermione, looking worried.

“Gotta see it from their point o’ view,” said Hagridheavily. “I mean, it’s always bin a bit of a risk sendin’a kid ter Hogwarts, hasn’ it? Yer expect accidents,don’ yeh, with hundreds of underage wizards alllocked up tergether, but attempted murder, tha’sdiff’rent. ’S’no wonder Dumbledore’s angry with Sn —

Page | 455 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid stopped in his tracks, a familiar, guiltyexpression on what was visible of his face above histangled black beard.

“What?” said Harry quickly. “Dumbledore’s angry withSnape?”

“I never said tha’,” said Hagrid, though his look ofpanic could not have been a bigger giveaway. “Look atthe time, it’s gettin’ on fer midnight, I need ter —”

“Hagrid, why is Dumbledore angry with Snape?”

Harry asked loudly.

“Shhhh!” said Hagrid, looking both nervous andangry. “Don’ shout stuff like that, Harry, d’yeh wan’me ter lose me job? Mind, I don’ suppose yeh’d care,would yeh, not now yeh’ve given up Care of Mag —”

“Don’t try and make me feel guilty, it won’t work!”said Harry forcefully. “What’s Snape done?”

“I dunno, Harry, I shouldn’ta heard it at all! I — well, Iwas cornin’ outta the forest the other evenin’ an’ Ioverheard ’em talking — well, arguin’. Didn’t like terdraw attention to meself, so I sorta skulked an’ triednot ter listen, but it was a — well, a heated discussionan’ it wasn’ easy ter block it out.”

“Well?” Harry urged him, as Hagrid shuffled hisenormous feet uneasily.

“Well — I jus’ heard Snape sayin’ Dumbledore tooktoo much fer granted an’ maybe he — Snape — didn’wan’ ter do it anymore —”

“Do what?”

Page | 456 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I dunno, Harry, it sounded like Snape was feelin’ abit overworked, tha’s all — anyway, Dumbledore toldhim flat out he’d agreed ter do it an’ that was all therewas to it. Pretty firm with him. An’ then he saidsummat abou’ Snape makin’ investigations in hisHouse, in Slytherin. Well, there’s nothin’ strangeabou’ that!” Hagrid added hastily, as Harry andHermione exchanged looks full of meaning. “All theHeads o’ Houses were asked ter look inter thatnecklace business —”

“Yeah, but Dumbledore’s not having rows with therest of them, is he?” said Harry.

“Look,” Hagrid twisted his crossbow uncomfortably inhis hands; there was a loud splintering sound and itsnapped in two. “I know what yeh’re like abou’ Snape,Harry, an’ I don’ want yeh ter go readin’ more interthis than there is.”

“Look out,” said Hermione tersely.

They turned just in time to see the shadow of ArgusFilch looming over the wall behind them before theman himself turned the corner, hunchbacked, hisjowls aquiver.

“Oho!” he wheezed. “Out of bed so late, this’ll meandetention!”

“No it won’, Filch,” said Hagrid shortly. “They’re withme, aren’ they?”

“And what difference does that make?” asked Filchobnoxiously.

“I’m a ruddy teacher, aren’ I, yeh sneakin’ Squib!”said Hagrid, firing up at once.

Page | 457 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There was a nasty hissing noise as Filch swelled withfury; Mrs. Norris had arrived, unseen, and wastwisting herself sinuously around Filch’s skinnyankles.

“Get goin’,” said Hagrid out of the corner of hismouth.

Harry did not need telling twice; he and Hermioneboth hurried off; Hagrid’s and Filch’s raised voicesechoed behind them as they ran. They passed Peevesnear the turning into Gryffindor Tower, but he wasstreaking happily toward the source of the yelling,cackling and calling,

When there’s strife and when there’s troubleCall on Peevsie, he’ll make double!

The Fat Lady was snoozing and not pleased to bewoken, but swung forward grumpily to allow them toclamber into the mercifully peaceful and emptycommon room. It did not seem that people knewabout Ron yet; Harry was very relieved: He had beeninterrogated enough that day. Hermione bade himgood night and set off for the girls’ dormitory. Harry,however, remained behind, taking a seat beside thefire and looking down into the dying embers.

So Dumbledore had argued with Snape. In spite of allhe had told Harry, in spite of his insistence that hetrusted Snape completely, he had lost his temper withhim. ... He did not think that Snape had tried hardenough to investigate the Slytherins ... or, perhaps, toinvestigate a single Slytherin: Malfoy?

Was it because Dumbledore did not want Harry to doanything foolish, to take matters into his own hands,that he had pretended there was nothing in Harry’ssuspicions? That seemed likely. It might even be that

Page | 458 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore did not want anything to distract Harryfrom their lessons, or from procuring that memoryfrom Slughorn. Perhaps Dumbledore did not think itright to confide suspicions about his staff to sixteen-year-olds. ...

“There you are, Potter!”

Harry jumped to his feet in shock, his wand at theready. He had been quite convinced that the commonroom was empty; he had not been at all prepared fora hulking figure to rise suddenly out of a distantchair. A closer look showed him that it was CormacMcLaggen.

“I’ve been waiting for you to come back,” saidMcLaggen, disregarding Harry’s drawn wand.

“Must’ve fallen asleep. Look, I saw them takingWeasley up to the hospital wing earlier. Didn’t looklike he’ll be fit for next week’s match.”

It took Harry a few moments to realize whatMcLaggen was talking about.

“Oh ... right ... Quidditch,” he said, putting his wandback into the belt of his jeans and running a handwearily through his hair. “Yeah ... he might not makeit.”

“Well, then, I’ll be playing Keeper, won’t I?” saidMcLaggen.

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Yeah, I suppose so. ...”

He could not think of an argument against it; afterall, McLaggen had certainly performed second-best inthe trials.

Page | 459 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Excellent,” said McLaggen in a satisfied voice. “Sowhen’s practice?”

“What? Oh ... there’s one tomorrow evening.”

“Good. Listen, Potter, we should have a talkbeforehand. I’ve got some ideas on strategy you mightfind useful.”

“Right,” said Harry unenthusiastically. “Well, I’ll hearthem tomorrow, then. I’m pretty tired now ... see you

The news that Ron had been poisoned spread quicklynext day, but it did not cause the sensation thatKatie’s attack had done. People seemed to think thatit might have been an accident, given that he hadbeen in the Potions master’s room at the time, andthat as he had been given an antidote immediatelythere was no real harm done. In fact, the Gryffindorswere generally much more interested in the upcomingQuidditch match against Hufflepuff, for many of themwanted to see Zacharias Smith, who played Chaser onthe Hufflepuff team, punished soundly for hiscommentary during the opening match againstSlytherin.

Harry, however, had never been less interested inQuidditch; he was rapidly becoming obsessed withDraco Malfoy. Still checking the Marauder’s Mapwhenever he got a chance, he sometimes madedetours to wherever Malfoy happened to be, but hadnot yet detected him doing anything out of theordinary. And still there were those inexplicable timeswhen Malfoy simply vanished from the map. ...

But Harry did not get a lot of time to consider theproblem, what with Quidditch practice, homework,

Page | 460 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

and the fact that he was now being dogged whereverhe went by Cormac McLaggen and Lavender Brown.

He could not decide which of them was moreannoying. McLaggen kept up a constant stream ofhints that he would make a better permanent Keeperfor the team than Ron, and that now that Harry wasseeing him play regularly he would surely comearound to this way of thinking too; he was also keento criticize the other players and provide Harry withdetailed training schemes, so that more than onceHarry was forced to remind him who was Captain.

Meanwhile, Lavender kept sidling up to Harry todiscuss Ron, which Harry found almost more wearingthan McLaggen’s Quidditch lectures. At first,

Lavender had been very annoyed that nobody hadthought to tell her that Ron was in the hospital wing— “I mean, I am his girlfriend!” — but unfortunatelyshe had now decided to forgive Harry this lapse ofmemory and was keen to have lots of in-depth chatswith him about Ron’s feelings, a most uncomfortableexperience that Harry would have happily forgone.

“Look, why don’t you talk to Ron about all this?”

Harry asked, after a particularly long interrogationfrom Lavender that took in everything from preciselywhat Ron had said about her new dress robes towhether or not Harry thought that Ron considered hisrelationship with Lavender to be “serious.”

“Well, I would, but he’s always asleep when I go andsee him!” said Lavender fretfully.

“Is he?” said Harry, surprised, for he had found Ronperfectly alert every time he had been up to thehospital wing, both highly interested in the news ofDumbledore and Snape’s row and keen to abuseMcLaggen as much as possible.

Page | 461 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Is Hermione Granger still visiting him?” Lavenderdemanded suddenly.

“Yeah, I think so. Well, they’re friends, aren’t they?”said Harry uncomfortably.

“Friends, don’t make me laugh,” said Lavenderscornfully. “She didn’t talk to him for weeks after hestarted going out with me! But I suppose she wants tomake up with him now he’s all interesting. ...”

“Would you call getting poisoned being interesting?”asked Harry. “Anyway — sorry, got to go — there’sMcLaggen coming for a talk about Quidditch,” saidHarry hurriedly, and he dashed sideways through adoor pretending to be solid wall and sprinted downthe shortcut that would take him off to Potions where,thankfully, neither Lavender nor McLaggen couldfollow him.

On the morning of the Quidditch match againstHufflepuff, Harry dropped in on the hospital wingbefore heading down to the pitch. Ron was veryagitated; Madam Pomfrey would not let him go downto watch the match, feeling it would overexcite him.

“So how’s McLaggen shaping up?” he asked Harrynervously, apparently forgetting that he had alreadyasked the same question twice.

“I’ve told you,” said Harry patiently, “he could beworld-class and I wouldn’t want to keep him. Hekeeps trying to tell everyone what to do, he thinks hecould play every position better than the rest of us. Ican’t wait to be shot of him. And speaking of gettingshot of people,” Harry added, getting to his feet andpicking up his Firebolt, “will you stop pretending tobe asleep when Lavender comes to see you? She’sdriving me mad as well.”

Page | 462 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh,” said Ron, looking sheepish. “Yeah. All right.”

“If you don’t want to go out with her anymore, just tellher,” said Harry.

“Yeah ... well ... it’s not that easy, is it?” said Ron. Hepaused. “Hermione going to look in before thematch?” he added casually.

“No, she’s already gone down to the pitch withGinny.”

“Oh,” said Ron, looking rather glum. “Right. Well,good luck. Hope you hammer McLag — I mean,Smith.”

“I’ll try,” said Harry, shouldering his broom. “See youafter the match.”

He hurried down through the deserted corridors; thewhole school was outside, either already seated in thestadium or heading down toward it. He was lookingout of the windows he passed, trying to gauge howmuch wind they were facing, when a noise aheadmade him glance up and he saw Malfoy walkingtoward him, accompanied by two girls, both of whomlooked sulky and resentful.

Malfoy stopped short at the sight of Harry, then gavea short, humorless laugh and continued walking.

“Where’re you going?” Harry demanded.

“Yeah, I’m really going to tell you, because it’s yourbusiness, Potter,” sneered Malfoy. “You’d better hurryup, they’ll be waiting for ‘the Chosen Captain’ — ‘theBoy Who Scored’ — whatever they call you thesedays.”

Page | 463 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

One of the girls gave an unwilling giggle. Harry staredat her. She blushed. Malfoy pushed past Harry andshe and her friend followed at a trot, turning thecorner and vanishing from view.

Harry stood rooted on the spot and watched themdisappear. This was infuriating; he was alreadycutting it fine to get to the match on time and yetthere was Malfoy, skulking off while the rest of theschool was absent: Harry’s best chance yet ofdiscovering what Malfoy was up to. The silent secondstrickled past, and Harry remained where he was,frozen, gazing at the place where Malfoy hadvanished. ...

“Where have you been?” demanded Ginny, as Harrysprinted into the changing rooms. The whole teamwas changed and ready; Coote and Peakes, theBeaters, were both hitting their clubs nervouslyagainst their legs.

“I met Malfoy,” Harry told her quietly, as he pulled hisscarlet robes over his head.

“So?”

“So I wanted to know how come he’s up at the castlewith a couple of girlfriends while everyone else isdown here. ...”

“Does it matter right now?”

“Well, I’m not likely to find out, am I?” said Harry,seizing his Firebolt and pushing his glasses straight.“Come on then!”

And without another word, he marched out onto thepitch to deafening cheers and boos.

Page | 464 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There was little wind; the clouds were patchy; everynow and then there were dazzling flashes of brightsunlight.

“Tricky conditions!” McLaggen said bracingly to theteam. “Coote, Peakes, you’ll want to fly out of the sun,so they don’t see you coming —”

“I’m the Captain, McLaggen, shut up giving theminstructions,” said Harry angrily. “Just get up by thegoal posts!”

Once McLaggen had marched off, Harry turned toCoote and Peakes.

“Make sure you do fly out of the sun,” he told themgrudgingly.

He shook hands with the Hufflepuff Captain, andthen, on Madam Hooch’s whistle, kicked off and roseinto the air, higher than the rest of his team,streaking around the pitch in search of the Snitch. Ifhe could catch it good and early, there might be achance he could get back up to the castle, seize theMarauder’s Map, and find out what Malfoy was doing.

“And that’s Smith of Hufflepuff with the Quaffle,” saida dreamy voice, echoing over the grounds. “He did thecommentary last time, of course, and Ginny Weasleyflew into him, I think probably on purpose, it lookedlike it. Smith was being quite rude about Gryffindor, Iexpect he regrets that now he’s playing them — oh,look, he’s lost the Quaffle, Ginny took it from him, Ido like her, she’s very nice. ...”

Harry stared down at the commentator’s podium.Surely nobody in their right mind would have letLuna Lovegood commentate? But even from above

Page | 465 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

there was no mistaking that long, dirty-blonde hair,nor the necklace of butterbeer corks. ... Beside Luna,Professor McGonagall was looking slightlyuncomfortable, as though she was indeed havingsecond thoughts about this appointment.

"... but now that big Hufflepuff player’s got theQuaffle from her, I can’t remember his name, it’ssomething like Bibble — no, Buggins —”

“It’s Cadwallader!” said Professor McGonagall loudlyfrom beside Luna. The crowd laughed.

Harry stared around for the Snitch; there was no signof it. Moments later, Cadwallader scored. McLaggenhad been shouting criticism at Ginny for allowing theQuaffle out of her possession, with the result that hehad not noticed the large red ball soaring past hisright ear.

“McLaggen, will you pay attention to what you’resupposed to be doing and leave everyone else alone!”bellowed Harry, wheeling around to face his Keeper.

“You’re not setting a great example!” McLaggenshouted back, red-faced and furious.

“And Harry Potter’s now having an argument with hisKeeper,” said Luna serenely, while both Hufflepuffsand Slytherins below in the crowd cheered and jeered.“I don’t think that’ll help him find the Snitch, butmaybe it’s a clever ruse. ...”

Swearing angrily, Harry spun round and set offaround the pitch again, scanning the skies for somesign of the tiny, winged golden ball.

Ginny and Demelza scored a goal apiece, giving thered-and-gold-clad supporters below something to

Page | 466 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

cheer about. Then Cadwallader scored again, makingthings level, but Luna did not seem to have noticed;she appeared singularly uninterested in suchmundane things as the score, and kept attempting todraw the crowd’s attention to such things asinterestingly shaped clouds and the possibility thatZacharias Smith, who had so far failed to maintainpossession of the Quaffle for longer than a minute,was suffering from something called “Loser’s Lurgy.”

“Seventy-forty to Hufflepuff!” barked ProfessorMcGonagall into Luna’s megaphone.

“Is it, already?” said Luna vaguely. “Oh, look! TheGryffindor Keeper’s got hold of one of the Beater’sbats.”

Harry spun around in midair. Sure enough,

McLaggen, for reasons best known to himself, hadpulled Peakes’s bat from him and appeared to bedemonstrating how to hit a Bludger toward anoncoming Cadwallader.

“ Will you give him back his bat and get back to the goalposts!” roared Harry, pelting toward McLaggen just asMcLaggen took a ferocious swipe at the Bludger andmishit it.

A blinding, sickening pain ... a flash of light ... distantscreams ... and the sensation of falling down a longtunnel ...

And the next thing Harry knew, he was lying in aremarkably warm and comfortable bed and lookingup at a lamp that was throwing a circle of golden lightonto a shadowy ceiling. He raised his headawkwardly. There on his left was a familiar-looking,freckly, red-haired person.

Page | 467 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Nice of you to drop in,” said Ron, grinning.

Harry blinked and looked around. Of course: He wasin the hospital wing. The sky outside was indigostreaked with crimson. The match must have finishedhours ago ... as had any hope of cornering Malfoy.Harry’s head felt strangely heavy; he raised a handand felt a stiff turban of bandages.

“What happened?”

“Cracked skull,” said Madam Pomfrey, bustling upand pushing him back against his pillows. “Nothing toworry about, I mended it at once, but I’m keeping youin overnight. You shouldn’t overexert yourself for afew hours.”

“I don’t want to stay here overnight,” said Harryangrily, sitting up and throwing back his covers. “Iwant to find McLaggen and kill him.”

“I’m afraid that would come under the heading of‘overexertion,’ ” said Madam Pomfrey, pushing himfirmly back onto the bed and raising her wand in athreatening manner. “You will stay here until Idischarge you, Potter, or I shall call the headmaster.”

She bustled back into her office, and Harry sank backinto his pillows, fuming.

“D’you know how much we lost by?” he asked Ronthrough clenched teeth.

“Well, yeah I do,” said Ron apologetically. “Final scorewas three hundred and twenty to sixty.”

“Brilliant,” said Harry savagely. “Really brilliant!

When I get hold of McLaggen —”

Page | 468 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You don’t want to get hold of him, he’s the size of atroll,” said Ron reasonably. “Personally, I think there’sa lot to be said for hexing him with that toenail thingof the Prince’s. Anyway, the rest of the team might’vedealt with him before you get out of here, they’re nothappy. ...”

There was a note of badly suppressed glee in Ron’svoice; Harry could tell he was nothing short of thrilledthat McLaggen had messed up so badly. Harry laythere, staring up at the patch of light on the ceiling,his recently mended skull not hurting, precisely, butfeeling slightly tender underneath all the bandaging.

“I could hear the match commentary from here,” saidRon, his voice now shaking with laughter. “I hopeLuna always commentates from now on. ... Loser’sLurgy ...”

But Harry was still too angry to see much humor inthe situation, and after a while Ron’s snorts subsided.

“Ginny came in to visit while you were unconscious,”he said, after a long pause, and Harry’s imaginationzoomed into overdrive, rapidly constructing a scene inwhich Ginny, weeping over his lifeless form, confessedher feelings of deep attraction to him while Ron gavethem his blessing. ... “She reckons you only justarrived on time for the match. How come? You lefthere early enough.”

“Oh ...” said Harry, as the scene in his mind’s eyeimploded. “Yeah ... well, I saw Malfoy sneaking offwith a couple of girls who didn’t look like they wantedto be with him, and that’s the second time he’s madesure he isn’t down on the Quidditch pitch with therest of the school; he skipped the last match too,remember?” Harry sighed. “Wish I’d followed himnow, the match was such a fiasco. ...”

Page | 469 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t be stupid,” said Ron sharply. “You couldn’thave missed a Quidditch match just to follow Malfoy,you’re the Captain!”

“I want to know what he’s up to,” said Harry. “Anddon’t tell me it’s all in my head, not after what Ioverheard between him and Snape —”

“I never said it was all in your head,” said Ron,hoisting himself up on an elbow in turn and frowningat Harry, “but there’s no rule saying only one personat a time can be plotting anything in this place! You’regetting a bit obsessed with Malfoy, Harry. I mean,thinking about missing a match just to follow him ...”

“I want to catch him at it!” said Harry in frustration.

“I mean, where’s he going when he disappears off themap?”

“I dunno ... Hogsmeade?” suggested Ron, yawning.

“I’ve never seen him going along any of the secretpassageways on the map. I thought they were beingwatched now anyway?”

“Well then, I dunno,” said Ron.

Silence fell between them. Harry stared up at thecircle of lamplight above him, thinking. ...

If only he had Rufus Scrimgeour’s power, he wouldhave been able to set a tail upon Malfoy, butunfortunately Harry did not have an office full ofAurors at his command. ... He thought fleetingly oftrying to set something up with the D.A., but thereagain was the problem that people would be missedfrom lessons; most of them, after all, still had fullschedules. ...

Page | 470 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There was a low, rumbling snore from Ron’s bed.

After a while Madam Pomfrey came out of her office,this time wearing a thick dressing gown. It waseasiest to feign sleep; Harry rolled over onto his sideand listened to all the curtains closing themselves asshe waved her wand. The lamps dimmed, and shereturned to her office; he heard the door click behindher and knew that she was off to bed.

This was, Harry reflected in the darkness, the thirdtime that he had been brought to the hospital wingbecause of a Quidditch injury. Last time he had fallenoff his broom due to the presence of dementorsaround the pitch, and the time before that, all thebones had been removed from his arm by theincurably inept Professor Lockhart. ... That had beenhis most painful injury by far ... he remembered theagony of regrowing an armful of bones in one night, adiscomfort not eased by the arrival of an unexpectedvisitor in the middle of the —

Harry sat bolt upright, his heart pounding, hisbandage turban askew. He had the solution at last:There was a way to have Malfoy followed — how couldhe have forgotten, why hadn’t he thought of it before?

But the question was, how to call him? What did youdo?

Quietly, tentatively, Harry spoke into the darkness.“Kreacher?”

There was a very loud crack, and the sounds ofscuffling and squeaks filled the silent room. Ronawoke with a yelp.

“What’s going — ?”

Page | 471 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry pointed his wand hastily at the door of MadamPomfrey’s office and muttered, “MuffliatoV’ so that shewould not come running. Then he scrambled to theend of his bed for a better look at what was going on.

Two house-elves were rolling around on the floor inthe middle of the dormitory, one wearing a shrunkenmaroon jumper and several woolly hats, the other, afilthy old rag strung over his hips like a loincloth.Then there was another loud bang, and Peeves thePoltergeist appeared in midair above the wrestlingelves.

“I was watching that, Potty!” he told Harryindignantly, pointing at the fight below, before lettingout a loud cackle. “Look at the ickle creaturessquabbling, bitey bitey, punchy punchy —”

“Kreacher will not insult Harry Potter in front ofDobby, no he won’t, or Dobby will shut Kreacher’smouth for him!” cried Dobby in a high-pitched voice.

“— kicky, scratchy!” cried Peeves happily, now peltingbits of chalk at the elves to enrage them further.“Tweaky, pokey!”

“Kreacher will say what he likes about his master, ohyes, and what a master he is, filthy friend ofMudbloods, oh, what would poor Kreacher’s mistresssay — ?”

Exactly what Kreacher’s mistress would have saidthey did not find out, for at that moment Dobby sankhis knobbly little fist into Kreacher’s mouth andknocked out half of his teeth. Harry and Ron bothleapt out of their beds and wrenched the two elvesapart, though they continued to try and kick andpunch each other, egged on by Peeves, who swooped

Page | 472 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

around the lamp squealing, “Stick your fingers up hisnosey, draw his cork and pull his earsies —”

Harry aimed his wand at Peeves and said, “Langlockl”Peeves clutched at his throat, gulped, then swoopedfrom the room making obscene gestures but unable tospeak, owing to the fact that his tongue had justglued itself to the roof of his mouth.

“Nice one,” said Ron appreciatively, lifting Dobby intothe air so that his flailing limbs no longer madecontact with Kreacher. “That was another Prince hex,wasn’t it?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, twisting Kreacher’s wizened arminto a half nelson. “Right — I’m forbidding you to fighteach other! Well, Kreacher, you’re forbidden to fightDobby. Dobby, I know I’m not allowed to give youorders —”

“Dobby is a free house-elf and he can obey anyone helikes and Dobby will do whatever Harry Potter wantshim to do!” said Dobby, tears now streaming down hisshriveled little face onto his jumper.

“Okay then,” said Harry, and he and Ron bothreleased the elves, who fell to the floor but did notcontinue fighting.

“Master called me?” croaked Kreacher, sinking into abow even as he gave Harry a look that plainly wishedhim a painful death.

“Yeah, I did,” said Harry, glancing toward MadamPomfrey’s office door to check that the Muffliato spellwas still working; there was no sign that she hadheard any of the commotion. “I’ve got a job for you.”

Page | 473 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Kreacher will do whatever Master wants,” saidKreacher, sinking so low that his lips almost touchedhis gnarled toes, “because Kreacher has no choice,but Kreacher is ashamed to have such a master, yes

“Dobby will do it, Harry Potter!” squeaked Dobby, histennis-ball-sized eyes still swimming in tears. “Dobbywould be honored to help Harry Potter!”

“Come to think of it, it would be good to have both ofyou,” said Harry. “Okay then ... I want you to tailDraco Malfoy.”

Ignoring the look of mingled surprise andexasperation on Ron’s face, Harry went on, “I want toknow where he’s going, who he’s meeting, and whathe’s doing. I want you to follow him around theclock.”

“Yes, Harry Potter!” said Dobby at once, his great eyesshining with excitement. “And if Dobby does it wrong,Dobby will throw himself off the topmost tower, HarryPotter!”

“There won’t be any need for that,” said Harry hastily.

“Master wants me to follow the youngest of theMalfoys?” croaked Kreacher. “Master wants me to spyupon the pure-blood great-nephew of my oldmistress?”

“That’s the one,” said Harry, foreseeing a great dangerand determining to prevent it immediately. “Andyou’re forbidden to tip him off, Kreacher, or to showhim what you’re up to, or to talk to him at all, or towrite him messages or ... or to contact him in anyway. Got it?”

Page | 474 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He thought he could see Kreacher struggling to see aloophole in the instructions he had just been givenand waited. After a moment or two, and to Harry’sgreat satisfaction, Kreacher bowed deeply again andsaid, with bitter resentment, “Master thinks ofeverything, and Kreacher must obey him even thoughKreacher would much rather be the servant of theMalfoy boy, oh yes. ...”

“That’s settled, then,” said Harry. “I’ll want regularreports, but make sure I’m not surrounded by peoplewhen you turn up. Ron and Hermione are okay. Anddon’t tell anyone what you’re doing. Just stick toMalfoy like a couple of wart plasters.”

Page | 475 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





LORD VOLDEMORT’S REQUEST

Harry and Ron left the hospital wing first thing onMonday morning, restored to full health by theministrations of Madam Pomfrey and now able toenjoy the benefits of having been knocked out andpoisoned, the best of which was that Hermione wasfriends with Ron again. Hermione even escorted themdown to breakfast, bringing with her the news thatGinny had argued with Dean. The drowsing creaturein Harry’s chest suddenly raised its head, sniffing theair hopefully.

“What did they row about?” he asked, trying to soundcasual as they turned onto a seventh-floor corridorthat was deserted but for a very small girl who hadbeen examining a tapestry of trolls in tutus. Shelooked terrified at the sight of the approaching sixthyears and dropped the heavy brass scales she wascarrying.

“It’s all right!” said Hermione kindly, hurrying forwardto help her. “Here ...”

Page | 476 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She tapped the broken scales with her wand andsaid, “Reparo.” The girl did not say thank you, butremained rooted to the spot as they passed andwatched them out of sight; Ron glanced back at her.

“I swear they’re getting smaller,” he said.

“Never mind her,” said Harry, a little impatiently.“What did Ginny and Dean row about, Hermione?”

“Oh, Dean was laughing about McLaggen hitting thatBludger at you,” said Hermione.

“It must’ve looked funny,” said Ron reasonably.

“It didn’t look funny at all!” said Hermione hotly. “Itlooked terrible and if Coote and Peakes hadn’t caughtHarry he could have been very badly hurt!”

“Yeah, well, there was no need for Ginny and Dean tosplit up over it,” said Harry, still trying to soundcasual. “Or are they still together?”

“Yes, they are — but why are you so interested?”asked Hermione, giving Harry a sharp look.

“I just don’t want my Quidditch team messed upagain!” he said hastily, but Hermione continued tolook suspicious, and he was most relieved when avoice behind them called, “Harry!” giving him anexcuse to turn his back on her.

“Oh, hi, Luna.”

“I went to the hospital wing to find you,” said Luna,rummaging in her bag. “But they said you’d left. ...”

She thrust what appeared to be a green onion, a largespotted toadstool, and a considerable amount of what

Page | 477 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

looked like cat litter into Ron’s hands, finally pullingout a rather grubby scroll of parchment that shehanded to Harry.

"... I’ve been told to give you this.”

It was a small roll of parchment, which Harryrecognized at once as another invitation to a lessonwith Dumbledore.

“Tonight,” he told Ron and Hermione, once he hadunrolled it.

“Nice commentary last match!” said Ron to Luna asshe took back the green onion, the toadstool, and thecat litter. Luna smiled vaguely.

“You’re making fun of me, aren’t you?” she said.“Everyone says I was dreadful.”

“No, I’m serious!” said Ron earnestly. “I can’tremember enjoying commentary more! What is this,by the way?” he added, holding the onionlike objectup to eye level.

“Oh, it’s a Gurdyroot,” she said, stuffing the cat litterand the toadstool back into her bag. “You can keep itif you like, I’ve got a few of them. They’re reallyexcellent for warding off Gulping Plimpies.”

And she walked away, leaving Ron chortling, stillclutching the Gurdyroot.

“You know, she’s grown on me, Luna,” he said, asthey set off again for the Great Hall. “I know she’sinsane, but it’s in a good —”

Page | 478 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He stopped talking very suddenly. Lavender Brownwas standing at the foot of the marble staircaselooking thunderous.

“Hi,” said Ron nervously.

“C’mon,” Harry muttered to Hermione, and they spedpast, though not before they had heard Lavender say,“Why didn’t you tell me you were getting out today?And why was she with you?”

Ron looked both sulky and annoyed when heappeared at breakfast half an hour later, and thoughhe sat with Lavender, Harry did not see themexchange a word all the time they were together.Hermione was acting as though she was quiteoblivious to all of this, but once or twice Harry saw aninexplicable smirk cross her face. All that day sheseemed to be in a particularly good mood, and thatevening in the common room she even consented tolook over (in other words, finish writing) Harry’sHerbology essay, something she had been resolutelyrefusing to do up to this point, because she hadknown that Harry would then let Ron copy his work.

“Thanks a lot, Hermione,” said Harry, giving her ahasty pat on the back as he checked his watch andsaw that it was nearly eight o’clock. “Listen, I’ve got tohurry or I’ll be late for Dumbledore. ...”

She did not answer, but merely crossed out a few ofhis feebler sentences in a weary sort of way. Grinning,Harry hurried out through the portrait hole and off tothe headmaster’s office. The gargoyle leapt aside atthe mention of toffee eclairs, and Harry took the spiralstaircase two steps at a time, knocking on the doorjust as a clock within chimed eight.

Page | 479 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Enter,” called Dumbledore, but as Harry put out ahand to push the door, it was wrenched open frominside. There stood Professor Trelawney.

“Aha!” she cried, pointing dramatically at Harry asshe blinked at him through her magnifyingspectacles. “So this is the reason I am to be thrownunceremoniously from your office, Dumbledore!”

“My dear Sybill,” said Dumbledore in a slightlyexasperated voice, “there is no question of throwingyou unceremoniously from anywhere, but Harry doeshave an appointment, and I really don’t think there isany more to be said —”

“Very well,” said Professor Trelawney, in a deeplywounded voice. “If you will not banish the usurpingnag, so be it. ... Perhaps I shall find a school wheremy talents are better appreciated. ...”

She pushed past Harry and disappeared down thespiral staircase; they heard her stumble halfwaydown, and Harry guessed that she had tripped overone of her trailing shawls.

“Please close the door and sit down, Harry,” saidDumbledore, sounding rather tired.

Harry obeyed, noticing as he took his usual seat infront of Dumbledore’s desk that the Pensieve laybetween them once more, as did two more tiny crystalbottles full of swirling memory.

“Professor Trelawney still isn’t happy Firenze isteaching, then?” Harry asked.

“No,” said Dumbledore, “Divination is turning out tobe much more trouble than I could have foreseen,never having studied the subject myself. I cannot ask

Page | 480 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Firenze to return to the forest, where he is now anoutcast, nor can I ask Sybill Trelawney to leave.Between ourselves, she has no idea of the danger shewould be in outside the castle. She does not know —and I think it would be unwise to enlighten her —that she made the prophecy about you andVoldemort, you see.”

Dumbledore heaved a deep sigh, then said, “Butnever mind my staffing problems. We have muchmore important matters to discuss. Firstly — haveyou managed the task I set you at the end of ourprevious lesson?”

“Ah,” said Harry, brought up short. What withApparition lessons and Quidditch and Ron beingpoisoned and getting his skull cracked and hisdetermination to find out what Draco Malfoy was upto, Harry had almost forgotten about the memoryDumbledore had asked him to extract from ProfessorSlughorn. “Well, I asked Professor Slughorn about itat the end of Potions, sir, but, er, he wouldn’t give itto me.”

There was a little silence.

“I see,” said Dumbledore eventually, peering at Harryover the top of his half-moon spectacles and givingHarry the usual sensation that he was being X-rayed.“And you feel that you have exerted your very bestefforts in this matter, do you? That you haveexercised all of your considerable ingenuity? That youhave left no depth of cunning unplumbed in yourquest to retrieve the memory?”

“Well,” Harry stalled, at a loss for what to say next.

His single attempt to get hold of the memory suddenlyseemed embarrassingly feeble. “Well ... the day Ronswallowed love potion by mistake I took him to

Page | 481 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Professor Slughorn. I thought maybe if I got ProfessorSlughorn in a good enough mood —”

“And did that work?” asked Dumbledore.

“Well, no, sir, because Ron got poisoned —”

“— which, naturally, made you forget all about tryingto retrieve the memory; I would have expected nothingelse, while your best friend was in danger. Once itbecame clear that Mr. Weasley was going to make afull recovery, however, I would have hoped that youreturned to the task I set you. I thought I made itclear to you how very important that memory is.Indeed, I did my best to impress upon you that it isthe most crucial memory of all and that we will bewasting our time without it.”

A hot, prickly feeling of shame spread from the top ofHarry’s head all the way down his body. Dumbledorehad not raised his voice, he did not even sound angry,but Harry would have preferred him to yell; this colddisappointment was worse than anything.

“Sir,” he said, a little desperately, “it isn’t that I wasn’tbothered or anything, I’ve just had other — otherthings ...”

“Other things on your mind,” Dumbledore finishedthe sentence for him. “I see.”

Silence fell between them again, the mostuncomfortable silence Harry had ever experiencedwith Dumbledore; it seemed to go on and on,punctuated only by the little grunting snores of theportrait of Armando Dippet over Dumbledore’s head.Harry felt strangely diminished, as though he hadshrunk a little since he had entered the room. Whenhe could stand it no longer he said, “ProfessorPage | 482 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore, I’m really sorry. I should have donemore. ... I should have realized you wouldn’t haveasked me to do it if it wasn’t really important.”

“Thank you for saying that, Harry,” said Dumbledorequietly. “May I hope, then, that you will give thismatter higher priority from now on? There will belittle point in our meeting after tonight unless wehave that memory.”

“I’ll do it, sir, I’ll get it from him,” he said earnestly.

“Then we shall say no more about it just now,” saidDumbledore more kindly, “but continue with ourstory where we left off. You remember where thatwas?”

“Yes, sir,” said Harry quickly. “Voldemort killed hisfather and his grandparents and made it look asthough his Uncle Morfin did it. Then he went back toHogwarts and he asked ... he asked ProfessorSlughorn about Horcruxes,” he mumbledshamefacedly.

“Very good,” said Dumbledore. “Now, you willremember, I hope, that I told you at the very outset ofthese meetings of ours that we would be entering therealms of guesswork and speculation?”

“Yes, sir.”

“Thus far, as I hope you agree, I have shown youreasonably firm sources of fact for my deductions asto what Voldemort did until the age of seventeen?”

Harry nodded.

“But now, Harry,” said Dumbledore, “now thingsbecome murkier and stranger. If it was difficult to find

Page | 483 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

evidence about the boy Riddle, it has been almostimpossible to find anyone prepared to reminisceabout the man Voldemort. In fact, I doubt whetherthere is a soul alive, apart from himself, who couldgive us a full account of his life since he leftHogwarts. However, I have two last memories that Iwould like to share with you.” Dumbledore indicatedthe two little crystal bottles gleaming beside thePensieve. “I shall then be glad of your opinion as towhether the conclusions I have drawn from themseem likely.”

The idea that Dumbledore valued his opinion thishighly made Harry feel even more deeply ashamedthat he had failed in the task of retrieving the Horcruxmemory, and he shifted guiltily in his seat asDumbledore raised the first of the two bottles to thelight and examined it.

“I hope you are not tired of diving into other people’smemories, for they are curious recollections, thesetwo,” he said. “This first one came from a very oldhouse-elf by the name of Hokey. Before we see whatHokey witnessed, I must quickly recount how LordVoldemort left Hogwarts.

“He reached the seventh year of his schooling with, asyou might have expected, top grades in everyexamination he had taken. All around him, hisclassmates were deciding which jobs they were topursue once they had left Hogwarts. Nearly everybodyexpected spectacular things from Tom Riddle, prefect,Head Boy, winner of the Award for Special Services tothe School. I know that several teachers, ProfessorSlughorn amongst them, suggested that he join theMinistry of Magic, offered to set up appointments, puthim in touch with useful contacts. He refused alloffers. The next thing the staff knew, Voldemort wasworking at Borgin and Burkes.”

Page | 484 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“At Borgin and Burkes?” Harry repeated, stunned.

“At Borgin and Burkes,” repeated Dumbledore calmly.“I think you will see what attractions the place heldfor him when we have entered Hokey’s memory. Butthis was not Voldemort’s first choice of job. Hardlyanyone knew of it at the time — I was one of the fewin whom the then headmaster confided — butVoldemort first approached Professor Dippet andasked whether he could remain at Hogwarts as ateacher.”

“He wanted to stay here? Why?” asked Harry, moreamazed still.

“I believe he had several reasons, though he confidednone of them to Professor Dippet,” said Dumbledore.“Firstly, and very importantly, Voldemort was, Ibelieve, more attached to this school than he has everbeen to a person. Hogwarts was where he had beenhappiest; the first and only place he had felt athome.”

Harry felt slightly uncomfortable at these words, forthis was exactly how he felt about Hogwarts too.

“Secondly, the castle is a stronghold of ancient magic.Undoubtedly Voldemort had penetrated many more ofits secrets than most of the students who passthrough the place, but he may have felt that therewere still mysteries to unravel, stores of magic to tap.

“And thirdly, as a teacher, he would have had greatpower and influence over young witches and wizards.Perhaps he had gained the idea from ProfessorSlughorn, the teacher with whom he was on bestterms, who had demonstrated how influential a role ateacher can play. I do not imagine for an instant thatVoldemort envisaged spending the rest of his life atPage | 485 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hogwarts, but I do think that he saw it as a usefulrecruiting ground, and a place where he might beginto build himself an army.”

“But he didn’t get the job, sir?”

“No, he did not. Professor Dippet told him that he wastoo young at eighteen, but invited him to reapply in afew years, if he still wished to teach.”

“How did you feel about that, sir?” asked Harryhesitantly.

“Deeply uneasy,” said Dumbledore. “I had advisedArmando against the appointment — I did not givethe reasons I have given you, for Professor Dippet wasvery fond of Voldemort and convinced of his honesty.But I did not want Lord Voldemort back at thisschool, and especially not in a position of power.”

“Which job did he want, sir? What subject did hewant to teach?”

Somehow, Harry knew the answer even beforeDumbledore gave it.

“Defense Against the Dark Arts. It was being taught atthe time by an old Professor by the name of GalateaMerrythought, who had been at Hogwarts for nearlyfifty years.

“So Voldemort went off to Borgin and Burkes, and allthe staff who had admired him said what a waste itwas, a brilliant young wizard like that, working in ashop. However, Voldemort was no mere assistant.Polite and handsome and clever, he was soon givenparticular jobs of the type that only exist in a placelike Borgin and Burkes, which specializes, as youknow, Harry, in objects with unusual and powerfulPage |486 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

properties. Voldemort was sent to persuade people topart with their treasures for sale by the partners, andhe was, by all accounts, unusually gifted at doingthis.”

“I’ll bet he was,” said Harry, unable to containhimself.

“Well, quite,” said Dumbledore, with a faint smile.“And now it is time to hear from Hokey the house-elf,who worked for a very old, very rich witch by thename of Hepzibah Smith.”

Dumbledore tapped a bottle with his wand, the corkflew out, and he tipped the swirling memory into thePensieve, saying as he did so, “After you, Harry.”

Harry got to his feet and bent once more over therippling silver contents of the stone basin until hisface touched them. He tumbled through darknothingness and landed in a sitting room in front ofan immensely fat old lady wearing an elaborate gingerwig and a brilliant pink set of robes that flowed allaround her, giving her the look of a melting iced cake.She was looking into a small jeweled mirror anddabbing rouge onto her already scarlet cheeks with alarge powder puff, while the tiniest and oldest house-elf Harry had ever seen laced her fleshy feet into tightsatin slippers.

“Hurry up, Hokey!” said Hepzibah imperiously. “Hesaid he’d come at four, it’s only a couple of minutes toand he’s never been late yet!”

She tucked away her powder puff as the house-elfstraightened up. The top of the elf’s head barelyreached the seat of Hepzibah’s chair, and her paperyskin hung off her frame just like the crisp linen sheetshe wore draped like a toga.

Page | 487 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“How do I look?” said Hepzibah, turning her head toadmire the various angles of her face in the mirror.

“Lovely, madam,” squeaked Hokey.

Harry could only assume that it was down in Hokey’scontract that she must lie through her teeth whenasked this question, because Hepzibah Smith lookeda long way from lovely in his opinion.

A tinkling doorbell rang and both mistress and elfjumped.

“Quick, quick, he’s here, Hokey!” cried Hepzibah andthe elf scurried out of the room, which was socrammed with objects that it was difficult to see howanybody could navigate their way across it withoutknocking over at least a dozen things: There werecabinets full of little lacquered boxes, cases full ofgold-embossed books, shelves of orbs and celestialglobes, and many flourishing potted plants in brasscontainers. In fact, the room looked like a crossbetween a magical antique shop and a conservatory.

The house-elf returned within minutes, followed by atall young man Harry had no difficulty whatsoever inrecognizing as Voldemort. He was plainly dressed in ablack suit; his hair was a little longer than it hadbeen at school and his cheeks were hollowed, but allof this suited him; he looked more handsome thanever. He picked his way through the cramped roomwith an air that showed he had visited many timesbefore and bowed low over Hepzibah’s fat little hand,brushing it with his lips.

“I brought you flowers,” he said quietly, producing abunch of roses from nowhere.

Page | 488 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You naughty boy, you shouldn’t have!” squealed oldHepzibah, though Harry noticed that she had anempty vase standing ready on the nearest little table.“You do spoil this old lady, Tom. ... Sit down, sitdown. ... Where’s Hokey? Ah ...”

The house-elf had come dashing back into the roomcarrying a tray of little cakes, which she set at hermistress’s elbow.

“Help yourself, Tom,” said Hepzibah, “I know how youlove my cakes. Now, how are you? You look pale. Theyoverwork you at that shop, I’ve said it a hundredtimes. ...”

Voldemort smiled mechanically and Hepzibahsimpered.

“Well, what’s your excuse for visiting this time?” sheasked, batting her lashes.

“Mr. Burke would like to make an improved offer forthe goblin-made armor,” said Voldemort. “Fivehundred Galleons, he feels it is a more than fair —”

“Now, now, not so fast, or I’ll think you’re only herefor my trinkets!” pouted Hepzibah.

“I am ordered here because of them,” said Voldemortquietly. “I am only a poor assistant, madam, whomust do as he is told. Mr. Burke wishes me to inquire

“Oh, Mr. Burke, phooey!” said Hepzibah, waving alittle hand. “I’ve something to show you that I’ve nevershown Mr. Burke! Can you keep a secret, Tom? Willyou promise you won’t tell Mr. Burke I’ve got it? He’dnever let me rest if he knew I’d shown it to you, andI’m not selling, not to Burke, not to anyone! But you,Page | 489 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Tom, you’ll appreciate it for its history, not how manyGalleons you can get for it.”

“I’d be glad to see anything Miss Hepzibah shows me,”said Voldemort quietly, and Hepzibah gave anothergirlish giggle.

“I had Hokey bring it out for me. ... Hokey, where areyou? I want to show Mr. Riddle our finest treasure. ...In fact, bring both, while you’re at it. ...”

“Here, madam,” squeaked the house-elf, and Harrysaw two leather boxes, one on top of the other,moving across the room as if of their own volition,though he knew the tiny elf was holding them overher head as she wended her way between tables,pouffes, and footstools.

“Now,” said Hepzibah happily, taking the boxes fromthe elf, laying them in her lap, and preparing to openthe topmost one, “I think you’ll like this, Tom. ... Oh,if my family knew I was showing you. ... They can’twait to get their hands on this!”

She opened the lid. Harry edged forward a little to geta better view and saw what looked like a small goldencup with two finely wrought handles.

“I wonder whether you know what it is, Tom? Pick itup, have a good look!” whispered Hepzibah, andVoldemort stretched out a long-fingered hand andlifted the cup by one handle out of its snug silkenwrappings. Harry thought he saw a red gleam in hisdark eyes. His greedy expression was curiouslymirrored on Hepzibah’s face, except that her tiny eyeswere fixed upon Voldemort’s handsome features.

“A badger,” murmured Voldemort, examining theengraving upon the cup. “Then this was ... ?”

Page | 490 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Helga Hufflepuff’s, as you very well know, you cleverboy!” said Hepzibah, leaning forward with a loudcreaking of corsets and actually pinching his hollowcheek. “Didn’t I tell you I was distantly descended?This has been handed down in the family for yearsand years. Lovely, isn’t it? And all sorts of powers it’ssupposed to possess too, but I haven’t tested themthoroughly, I just keep it nice and safe in here. ...”

She hooked the cup back off Voldemort’s longforefinger and restored it gently to its box, too intentupon settling it carefully back into position to noticethe shadow that crossed Voldemort’s face as the cupwas taken away.

“Now then,” said Hepzibah happily, “where’s Hokey?Oh yes, there you are — take that away now, Hokey.”

The elf obediently took the boxed cup, and Hepzibahturned her attention to the much flatter box in herlap.

“I think you’ll like this even more, Tom,” shewhispered. “Lean in a little, dear boy, so you can see....Of course, Burke knows I’ve got this one, I boughtit from him, and I daresay he’d love to get it backwhen I’m gone. ...”

She slid back the fine filigree clasp and flipped openthe box. There upon the smooth crimson velvet lay aheavy golden locket.

Voldemort reached out his hand, without invitationthis time, and held it up to the light, staring at it.

“Slytherin’s mark,” he said quietly, as the light playedupon an ornate, serpentine S.

Page | 491 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“That’s right!” said Hepzibah, delighted, apparently, atthe sight of Voldemort gazing at her locket, transfixed.“I had to pay an arm and a leg for it, but I couldn’t letit pass, not a real treasure like that, had to have it formy collection. Burke bought it, apparently, from aragged-looking woman who seemed to have stolen it,but had no idea of its true value —”

There was no mistaking it this time: Voldemort’s eyesflashed scarlet at the words, and Harry saw hisknuckles whiten on the locket’s chain.

“— I daresay Burke paid her a pittance but there youare. ... Pretty, isn’t it? And again, all kinds of powersattributed to it, though I just keep it nice and safe. ...”

She reached out to take the locket back. For amoment, Harry thought Voldemort was not going tolet go of it, but then it had slid through his fingersand was back in its red velvet cushion.

“So there you are, Tom, dear, and I hope you enjoyedthat!”

She looked him full in the face and for the first time,Harry saw her foolish smile falter.

“Are you all right, dear?”

“Oh yes,” said Voldemort quietly. “Yes, I’m very well.

“I thought — but a trick of the light, I suppose —”said Hepzibah, looking unnerved, and Harry guessedthat she too had seen the momentary red gleam inVoldemort’s eyes. “Here, Hokey, take these away andlock them up again. ... The usual enchantments ...”

Page | 492 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Time to leave, Harry,” said Dumbledore quietly, andas the little elf bobbed away bearing the boxes,Dumbledore grasped Harry once again above theelbow and together they rose up through oblivion andback to Dumbledore’s office.

“Hepzibah Smith died two days after that little scene,”said Dumbledore, resuming his seat and indicatingthat Harry should do the same. “Hokey the house-elfwas convicted by the Ministry of poisoning hermistress’s evening cocoa by accident.”

“No way!” said Harry angrily.

“I see we are of one mind,” said Dumbledore.“Certainly, there are many similarities between thisdeath and that of the Riddles. In both cases,somebody else took the blame, someone who had aclear memory of having caused the death —”

“Hokey confessed?”

“She remembered putting something in her mistress’scocoa that turned out not to be sugar, but a lethaland little-known poison,” said Dumbledore. “It wasconcluded that she had not meant to do it, but beingold and confused —”

“Voldemort modified her memory, just like he did withMorfin!”

“Yes, that is my conclusion too,” said Dumbledore.“And, just as with Morfin, the Ministry waspredisposed to suspect Hokey —”

“— because she was a house-elf,” said Harry. He hadrarely felt more in sympathy with the societyHermione had set up, S.P.E.W.

Page | 493 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Precisely,” said Dumbledore. “She was old, sheadmitted to having tampered with the drink, andnobody at the Ministry bothered to inquire further. Asin the case of Morfin, by the time I traced her andmanaged to extract this memory, her life was almostover — but her memory, of course, proves nothingexcept that Voldemort knew of the existence of thecup and the locket.

“By the time Hokey was convicted, Hepzibah’s familyhad realized that two of her greatest treasures weremissing. It took them a while to be sure of this, forshe had many hiding places, having always guardedher collection most jealously. But before they weresure beyond doubt that the cup and the locket wereboth gone, the assistant who had worked at Borginand Burkes, the young man who had visitedHepzibah so regularly and charmed her so well, hadresigned his post and vanished. His superiors had noidea where he had gone; they were as surprised asanyone at his disappearance. And that was the lastthat was seen or heard of Tom Riddle for a very longtime.

“Now,” said Dumbledore, “if you don’t mind, Harry, Iwant to pause once more to draw your attention tocertain points of our story. Voldemort had committedanother murder; whether it was his first since hekilled the Riddles, I do not know, but I think it was.This time, as you will have seen, he killed not forrevenge, but for gain. He wanted the two fabuloustrophies that poor, besotted, old woman showed him.Just as he had once robbed the other children at hisorphanage, just as he had stolen his Uncle Morfin’sring, so he ran off now with Hepzibah’s cup andlocket.”

“But,” said Harry, frowning, “it seems mad. ... Riskingeverything, throwing away his job, just for those ...”

Page | 494 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Mad to you, perhaps, but not to Voldemort,” saidDumbledore. “I hope you will understand in duecourse exactly what those objects meant to him,Harry, but you must admit that it is not difficult toimagine that he saw the locket, at least, as rightfullyhis.”

“The locket maybe,” said Harry, “but why take thecup as well?”

“It had belonged to another of Hogwarts’s founders,”said Dumbledore. “I think he still felt a great pulltoward the school and that he could not resist anobject so steeped in Hogwarts history. There wereother reasons, I think. ... I hope to be able todemonstrate them to you in due course.

“And now for the very last recollection I have to showyou, at least until you manage to retrieve ProfessorSlughorn’s memory for us. Ten years separatesHokey’s memory and this one, ten years during whichwe can only guess at what Lord Voldemort was doing.

Harry got to his feet once more as Dumbledoreemptied the last memory into the Pensieve.

“Whose memory is it?” he asked.

“Mine,” said Dumbledore.

And Harry dived after Dumbledore through theshifting silver mass, landing in the very office he hadjust left. There was Fawkes slumbering happily on hisperch, and there behind the desk was Dumbledore,who looked very similar to the Dumbledore standingbeside Harry, though both hands were whole andundamaged and his face was, perhaps, a little lesslined. The one difference between the present-dayPage | 495 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

office and this one was that it was snowing in thepast; bluish flecks were drifting past the window inthe dark and building up on the outside ledge.

The younger Dumbledore seemed to be waiting forsomething, and sure enough, moments after theirarrival, there was a knock on the door and he said,“Enter.”

Harry let out a hastily stifled gasp. Voldemort hadentered the room. His features were not those Harryhad seen emerge from the great stone cauldronalmost two years ago: They were not as snakelike, theeyes were not yet scarlet, the face not yet masklike,and yet he was no longer handsome Tom Riddle. Itwas as though his features had been burned andblurred; they were waxy and oddly distorted, and thewhites of the eyes now had a permanently bloodylook, though the pupils were not yet the slits thatHarry knew they would become. He was wearing along black cloak, and his face was as pale as thesnow glistening on his shoulders.

The Dumbledore behind the desk showed no sign ofsurprise. Evidently this visit had been made byappointment.

“Good evening, Tom,” said Dumbledore easily. “Won’tyou sit down?”

“Thank you,” said Voldemort, and he took the seat towhich Dumbledore had gestured — the very seat, bythe looks of it, that Harry had just vacated in thepresent. “I heard that you had become headmaster,”he said, and his voice was slightly higher and colderthan it had been. “A worthy choice.”

“I am glad you approve,” said Dumbledore, smiling.“May I offer you a drink?”

Page | 496 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“That would be welcome,” said Voldemort. “I havecome a long way.”

Dumbledore stood and swept over to the cabinetwhere he now kept the Pensieve, but which then wasfull of bottles. Having handed Voldemort a goblet ofwine and poured one for himself, he returned to theseat behind his desk.

“So, Tom ... to what do I owe the pleasure?”

Voldemort did not answer at once, but merely sippedhis wine.

“They do not call me Tom’ anymore,” he said. “Thesedays, I am known as —”

“I know what you are known as,” said Dumbledore,smiling pleasantly. “But to me, I’m afraid, you willalways be Tom Riddle. It is one of the irritating thingsabout old teachers. I am afraid that they never quiteforget their charges’youthful beginnings.”

He raised his glass as though toasting Voldemort,whose face remained expressionless. Nevertheless,Harry felt the atmosphere in the room change subtly:Dumbledore’s refusal to use Voldemort’s chosenname was a refusal to allow Voldemort to dictate theterms of the meeting, and Harry could tell thatVoldemort took it as such.

“I am surprised you have remained here so long,” saidVoldemort after a short pause. “I always wonderedwhy a wizard such as yourself never wished to leaveschool.”

“Well,” said Dumbledore, still smiling, “to a wizardsuch as myself, there can be nothing more importantthan passing on ancient skills, helping hone young

Page | 497 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

minds. If I remember correctly, you once saw theattraction of teaching too.”

“I see it still,” said Voldemort. “I merely wondered whyyou — who are so often asked for advice by theMinistry, and who have twice, I think, been offeredthe post of Minister —”

“Three times at the last count, actually,” saidDumbledore. “But the Ministry never attracted me asa career. Again, something we have in common, Ithink.”

Voldemort inclined his head, unsmiling, and tookanother sip of wine. Dumbledore did not break thesilence that stretched between them now, but waited,with a look of pleasant expectancy, for Voldemort totalk first.

“I have returned,” he said, after a little while, “later,perhaps, than Professor Dippet expected ... but I havereturned, nevertheless, to request again what he oncetold me I was too young to have. I have come to you toask that you permit me to return to this castle, toteach. I think you must know that I have seen anddone much since I left this place. I could show andtell your students things they can gain from no otherwizard.”

Dumbledore considered Voldemort over the top of hisown goblet for a while before speaking.

“Yes, I certainly do know that you have seen and donemuch since leaving us,” he said quietly. “Rumors ofyour doings have reached your old school, Tom. Ishould be sorry to believe half of them.”

Page | 498 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort’s expression remained impassive as hesaid, “Greatness inspires envy, envy engenders spite,spite spawns lies. You must know this, Dumbledore.”

“You call it ‘greatness,’ what you have been doing, doyou?” asked Dumbledore delicately.

“Certainly,” said Voldemort, and his eyes seemed toburn red. “I have experimented; I have pushed theboundaries of magic further, perhaps, than they haveever been pushed —”

“Of some kinds of magic,” Dumbledore corrected himquietly. “Of some. Of others, you remain ... forgive me... woefully ignorant.”

For the first time, Voldemort smiled. It was a tautleer, an evil thing, more threatening than a look ofrage.

“The old argument,” he said softly. “But nothing Ihave seen in the world has supported your famouspronouncements that love is more powerful than mykind of magic, Dumbledore.”

“Perhaps you have been looking in the wrong places,”suggested Dumbledore.

“Well, then, what better place to start my freshresearches than here, at Hogwarts?” said Voldemort.“Will you let me return? Will you let me share myknowledge with your students? I place myself and mytalents at your disposal. I am yours to command.”

Dumbledore raised his eyebrows. “And what willbecome of those whom you command? What willhappen to those who call themselves — or so rumorhas it — the Death Eaters?”

Page | 499 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry could tell that Voldemort had not expectedDumbledore to know this name; he saw Voldemort’seyes flash red again and the slitlike nostrils flare.

“My friends,” he said, after a moment’s pause, “willcarry on without me, I am sure.”

“I am glad to hear that you consider them friends,”said Dumbledore. “I was under the impression thatthey are more in the order of servants.”

“You are mistaken,” said Voldemort.

“Then if I were to go to the Hog’s Head tonight, Iwould not find a group of them — Nott, Rosier,Mulciber, Dolohov — awaiting your return? Devotedfriends indeed, to travel this far with you on a snowynight, merely to wish you luck as you attempted tosecure a teaching post.”

There could be no doubt that Dumbledore’s detailedknowledge of those with whom he was traveling waseven less welcome to Voldemort; however, he ralliedalmost at once.

“You are omniscient as ever, Dumbledore.”

“Oh no, merely friendly with the local barmen,” saidDumbledore lightly. “Now, Tom ...”

Dumbledore set down his empty glass and drewhimself up in his seat, the tips of his fingers togetherin a very characteristic gesture.

“Let us speak openly. Why have you come heretonight, surrounded by henchmen, to request a jobwe both know you do not want?”

Page | 500 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort looked coldly surprised. “A job I do notwant? On the contrary, Dumbledore, I want it verymuch.”

“Oh, you want to come back to Hogwarts, but you donot want to teach any more than you wanted to whenyou were eighteen. What is it you’re after, Tom? Whynot try an open request for once?”

Voldemort sneered. “If you do not want to give me ajob -”

“Of course I don’t,” said Dumbledore. “And I don’tthink for a moment you expected me to. Nevertheless,you came here, you asked, you must have had apurpose.”

Voldemort stood up. He looked less like Tom Riddlethan ever, his features thick with rage. “This is yourfinal word?”

“It is,” said Dumbledore, also standing.

“Then we have nothing more to say to each other.”

“No, nothing,” said Dumbledore, and a great sadnessfilled his face. “The time is long gone when I couldfrighten you with a burning wardrobe and force youto make repayment for your crimes. But I wish Icould, Tom. ... I wish I could. ...”

For a second, Harry was on the verge of shouting apointless warning: He was sure that Voldemort’s handhad twitched toward his pocket and his wand; butthen the moment had passed, Voldemort had turnedaway, the door was closing, and he was gone.

Harry felt Dumbledore’s hand close over his armagain and moments later, they were standing together

Page | 501 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

on almost the same spot, but there was no snowbuilding on the window ledge, and Dumbledore’shand was blackened and dead-looking once more.

“Why?” said Harry at once, looking up intoDumbledore’s face. “Why did he come back? Did youever find out?”

“I have ideas,” said Dumbledore, “but no more thanthat.”

“What ideas, sir?”

“I shall tell you, Harry, when you have retrieved thatmemory from Professor Slughorn,” said Dumbledore.“When you have that last piece of the jigsaw,everything will, I hope, be clear ... to both of us.”

Harry was still burning with curiosity and eventhough Dumbledore had walked to the door and washolding it open for him, he did not move at once.

“Was he after the Defense Against the Dark Arts jobagain, sir? He didn’t say. ...”

“Oh, he definitely wanted the Defense Against theDark Arts job,” said Dumbledore. “The aftermath ofour little meeting proved that. You see, we have neverbeen able to keep a Defense Against the Dark Artsteacher for longer than a year since I refused the postto Lord Voldemort.”

Page | 502 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





THE UNKNOWABLE ROOM

Harry wracked his brains over the next week as tohow he was to persuade Slughorn to hand over thetrue memory, but nothing in the nature of a brainwave occurred and he was reduced to doing what hedid increasingly these days when at a loss: poringover his Potions book, hoping that the Prince wouldhave scribbled something useful in a margin, as hehad done so many times before.

“You won’t find anything in there,” said Hermionefirmly, late on Sunday evening.

“Don’t start, Hermione,” said Harry. “If it hadn’t beenfor the Prince, Ron wouldn’t be sitting here now.”

“He would if you’d just listened to Snape in our firstyear,” said Hermione dismissively.

Harry ignored her. He had just found an incantation(“Sectumsempral”) scrawled in a margin above theintriguing words “For Enemies,” and was itching to

Page | 503 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

try it out, but thought it best not to in front ofHermione. Instead, he surreptitiously folded down thecorner of the page.

They were sitting beside the fire in the common room;the only other people awake were fellow sixth years.There had been a certain amount of excitement earlierwhen they had come back from dinner to find a newsign on the notice board that announced the date fortheir Apparition Test. Those who would be seventeenon or before the first test date, the twenty-first ofApril, had the option of signing up for additionalpractice sessions, which would take place (heavilysupervised) in Hogsmeade.

Ron had panicked on reading this notice; he had stillnot managed to Apparate and feared he would not beready for the test. Hermione, who had now achievedApparition twice, was a little more confident, butHarry, who would not be seventeen for another fourmonths, could not take the test whether ready or not.

“At least you can Apparate, though!” said Ron tensely.“You’ll have no trouble come July!”

“I’ve only done it once,” Harry reminded him; he hadfinally managed to disappear and rematerialize insidehis hoop during their previous lesson.

Having wasted a lot of time worrying aloud aboutApparition, Ron was now struggling to finish aviciously difficult essay for Snape that Harry andHermione had already completed. Harry fullyexpected to receive low marks on his, because he haddisagreed with Snape on the best way to tackledementors, but he did not care: Slughorn’s memorywas the most important thing to him now.

Page | 504 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm telling you, the stupid Prince isn’t going to beable to help you with this, Harry!” said Hermione,more loudly. “There’s only one way to force someoneto do what you want, and that’s the Imperius Curse,which is illegal —”

“Yeah, I know that, thanks,” said Harry, not lookingup from the book. “That’s why I’m looking forsomething different. Dumbledore says Veritaserumwon’t do it, but there might be something else, apotion or a spell. ...”

“You’re going about it the wrong way,” said Hermione.“Only you can get the memory, Dumbledore says.

That must mean you can persuade Slughorn whereother people can’t. It’s not a question of slipping hima potion, anyone could do that —”

“How d’you spell ‘belligerent’?” said Ron, shaking hisquill very hard while staring at his parchment. “Itcan’t be B — U — M —”

“No, it isn’t,” said Hermione, pulling Ron’s essaytoward her. “And ‘augury’ doesn’t begin O — R — Geither. What kind of quill are you using?”

“It’s one of Fred and George’s Spell-Check ones ... butI think the charm must be wearing off. ...”

“Yes, it must,” said Hermione, pointing at the title ofhis essay, “because we were asked how we’d deal withdementors, not ‘Dugbogs,’ and I don’t remember youchanging your name to ‘Roonil Wazlib’ either.”

“Ah no!” said Ron, staring horror-struck at theparchment. “Don’t say I’ll have to write the wholething out again!”

Page | 505 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“It’s okay, we can fix it,” said Hermione, pulling theessay toward her and taking out her wand.

“I love you, Hermione,” said Ron, sinking back in hischair, rubbing his eyes wearily.

Hermione turned faintly pink, but merely said, “Don’tlet Lavender hear you saying that.”

“I won’t,” said Ron into his hands. “Or maybe I will ...then she’ll ditch me ...”

“Why don’t you ditch her if you want to finish it?”asked Harry.

“You haven’t ever chucked anyone, have you?” saidRon. “You and Cho just —”

“Sort of fell apart, yeah,” said Harry

“Wish that would happen with me and Lavender,”said Ron gloomily, watching Hermione silentlytapping each of his misspelled words with the end ofher wand, so that they corrected themselves on thepage. “But the more I hint I want to finish it, thetighter she holds on. It’s like going out with the giantsquid.”

“There,” said Hermione, some twenty minutes later,handing back Ron’s essay.

“Thanks a million,” said Ron. “Can I borrow your quillfor the conclusion?”

Harry, who had found nothing useful in the Half-Blood Prince’s notes so far, looked around; the threeof them were now the only ones left in the commonroom, Seamus having just gone up to bed cursingSnape and his essay. The only sounds were thePage | 506 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

crackling of the fire and Ron scratching out one lastparagraph on dementors using Hermione’s quill.

Harry had just closed the Half-Blood Prince’s book,yawning, when —

Crack.

Hermione let out a little shriek; Ron spilled ink allover his freshly completed essay, and Harry said,“Kreacher!”

The house-elf bowed low and addressed his owngnarled toes.

“Master said he wanted regular reports on what theMalfoy boy is doing, so Kreacher has come to give —”

Crack.

Dobby appeared alongside Kreacher, his tea-cozy hataskew.

“Dobby has been helping too, Harry Potter!” hesqueaked, casting Kreacher a resentful look. “AndKreacher ought to tell Dobby when he is coming tosee Harry Potter so they can make their reportstogether!”

“What is this?” asked Hermione, still looking shockedby these sudden appearances. “What’s going on,Harry?”

Harry hesitated before answering, because he had nottold Hermione about setting Kreacher and Dobby totail Malfoy; house-elves were always such a touchysubject with her.

“Well ... they’ve been following Malfoy for me,” hesaid.

Page | 507 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Night and day,” croaked Kreacher.

“Dobby has not slept for a week, Harry Potter!” saidDobby proudly, swaying where he stood.

Hermione looked indignant.

“You haven’t slept, Dobby? But surely, Harry, youdidn’t tell him not to —”

“No, of course I didn’t,” said Harry quickly. “Dobby,you can sleep, all right? But has either of you foundout anything?” he hastened to ask, before Hermionecould intervene again.

“Master Malfoy moves with a nobility that befits hispure blood,” croaked Kreacher at once. “His featuresrecall the fine bones of my mistress and his mannersare those of—”

“Draco Malfoy is a bad boy!” squeaked Dobby angrily.“A bad boy who — who —”

He shuddered from the tassel of his tea cozy to thetoes of his socks and then ran at the fire, as thoughabout to dive into it; Harry, to whom this was notentirely unexpected, caught him around the middleand held him fast. For a few seconds Dobbystruggled, then went limp.

“Thank you, Harry Potter,” he panted. “Dobby stillfinds it difficult to speak ill of his old masters. ...”

Harry released him; Dobby straightened his tea cozyand said defiantly to Kreacher, “But Kreacher shouldknow that Draco Malfoy is not a good master to ahouse-elf!”

Page | 508 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, we don’t need to hear about you being in lovewith Malfoy,” Harry told Kreacher. “Let’s fast forwardto where he’s actually been going.”

Kreacher bowed again, looking furious, and then said,“Master Malfoy eats in the Great Hall, he sleeps in adormitory in the dungeons, he attends his classes ina variety of —”

“Dobby, you tell me,” said Harry, cutting acrossKreacher. “Has he been going anywhere he shouldn’thave?”

“Harry Potter, sir,” squeaked Dobby, his great orblikeeyes shining in the firelight, “the Malfoy boy isbreaking no rules that Dobby can discover, but he isstill keen to avoid detection. He has been makingregular visits to the seventh floor with a variety ofother students, who keep watch for him while heenters —”

“The Room of Requirement!” said Harry, smackinghimself hard on the forehead with Advanced Potion-Making. Hermione and Ron stared at him. “That’swhere he’s been sneaking off to! That’s where he’sdoing ... whatever he’s doing! And I bet that’s whyhe’s been disappearing off the map — come to thinkof it, I’ve never seen the Room of Requirement onthere!”

“Maybe the Marauders never knew the room wasthere,” said Ron.

“I think it’ll be part of the magic of the room,” saidHermione. “If you need it to be Unplottable, it will be.”

“Dobby, have you managed to get in to have a look atwhat Malfoy’s doing?” said Harry eagerly.

Page | 509 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No, Harry Potter, that is impossible,” said Dobby.

“No, it’s not,” said Harry at once. “Malfoy got into ourheadquarters there last year, so I’ll be able to get inand spy on him, no problem.”

“But I don’t think you will, Harry,” said Hermioneslowly. “Malfoy already knew exactly how we wereusing the room, didn’t he, because that stupidMarietta had blabbed. He needed the room to becomethe headquarters of the D.A., so it did. But you don’tknow what the room becomes when Malfoy goes inthere, so you don’t know what to ask it to transforminto.”

“There’ll be a way around that,” said Harrydismissively. “You’ve done brilliantly, Dobby.”

“Kreacher’s done well too,” said Hermione kindly; butfar from looking grateful, Kreacher averted his huge,bloodshot eyes and croaked at the ceiling, “TheMudblood is speaking to Kreacher, Kreacher willpretend he cannot hear —”

“Get out of it,” Harry snapped at him, and Kreachermade one last deep bow and Disapparated. “You’dbetter go and get some sleep too, Dobby.”

“Thank you, Harry Potter, sir!” squeaked Dobbyhappily, and he too vanished.

“How good’s this?” said Harry enthusiastically,turning to Ron and Hermione the moment the roomwas elf-free again. “We know where Malfoy’s going!We’ve got him cornered now!”

“Yeah, it’s great,” said Ron glumly, who wasattempting to mop up the sodden mass of ink thathad recently been an almost completed essay.

Page | 510 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

Hermione pulled it toward her and began siphoningthe ink off with her wand.

“But what’s all this about him going up there with aVariety of students’?” said Hermione. “How manypeople are in on it? You wouldn’t think he’d trust lotsof them to know what he’s doing. ...”

“Yeah, that is weird,” said Harry, frowning. “I heardhim telling Crabbe it wasn’t Crabbe’s business whathe was doing ... so what’s he telling all these ... allthese ...”

Harry’s voice tailed away; he was staring at the fire.

“God, I’ve been stupid,” he said quietly. “It’s obvious,isn’t it? There was a great vat of it down in thedungeon. ... He could’ve nicked some any time duringthat lesson. ...”

“Nicked what?” said Ron.

“Polyjuice Potion. He stole some of the PolyjuicePotion Slughorn showed us in our first Potionslesson. ... There aren’t a whole variety of studentsstanding guard for Malfoy ... it’s just Crabbe andGoyle as usual. ... Yeah, it all fits!” said Harry,jumping up and starting to pace in front of the fire.“They’re stupid enough to do what they’re told even ifhe won’t tell them what he’s up to ... but he doesn’twant them to be seen lurking around outside theRoom of Requirement, so he’s got them takingPolyjuice to make them look like other people. ...Those two girls I saw him with when he missedQuidditch — ha! Crabbe and Goyle!”

“Do you mean to say,” said Hermione in a hushedvoice, “that that little girl whose scales I repaired — ?”

Page | 511 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, of course!” said Harry loudly, staring at her.“Of course! Malfoy must’ve been inside the room atthe time, so she — what am I talking about? — hedropped the scales to tell Malfoy not to come out,because there was someone there! And there was thatgirl who dropped the toadspawn too! We’ve beenwalking past him all the time and not realizing it!”

“He’s got Crabbe and Goyle transforming into girls?”guffawed Ron. “Blimey ... No wonder they don’t looktoo happy these days. ... I’m surprised they don’t tellhim to stuff it. ...”

“Well, they wouldn’t, would they, if he’s shown themhis Dark Mark?” said Harry.

“Hmmm ... the Dark Mark we don’t know exists,” saidHermione skeptically, rolling up Ron’s dried essaybefore it could come to any more harm and handing itto him.

“Well see,” said Harry confidently.

“Yes, we will,” Hermione said, getting to her feet andstretching. “But, Harry, before you get all excited, Istill don’t think you’ll be able to get into the Room ofRequirement without knowing what’s there first. AndI don’t think you should forget” — she heaved her bagonto her shoulder and gave him a very serious look —“that what you’re supposed to be concentrating on isgetting that memory from Slughorn. Good night.”

Harry watched her go, feeling slightly disgruntled.Once the door to the girls’ dormitories had closedbehind her he rounded on Ron.

“What d’you think?”

Page | 512 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Wish I could Disapparate like a house-elf,” said Ron,staring at the spot where Dobby had vanished. “I’dhave that Apparition Test in the bag.”

Harry did not sleep well that night. He lay awake forwhat felt like hours, wondering how Malfoy was usingthe Room of Requirement and what he, Harry, wouldsee when he went in there the following day, forwhatever Hermione said, Harry was sure that ifMalfoy had been able to see the headquarters of theD.A., he would be able to see Malfoy’s ... what could itbe? A meeting place? A hideout? A storeroom? Aworkshop? Harry’s mind worked feverishly and hisdreams, when he finally fell asleep, were broken anddisturbed by images of Malfoy, who turned intoSlughorn, who turned into Snape. ...

Harry was in a state of great anticipation overbreakfast the following morning; he had a free periodbefore Defense Against the Dark Arts and wasdetermined to spend it trying to get into the Room ofRequirement. Hermione was rather ostentatiouslyshowing no interest in his whispered plans for forcingentry into the room, which irritated Harry, because hethought she might be a lot of help if she wanted to.

“Look,” he said quietly, leaning forward and putting ahand on the Daily Prophet, which she had justremoved from a post owl, to stop her from opening itand vanishing behind it. “I haven’t forgotten aboutSlughorn, but I haven’t got a clue how to get thatmemory off him, and until I get a brain wave whyshouldn’t I find out what Malfoy’s doing?”

“I’ve already told you, you need to persuadeSlughorn,” said Hermione. “It’s not a question oftricking him or bewitching him, or Dumbledore couldhave done it in a second. Instead of messing aroundoutside the Room of Requirement” — she jerked thePage | 513 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

Prophet out from under Harry’s hand and unfolded itto look at the front page — “you should go and findSlughorn and start appealing to his better nature.”

“Anyone we know — ?” asked Ron, as Hermionescanned the headlines.

“Yes!” said Hermione, causing both Harry and Ron togag on their breakfast. “But it’s all right, he’s notdead — it’s Mundungus, he’s been arrested and sentto Azkaban! Something to do with impersonating anInferius during an attempted burglary ... andsomeone called Octavius Pepper has vanished. ... Oh,and how horrible, a nine-year-old boy has beenarrested for trying to kill his grandparents, they thinkhe was under the Imperius Curse. ...”

They finished their breakfast in silence. Hermione setoff immediately for Ancient Runes; Ron for thecommon room, where he still had to finish hisconclusion on Snape’s dementor essay; and Harry forthe corridor on the seventh floor and the stretch ofwall opposite the tapestry of Barnabas the Barmyteaching trolls to do ballet.

Harry slipped on his Invisibility Cloak once he hadfound an empty passage, but he need not havebothered. When he reached his destination he foundit deserted. Harry was not sure whether his chancesof getting inside the room were better with Malfoyinside it or out, but at least his first attempt was notgoing to be complicated by the presence of Crabbe orGoyle pretending to be an eleven-year-old girl.

He closed his eyes as he approached the place wherethe Room of Requirement’s door was concealed. Heknew what he had to do; he had become mostaccomplished at it last year. Concentrating with allhis might he thought, I need to see what Malfoy’sPage | 514 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

doing in here. ... I need to see what Malfoy’s doing inhere. ... I need to see what Malfoy’s doing in here. ...

Three times he walked past the door; then, his heartpounding with excitement, he opened his eyes andfaced it —

But he was still looking at a stretch of mundanelyblank wall.

He moved forward and gave it an experimental push.The stone remained solid and unyielding.

“Okay,” said Harry aloud. “Okay ... I thought thewrong thing. ...”

He pondered for a moment then set off again, eyesclosed, concentrating as hard as he could.

I need to see the place where Malfoy keeps comingsecretly. ... I need to see the place where Malfoy keepscoming secretly. ...

After three walks past, he opened his eyesexpectantly.

There was no door.

“Oh, come off it,” he told the wall irritably. “That wasa clear instruction. ... Fine ...”

He thought hard for several minutes before stridingoff once more.

I need you to become the place you become for DracoMalfoy. ...

He did not immediately open his eyes when he hadfinished his patrolling; he was listening hard, as

Page | 515 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

though he might hear the door pop into existence. Heheard nothing, however, except the distant twitteringof birds outside. He opened his eyes.

There was still no door.

Harry swore. Someone screamed. He looked around tosee a gaggle of first years running back around thecorner, apparently under the impression that theyhad just encountered a particularly foulmouthedghost.

Harry tried every variation of “I need to see whatDraco Malfoy is doing inside you” that he could thinkof for a whole hour, at the end of which he was forcedto concede that Hermione might have had a point:

The room simply did not want to open for him.Frustrated and annoyed, he set off for DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts, pulling off his Invisibility Cloakand stuffing it into his bag as he went.

“Late again, Potter,” said Snape coldly, as Harryhurried into the candlelit classroom. “Ten points fromGryffindor.”

Harry scowled at Snape as he flung himself into theseat beside Ron; half the class was still on its feet,taking out books and organizing their things; hecould not be much later than any of them.

“Before we start, I want your dementor essays,” saidSnape, waving his wand carelessly, so that twenty-five scrolls of parchment soared into the air andlanded in a neat pile on his desk. “And I hope for yoursakes they are better than the tripe I had to endureon resisting the Imperius Curse. Now, if you will allopen your books to page — what is it, Mr. Finnigan?”

Page | 516 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Sir,” said Seamus, “I’ve been wondering, how do youtell the difference between an Inferius and a ghost?Because there was something in the paper about anInferius —”

“No, there wasn’t,” said Snape in a bored voice.

“But sir, I heard people talking —”

“If you had actually read the article in question, Mr.Finnigan, you would have known that the so-calledInferius was nothing but a smelly sneak thief by thename of Mundungus Fletcher.”

“I thought Snape and Mundungus were on the sameside,” muttered Harry to Ron and Hermione.“Shouldn’t he be upset Mundungus has been arrest

“But Potter seems to have a lot to say on the subject,”said Snape, pointing suddenly at the back of theroom, his black eyes fixed on Harry “Let us ask Potterhow we would tell the difference between an Inferiusand a ghost.”

The whole class looked around at Harry, who hastilytried to recall what Dumbledore had told him thenight that they had gone to visit Slughorn.

“Er — well — ghosts are transparent —” he said.

“Oh, very good,” interrupted Snape, his lip curling.“Yes, it is easy to see that nearly six years of magicaleducation have not been wasted on you, Potter.‘Ghosts are transparent.’ ”

Pansy Parkinson let out a high-pitched giggle. Severalother people were smirking. Harry took a deep breathand continued calmly, though his insides were

Page | 517 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

boiling, “Yeah, ghosts are transparent, but Inferi aredead bodies, aren’t they? So they’d be solid —”

“A five-year-old could have told us as much,” sneeredSnape. “The Inferius is a corpse that has beenreanimated by a Dark wizard’s spells. It is not alive, itis merely used like a puppet to do the wizard’sbidding. A ghost, as I trust that you are all aware bynow, is the imprint of a departed soul left upon theearth ... and of course, as Potter so wisely tells us,transparent.”

“Well, what Harry said is the most useful if we’retrying to tell them apart!” said Ron. “When we comeface-to-face with one down a dark alley, we’re going tobe having a shufti to see if it’s solid, aren’t we, we’renot going to be asking, ‘Excuse me, are you theimprint of a departed soul?’ ”

There was a ripple of laughter, instantly quelled bythe look Snape gave the class.

“Another ten points from Gryffindor,” said Snape. “Iwould expect nothing more sophisticated from you,Ronald Weasley, the boy so solid he cannot Apparatehalf an inch across a room.”

“IVo!” whispered Hermione, grabbing Harry’s arm ashe opened his mouth furiously. “There’s no point,you’ll just end up in detention again, leave it!”

“Now open your books to page two hundred andthirteen,” said Snape, smirking a little, “and read thefirst two paragraphs on the Cruciatus Curse. ...”

Ron was very subdued all through the class. Whenthe bell sounded at the end of the lesson, Lavendercaught up with Ron and Harry (Hermionemysteriously melted out of sight as she approached)

Page | 518 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

and abused Snape hotly for his jibe about Ron’sApparition, but this seemed to merely irritate Ron,and he shook her off by making a detour into theboys’ bathroom with Harry.

“Snape’s right, though, isn’t he?” said Ron, afterstaring into a cracked mirror for a minute or two. “Idunno whether it’s worth me taking the test. I justcan’t get the hang of Apparition.”

“You might as well do the extra practice sessions inHogsmeade and see where they get you,” said Harryreasonably. “It’ll be more interesting than trying to getinto a stupid hoop anyway. Then, if you’re still not —you know — as good as you’d like to be, you canpostpone the test, do it with me over the summ —Myrtle, this is the boys’ bathroom!”

The ghost of a girl had risen out of the toilet in acubicle behind them and was now floating in midair,staring at them through thick, white, round glasses.

“Oh,” she said glumly. “It’s you two.”

“Who were you expecting?” said Ron, looking at her inthe mirror.

“Nobody,” said Myrtle, picking moodily at a spot onher chin. “He said he’d come back and see me, butthen you said you’d pop in and visit me too” — shegave Harry a reproachful look — “and I haven’t seenyou for months and months. I’ve learned not to expecttoo much from boys.”

“I thought you lived in that girls’ bathroom?” saidHarry, who had been careful to give the place a wideberth for some years now.

Page | 519 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I do,” she said, with a sulky little shrug, “but thatdoesn’t mean I can’t visit other places. I came andsaw you in your bath once, remember?”

“Vividly,” said Harry.

“But I thought he liked me,” she said plaintively.“Maybe if you two left, he’d come back again. ... Wehad lots in common. ... I’m sure he felt it. ...”

And she looked hopefully toward the door.

“When you say you had lots in common,” said Ron,sounding rather amused now, “d’you mean he lives inan S-bend too?”

“No,” said Myrtle defiantly, her voice echoing loudlyaround the old tiled bathroom. “I mean he’s sensitive,people bully him too, and he feels lonely and hasn’tgot anybody to talk to, and he’s not afraid to show hisfeelings and cry!”

“There’s been a boy in here crying?” said Harrycuriously. “A young boy?”

“Never you mind!” said Myrtle, her small, leaky eyesfixed on Ron, who was now definitely grinning. “Ipromised I wouldn’t tell anyone, and I’ll take hissecret to the —”

“— not the grave, surely?” said Ron with a snort. “Thesewers, maybe ...”

Myrtle gave a howl of rage and dived back into thetoilet, causing water to slop over the sides and ontothe floor. Goading Myrtle seemed to have put freshheart into Ron.

Page | 520 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You’re right,” he said, swinging his schoolbag backover his shoulder, “I’ll do the practice sessions inHogsmeade before I decide about taking the test.”

And so the following weekend, Ron joined Hermioneand the rest of the sixth years who would turnseventeen in time to take the test in a fortnight. Harryfelt rather jealous watching them all get ready to gointo the village; he missed making trips there, and itwas a particularly fine spring day, one of the firstclear skies they had seen in a long time. However, hehad decided to use the time to attempt anotherassault on the Room of Requirement.

“You’d do better,” said Hermione, when he confidedthis plan to Ron and her in the entrance hall, “to gostraight to Slughorn’s office and try and get thatmemory from him.”

“I’ve been trying!” said Harry crossly, which wasperfectly true. He had lagged behind after everyPotions lesson that week in an attempt to cornerSlughorn, but the Potions master always left thedungeon so fast that Harry had not been able to catchhim. Twice, Harry had gone to his office and knocked,but received no reply, though on the second occasionhe was sure he had heard the quickly stifled soundsof an old gramophone.

“He doesn’t want to talk to me, Hermione! He can tellI’ve been trying to get him on his own again, and he’snot going to let it happen!”

“Well, you’ve just got to keep at it, haven’t you?”

The short queue of people waiting to file past Filch,who was doing his usual prodding act with theSecrecy Sensor, moved forward a few steps and Harrydid not answer in case he was overheard by the

Page | 521 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

caretaker. He wished Ron and Hermione both luck,then turned and climbed the marble staircase again,determined, whatever Hermione said, to devote anhour or two to the Room of Requirement.

Once out of sight of the entrance hall, Harry pulledthe Marauder’s Map and his Invisibility Cloak fromhis bag. Having concealed himself, he tapped themap, murmured, “I solemnly swear that I am up to nogood,” and scanned it carefully.

As it was Sunday morning, nearly all the studentswere inside their various common rooms, theGryffindors in one tower, the Ravenclaws in another,the Slytherins in the dungeons, and the Hufflepuffs inthe basement near the kitchens. Here and there astray person meandered around the library or up acorridor. ... There were a few people out in thegrounds ... and there, alone in the seventh-floorcorridor, was Gregory Goyle. There was no sign of theRoom of Requirement, but Harry was not worriedabout that; if Goyle was standing guard outside it, theroom was open, whether the map was aware of it ornot. He therefore sprinted up the stairs, slowing downonly when he reached the corner into the corridor,when he began to creep, very slowly, toward the verysame little girl, clutching her heavy brass scales, thatHermione had so kindly helped a fortnight before. Hewaited until he was right behind her before bendingvery low and whispering, “Hello ... you’re very pretty,aren’t you?”

Goyle gave a high-pitched scream of terror, threw thescales up into the air, and sprinted away, vanishingfrom sight long before the sound of the scalessmashing had stopped echoing around the corridor.Laughing, Harry turned to contemplate the blank wallbehind which, he was sure, Draco Malfoy was nowstanding frozen, aware that someone unwelcome wasPage | 522 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

out there, but not daring to make an appearance. Itgave Harry a most agreeable feeling of power as hetried to remember what form of words he had not yettried.

Yet this hopeful mood did not last long. Half an hourlater, having tried many more variations of hisrequest to see what Malfoy was up to, the wall wasjust as doorless as ever. Harry felt frustrated beyondbelief; Malfoy might be just feet away from him, andthere was still not the tiniest shred of evidence as towhat he was doing in there. Losing his patiencecompletely, Harry ran at the wall and kicked it.

“OUCH!”

He thought he might have broken his toe; as heclutched it and hopped on one foot, the InvisibilityCloak slipped off him.

“Harry?”

He spun around, one-legged, and toppled over. There,to his utter astonishment, was Tonks, walking towardhim as though she frequently strolled up thiscorridor.

“What’re you doing here?” he said, scrambling to hisfeet again; why did she always have to find him lyingon the floor?

“I came to see Dumbledore,” said Tonks.

Harry thought she looked terrible: thinner thanusual, her mouse-colored hair lank.

“His office isn’t here,” said Harry, “it’s round the otherside of the castle, behind the gargoyle —”

Page | 523 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I know,” said Tonks. “He’s not there. Apparently he’sgone away again.”

“Has he?” said Harry, putting his bruised foot gingerlyback on the floor. “Hey — you don’t know where hegoes, I suppose?”

“No,” said Tonks.

“What did you want to see him about?”

“Nothing in particular,” said Tonks, picking,apparently unconsciously, at the sleeve of her robe. “Ijust thought he might know what’s going on. ... I’veheard rumors ... people getting hurt ...”

“Yeah, I know, it’s all been in the papers,” said Harry.“That little kid trying to kill his —”

“The Prophet’s often behind the times,” said Tonks,who didn’t seem to be listening to him. “You haven’thad any letters from anyone in the Order recently?”

“No one from the Order writes to me anymore,” saidHarry, “not since Sirius —”

He saw that her eyes had filled with tears.

“I’m sorry,” he muttered awkwardly. “I mean ... I misshim, as well. ...”

“What?” said Tonks blankly, as though she had notheard him. “Well ... I’ll see you around, Harry ...”

And she turned abruptly and walked back down thecorridor, leaving Harry to stare after her. After aminute or so, he pulled the Invisibility Cloak on againand resumed his efforts to get into the Room ofRequirement, but his heart was not in it. Finally, aPage | 524 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

hollow feeling in his stomach and the knowledge thatRon and Hermione would soon be back for lunchmade him abandon the attempt and leave the corridorto Malfoy who, hopefully, would be too afraid to leavefor some hours to come.

He found Ron and Hermione in the Great Hall,already halfway through an early lunch.

“I did it — well, kind of!” Ron told Harryenthusiastically when he caught sight of him. “I wassupposed to be Apparating to outside MadamPuddifoot’s Tea Shop and I overshot it a bit, ended upnear Scrivenshaft’s, but at least I moved!”

“Good one,” said Harry. “How’d you do, Hermione?”

“Oh, she was perfect, obviously,” said Ron, beforeHermione could answer. “Perfect deliberation,divination, and desperation or whatever the hell it is— we all went for a quick drink in the ThreeBroomsticks after and you should’ve heard Twycrossgoing on about her — I’ll be surprised if he doesn’tpop the question soon —”

“And what about you?” asked Hermione, ignoringRon. “Have you been up at the Room of Requirementall this time?”

“Yep,” said Harry. “And guess who I ran into upthere? Tonks!”

“Tonks?” repeated Ron and Hermione together,looking surprised.

“Yeah, she said she’d come to visit Dumbledore. ...”

“If you ask me,” said Ron once Harry had finisheddescribing his conversation with Tonks, “she’s

Page | 525 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

cracking up a bit. Losing her nerve after whathappened at the Ministry.”

“It’s a bit odd,” said Hermione, who for some reasonlooked very concerned. “She’s supposed to beguarding the school, why’s she suddenly abandoningher post to come and see Dumbledore when he’s noteven here?”

“I had a thought,” said Harry tentatively. He feltstrange about voicing it; this was much moreHermione’s territory than his. “You don’t think shecan have been ... you know ... in love with Sirius?”

Hermione stared at him.

“What on earth makes you say that?”

“I dunno,” said Harry, shrugging, “but she was nearlycrying when I mentioned his name ... and herPatronus is a big four-legged thing now. ... I wonderedwhether it hadn’t become ... you know ... him.”

“It’s a thought,” said Hermione slowly. “But I stilldon’t know why she’d be bursting into the castle tosee Dumbledore, if that’s really why she was here. ...”

“Goes back to what I said, doesn’t it?” said Ron, whowas now shoveling mashed potato into his mouth.“She’s gone a bit funny. Lost her nerve. Women,” hesaid wisely to Harry, “they’re easily upset.”

“And yet,” said Hermione, coming out of her reverie, “Idoubt you’d find a woman who sulked for half anhour because Madam Rosmerta didn’t laugh at theirjoke about the hag, the Healer, and the Mimbulusmimbletonia.”

Ron scowled.

Page | 526 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





AFTER THE BURIAL

Patches of bright blue sky were beginning to appearover the castle turrets, but these signs of approachingsummer did not lift Harry’s mood. He had beenthwarted, both in his attempts to find out whatMalfoy was doing, and in his efforts to start aconversation with Slughorn that might lead,somehow, to Slughorn handing over the memory hehad apparently suppressed for decades.

“For the last time, just forget about Malfoy,” Hermionetold Harry firmly.

They were sitting with Ron in a sunny corner of thecourtyard after lunch. Hermione and Ron were bothclutching a Ministry of Magic leaflet — CommonApparition Mistakes and How to Avoid Them — forthey were taking their tests that very afternoon, butby and large the leaflets had not proved soothing tothe nerves.

Page | 527 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron gave a start and tried to hide behind Hermione asa girl came around the corner.

“It isn’t Lavender,” said Hermione wearily.

“Oh, good,” said Ron, relaxing.

“Harry Potter?” said the girl. “I was asked to give youthis.”

“Thanks ...”

Harry’s heart sank as he took the small scroll ofparchment. Once the girl was out of earshot he said,“Dumbledore said we wouldn’t be having any morelessons until I got the memory!”

“Maybe he wants to check on how you’re doing?”suggested Hermione, as Harry unrolled theparchment; but rather than finding Dumbledore’slong, narrow, slanted writing he saw an untidysprawl, very difficult to read due to the presence oflarge blotches on the parchment where the ink hadrun.

Dear Harry, Ron, and Hermione,

Aragog died last night Harry and Ron, you met him,and you know how special he was. Hermione, I knowyou’d have liked him. It would mean a lot to me ifyou’d nip down for the burial later this evening. I’mplanning on doing it round dusk, that was his favoritetime of day. I know you’re not supposed to be out thatlate, but you can use the cloak. Wouldn’t ask, but Ican’t face it alone.

Hagrid

Page | 528 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Look at this,” said Harry, handing the note toHermione.

“Oh, for heaven’s sake,” she said, scanning it quicklyand passing it to Ron, who read it through lookingincreasingly incredulous.

“He’s mentaft” he said furiously. “That thing told itsmates to eat Harry and me! Told them to helpthemselves! And now Hagrid expects us to go downthere and cry over its horrible hairy body!”

“It’s not just that,” said Hermione. “He’s asking us toleave the castle at night and he knows security’s amillion times tighter and how much trouble we’d be inif we were caught.”

“We’ve been down to see him by night before,” saidHarry.

“Yes, but for something like this?” said Hermione.“We’ve risked a lot to help Hagrid out, but after all —Aragog’s dead. If it were a question of saving him —”

“— I’d want to go even less,” said Ron firmly. “Youdidn’t meet him, Hermione. Believe me, being deadwill have improved him a lot.”

Harry took the note back and stared down at all theinky blotches all over it. Tears had clearly fallen thickand fast upon the parchment. ...

“Harry, you can’t be thinking of going,” saidHermione. “It’s such a pointless thing to get detentionfor.”

Harry sighed. “Yeah, I know,” he said. “I s’poseHagrid’ll have to bury Aragog without us.”

Page | 529 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, he will,” said Hermione, looking relieved. “Look,Potions will be almost empty this afternoon, with usall off doing our tests. ... Try and soften Slughorn upa bit then!”

“Fifty-seventh time lucky, you think?” said Harrybitterly.

“Lucky,” said Ron suddenly. “Harry, that’s it — getlucky!”

“What d’you mean?”

“Use your lucky potion!”

“Ron, that’s — that’s it!” said Hermione, soundingstunned. “Of course! Why didn’t I think of it?”

Harry stared at them both. “Felix Felicis?” he said. “Idunno ... I was sort of saving it. ...”

“What for?” demanded Ron incredulously.

“What on earth is more important than this memory,Harry?” asked Hermione.

Harry did not answer. The thought of that little goldenbottle had hovered on the edges of his imagination forsome time; vague and unformulated plans thatinvolved Ginny splitting up with Dean, and Ronsomehow being happy to see her with a newboyfriend, had been fermenting in the depths of hisbrain, unacknowledged except during dreams or thetwilight time between sleeping and waking. ...

“Harry? Are you still with us?” asked Hermione.

“Wha — ? Yeah, of course,” he said, pulling himselftogether. “Well ... okay. If I can’t get Slughorn to talk

Page | 530 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

this afternoon, I’ll take some Felix and have anothergo this evening.”

“That’s decided, then,” said Hermione briskly, gettingto her feet and performing a graceful pirouette.“Destination ... determination ... deliberation ...” shemurmured.

“Oh, stop that,” Ron begged her, “I feel sick enough asit is — quick, hide me!”

“It isn’t Lavender!” said Hermione impatiently, asanother couple of girls appeared in the courtyard andRon dived behind her.

“Cool,” said Ron, peering over Hermione’s shoulder tocheck. “Blimey, they don’t look happy, do they?”

“They’re the Montgomery sisters and of course theydon’t look happy, didn’t you hear what happened totheir little brother?” said Hermione.

“I’m losing track of what’s happening to everyone’srelatives, to be honest,” said Ron.

“Well, their brother was attacked by a werewolf. Therumor is that their mother refused to help the DeathEaters. Anyway, the boy was only five and he died inSt. Mungo’s, they couldn’t save him.”

“He died?” repeated Harry, shocked. “But surelywerewolves don’t kill, they just turn you into one ofthem?”

“They sometimes kill,” said Ron, who lookedunusually grave now. “I’ve heard of it happeningwhen the werewolf gets carried away.”

“What was the werewolf’s name?” said Harry quickly.

Page | 531 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“Well, the rumor is that it was that Fenrir Greyback,”said Hermione.

“I knew it — the maniac who likes attacking kids, theone Lupin told me about!” said Harry angrily.

Hermione looked at him bleakly.

“Harry, you’ve got to get that memory,” she said. “It’sall about stopping Voldemort, isn’t it? These dreadfulthings that are happening are all down to him. ...”

The bell rang overhead in the castle and bothHermione and Ron jumped to their feet, lookingterrified.

“You’ll do fine,” Harry told them both, as they headedtoward the entrance hall to meet the rest of the peopletaking their Apparition Test. “Good luck.”

“And you too!” said Hermione with a significant look,as Harry headed off to the dungeons.

There were only three of them in Potions thatafternoon: Harry, Ernie, and Draco Malfoy.

“All too young to Apparate just yet?” said Slughorngenially. “Not turned seventeen yet?”

They shook their heads.

“Ah well,” said Slughorn cheerily, “as we’re so few,we’ll do something fun. I want you all to brew me upsomething amusing!”

“That sounds good, sir,” said Ernie sycophantically,rubbing his hands together. Malfoy, on the otherhand, did not crack a smile.

Page | 532 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What do you mean, ‘something amusing?” he saidirritably.

“Oh, surprise me,” said Slughorn airily.

Malfoy opened his copy of Advanced Potion-Makingwith a sulky expression. It could not have beenplainer that he thought this lesson was a waste oftime. Undoubtedly, Harry thought, watching him overthe top of his own book, Malfoy was begrudging thetime he could otherwise be spending in the Room ofRequirement.

Was it his imagination, or did Malfoy, like Tonks, lookthinner? Certainly he looked paler; his skin still hadthat grayish tinge, probably because he so rarely sawdaylight these days. But there was no air ofsmugness, excitement, or superiority; none of theswagger that he had had on the Hogwarts Express,when he had boasted openly of the mission he hadbeen given by Voldemort. ... There could be only oneconclusion, in Harry’s opinion: The mission, whateverit was, was going badly.

Cheered by this thought, Harry skimmed through hiscopy of Advanced Potion-Making and found a heavilycorrected Half-Blood Prince’s version of “An Elixir toInduce Euphoria,” which seemed not only to meetSlughorn’s instructions, but which might (Harry’sheart leapt as the thought struck him) put Slughorninto such a good mood that he would be prepared tohand over that memory if Harry could persuade himto taste some. ...

“Well, now, this looks absolutely wonderful,” saidSlughorn an hour and a half later, clapping his handstogether as he stared down into the sunshine yellowcontents of Harry’s cauldron. “Euphoria, I take it? Andwhat’s that I smell? Mmmm ... you’ve added just aPage | 533 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

sprig of peppermint, haven’t you? Unorthodox, butwhat a stroke of inspiration, Harry, of course, thatwould tend to counterbalance the occasional sideeffects of excessive singing and nose-tweaking. ... Ireally don’t know where you get these brain waves,my boy ... unless —”

Harry pushed the Half-Blood Prince’s book deeperinto his bag with his foot.

“— it’s just your mother’s genes coming out in you!”

“Oh ... yeah, maybe,” said Harry, relieved.

Ernie was looking rather grumpy; determined tooutshine Harry for once, he had most rashly inventedhis own potion, which had curdled and formed a kindof purple dumpling at the bottom of his cauldron.Malfoy was already packing up, sour-faced; Slughornhad pronounced his Hiccuping Solution merely“passable.”

The bell rang and both Ernie and Malfoy left at once.

“Sir,” Harry began, but Slughorn immediately glancedover his shoulder; when he saw that the room wasempty but for himself and Harry, he hurried away asfast as he could.

“Professor — Professor, don’t you want to taste my po— ?” called Harry desperately.

But Slughorn had gone. Disappointed, Harry emptiedthe cauldron, packed up his things, left the dungeon,and walked slowly back upstairs to the commonroom.

Ron and Hermione returned in the late afternoon.

Page | 534 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Harry!” cried Hermione as she climbed through theportrait hole. “Harry, I passed!”

“Well done!” he said. “And Ron?”

“He — he just failed,” whispered Hermione, as Roncame slouching into the room looking most morose.“It was really unlucky, a tiny thing, the examiner justspotted that he’d left half an eyebrow behind. ... Howdid it go with Slughorn?”

“No joy,” said Harry, as Ron joined them. “Bad luck,mate, but you’ll pass next time — we can take ittogether.”

“Yeah, I s’pose,” said Ron grumpily. “But half aneyebrow\ Like that matters!”

“I know,” said Hermione soothingly, “it does seemreally harsh. ...”

They spent most of their dinner roundly abusing theApparition examiner, and Ron looked fractionallymore cheerful by the time they set off back to thecommon room, now discussing the continuingproblem of Slughorn and the memory.

“So, Harry — you going to use the Felix Felicis orwhat?” Ron demanded.

“Yeah, I s’pose I’d better,” said Harry. “I don’t reckonI’ll need all of it, not twelve hours’ worth, it can’t takeall night. ... I’ll just take a mouthful. Two or threehours should do it.”

“It’s a great feeling when you take it,” said Ronreminiscently. “Like you can’t do anything wrong.”

Page | 535 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What are you talking about?” said Hermione,laughing. “You’ve never taken any!”

“Yeah, but I thought I had, didn’t I?” said Ron, asthough explaining the obvious. “Same differencereally ...”

As they had only just seen Slughorn enter the GreatHall and knew that he liked to take time over meals,they lingered for a while in the common room, theplan being that Harry should go to Slughorn’s officeonce the teacher had had time to get back there.When the sun had sunk to the level of the treetops inthe Forbidden Forest, they decided the moment hadcome, and after checking carefully that Neville, Dean,and Seamus were all in the common room, sneakedup to the boys’ dormitory.

Harry took out the rolled-up socks at the bottom ofhis trunk and extracted the tiny, gleaming bottle.

“Well, here goes,” said Harry, and he raised the littlebottle and took a carefully measured gulp.

“What does it feel like?” whispered Hermione.

Harry did not answer for a moment. Then, slowly butsurely, an exhilarating sense of infinite opportunitystole through him; he felt as though he could havedone anything, anything at all ... and getting thememory from Slughorn seemed suddenly not onlypossible, but positively easy. ...

He got to his feet, smiling, brimming with confidence.

“Excellent,” he said. “Really excellent. Right ... I’mgoing down to Hagrid’s.”

Page | 536 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What?” said Ron and Hermione together, lookingaghast.

“No, Harry — you’ve got to go and see Slughorn,remember?” said Hermione.

“No,” said Harry confidently. “I’m going to Hagrid’s,

I’ve got a good feeling about going to Hagrid’s.”

“You’ve got a good feeling about burying a giantspider?” asked Ron, looking stunned.

“Yeah,” said Harry, pulling his Invisibility Cloak out ofhis bag. “I feel like it’s the place to be tonight, youknow what I mean?”

“No,” said Ron and Hermione together, both lookingpositively alarmed now.

“This is Felix Felicis, I suppose?” said Hermioneanxiously, holding up the bottle to the light. “Youhaven’t got another little bottle full of— I don’t know

“Essence of Insanity?” suggested Ron, as Harryswung his cloak over his shoulders.

Harry laughed, and Ron and Hermione looked evenmore alarmed.

“Trust me,” he said. “I know what I’m doing ... or atleast” — he strolled confidently to the door — “Felixdoes.”

He pulled the Invisibility Cloak over his head and setoff down the stairs, Ron and Hermione hurrying alongbehind him. At the foot of the stairs, Harry slidthrough the open door.

Page | 537 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What were you doing up there with her?” shriekedLavender Brown, staring right through Harry at Ronand Hermione emerging together from the boys’dormitories. Harry heard Ron spluttering behind himas he darted across the room away from them.

Getting through the portrait hole was simple; as heapproached it, Ginny and Dean came through it, andHarry was able to slip between them. As he did so, hebrushed accidentally against Ginny.

“Don’t push me, please, Dean,” she said, soundingannoyed. “You’re always doing that, I can get throughperfectly well on my own. ...”

The portrait swung closed behind Harry, but notbefore he had heard Dean make an angry retort. ...

His feeling of elation increasing, Harry strode offthrough the castle. He did not have to creep along, forhe met nobody on his way, but this did not surprisehim in the slightest: This evening, he was the luckiestperson at Hogwarts.

Why he knew that going to Hagrid’s was the rightthing to do, he had no idea. It was as though thepotion was illuminating a few steps of the path at atime: He could not see the final destination, he couldnot see where Slughorn came in, but he knew that hewas going the right way to get that memory. When hereached the entrance hall he saw that Filch hadforgotten to lock the front door. Beaming, Harry threwit open and breathed in the smell of clean air andgrass for a moment before walking down the stepsinto the dusk.

It was when he reached the bottom step that itoccurred to him how very pleasant it would be to passthe vegetable patch on his walk to Hagrid’s. It was notstrictly on the way, but it seemed clear to Harry that

Page | 538 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

this was a whim on which he should act, so hedirected his feet immediately toward the vegetablepatch, where he was pleased, but not altogethersurprised, to find Professor Slughorn in conversationwith Professor Sprout. Harry lurked behind a lowstone wall, feeling at peace with the world andlistening to their conversation.

“I do thank you for taking the time, Pomona,”Slughorn was saying courteously, “most authoritiesagree that they are at their most efficacious if pickedat twilight.”

“Oh, I quite agree,” said Professor Sprout warmly.“That enough for you?”

“Plenty, plenty,” said Slughorn, who, Harry saw, wascarrying an armful of leafy plants. “This should allowfor a few leaves for each of my third years, and someto spare if anybody over-stews them. ... Well, goodevening to you, and many thanks again!”

Professor Sprout headed off into the gatheringdarkness in the direction of her greenhouses, andSlughorn directed his steps to the spot where Harrystood, invisible.

Seized with an immediate desire to reveal himself,Harry pulled off the cloak with a flourish.

“Good evening, Professor.”

“Merlin’s beard, Harry, you made me jump,” saidSlughorn, stopping dead in his tracks and lookingwary. “How did you get out of the castle?”

“I think Filch must’ve forgotten to lock the doors,”said Harry cheerfully, and was delighted to seeSlughorn scowl.

Page | 539 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll be reporting that man, he’s more concerned aboutlitter than proper security if you ask me. ... But whyare you out here, Harry?”

“Well, sir, it’s Hagrid,” said Harry, who knew that theright thing to do just now was to tell the truth. “He’spretty upset. ... But you won’t tell anyone, Professor?

I don’t want trouble for him. ...”

Slughorn’s curiosity was evidently aroused. “Well, Ican’t promise that,” he said gruffly. “But I know thatDumbledore trusts Hagrid to the hilt, so I’m sure hecan’t be up to anything very dreadful. ...”

“Well, it’s this giant spider, he’s had it for years. ... Itlived in the forest. ... It could talk and everything —”

“I heard rumors there were acromantulas in theforest,” said Slughorn softly, looking over at the massof black trees. “It’s true, then?”

“Yes,” said Harry. “But this one, Aragog, the first oneHagrid ever got, it died last night. He’s devastated. Hewants company while he buries it and I said I’d go.”

“Touching, touching,” said Slughorn absentmindedly,his large droopy eyes fixed upon the distant lights ofHagrid’s cabin. “But acromantula venom is veryvaluable ... If the beast only just died it might not yethave dried out. ... Of course, I wouldn’t want to doanything insensitive if Hagrid is upset ... but if therewas any way to procure some ... I mean, it’s almostimpossible to get venom from an acromantula whileit’s alive. ...”

Slughorn seemed to be talking more to himself thanHarry now.

Page | 540 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

"... seems an awful waste not to collect it ... might geta hundred Galleons a pint. ... To be frank, my salaryis not large. ...”

And now Harry saw clearly what was to be done.

“Well,” he said, with a most convincing hesitancy,“well, if you wanted to come, Professor, Hagrid wouldprobably be really pleased. ... Give Aragog a bettersend-off, you know ...”

“Yes, of course,” said Slughorn, his eyes nowgleaming with enthusiasm. “I tell you what, Harry, I’llmeet you down there with a bottle or two. ... We’lldrink the poor beast’s — well — not health — butwe’ll send it off in style, anyway, once it’s buried. AndI’ll change my tie, this one is a little exuberant for theoccasion. ...”

He bustled back into the castle, and Harry sped off toHagrid’s, delighted with himself.

“Yeh came,” croaked Hagrid, when he opened the doorand saw Harry emerging from the Invisibility Cloak infront of him.

“Yeah — Ron and Hermione couldn’t, though,” saidHarry. “They’re really sorry.”

“Don’ — don’ matter ... He’d’ve bin touched yeh’rehere, though, Harry. ...”

Hagrid gave a great sob. He had made himself a blackarmband out of what looked like a rag dipped in bootpolish, and his eyes were puffy, red, and swollen.Harry patted him consolingly on the elbow, which wasthe highest point of Hagrid he could easily reach.

“Where are we burying him?” he asked. “The forest?”

Page | 541 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Blimey, no,” said Hagrid, wiping his streaming eyeson the bottom of his shirt. “The other spiders won’ letme anywhere near their webs now Aragog’s gone.Turns out it was on’y on his orders they didn’ eat me!Can yeh believe that, Harry?”

The honest answer was “yes”; Harry recalled withpainful ease the scene when he and Ron had comeface-to-face with the acromantulas: They had beenquite clear that Aragog was the only thing thatstopped them from eating Hagrid.

“Never bin an area o’ the forest I couldn’ go before!”said Hagrid, shaking his head. “It wasn’ easy, gettin’Aragog’s body out o’ there, I can tell yeh — theyusually eat their dead, see. ... But I wanted ter give’im a nice burial ... a proper send-off ...”

He broke into sobs again and Harry resumed thepatting of his elbow, saying as he did so (for thepotion seemed to indicate that it was the right thingto do), “Professor Slughorn met me coming downhere, Hagrid.”

“Not in trouble, are yeh?” said Hagrid, looking up,alarmed. “Yeh shouldn’ be outta the castle in theevenin’, I know it, it’s my fault —”

“No, no, when he heard what I was doing he said he’dlike to come and pay his last respects to Aragog too,”said Harry. “He’s gone to change into something moresuitable, I think ... and he said he’d bring somebottles so we can drink to Aragog’s memory. ...

“Did he?” said Hagrid, looking both astonished andtouched. “Tha’s — tha’s righ’ nice of him, that is, an’not turnin’ yeh in either. I’ve never really had a lot terdo with Horace Slughorn before. ... Cornin’ ter see old

Page | 542 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Aragog off, though, eh? Well ... he’d’ve liked that,Aragog would. ...”

Harry thought privately that what Aragog would haveliked most about Slughorn was the ample amount ofedible flesh he provided, but he merely moved to therear window of Hagrid’s hut, where he saw the ratherhorrible sight of the enormous dead spider lying on itsback outside, its legs curled and tangled.

“Are we going to bury him here, Hagrid, in yourgarden?”

“Jus’ beyond the pumpkin patch, I thought,” saidHagrid in a choked voice. “I’ve already dug the — yehknow — grave. Jus’ thought we’d say a few nicethings over him — happy memories, yeh know —”

His voice quivered and broke. There was a knock onthe door, and he turned to answer it, blowing his noseon his great spotted handkerchief as he did so.Slughorn hurried over the threshold, several bottlesin his arms, and wearing a somber black cravat.

“Hagrid,” he said, in a deep, grave voice. “So verysorry to hear of your loss.”

“Tha’s very nice of yeh,” said Hagrid. “Thanks a lot.

An’ thanks fer not givin’ Harry detention neither. ...”

“Wouldn’t have dreamed of it,” said Slughorn. “Sadnight, sad night ... Where is the poor creature?”

“Out here,” said Hagrid in a shaking voice. “Shall we— shall we do it, then?”

The three of them stepped out into the back garden.The moon was glistening palely through the treesnow, and its rays mingled with the light spilling from

Page | 543 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid’s window to illuminate Aragog’s body lying onthe edge of a massive pit beside a ten-foot-highmound of freshly dug earth.

“Magnificent,” said Slughorn, approaching thespider’s head, where eight milky eyes stared blanklyat the sky and two huge, curved pincers shone,motionless, in the moonlight. Harry thought he heardthe tinkle of bottles as Slughorn bent over thepincers, apparently examining the enormous hairyhead.

“It’s not ev’ryone appreciates how beau’iful they are,”said Hagrid to Slughorn’s back, tears leaking from thecorners of his crinkled eyes. “I didn’ know yeh wereint’rested in creatures like Aragog, Horace.”

“Interested? My dear Hagrid, I revere them,” saidSlughorn, stepping back from the body. Harry sawthe glint of a bottle disappear beneath his cloak,though Hagrid, mopping his eyes once more, noticednothing. “Now ... shall we proceed to the burial?”

Hagrid nodded and moved forward. He heaved thegigantic spider into his arms and, with an enormousgrunt, rolled it into the dark pit. It hit the bottom witha rather horrible, crunchy thud. Hagrid started to cryagain.

“Of course, it’s difficult for you, who knew him best,”said Slughorn, who like Harry could reach no higherthan Hagrid’s elbow, but patted it all the same. “Whydon’t I say a few words?”

He must have got a lot of good quality venom fromAragog, Harry thought, for Slughorn wore a satisfiedsmirk as he stepped up to the rim of the pit and said,in a slow, impressive voice, “Farewell, Aragog, king ofarachnids, whose long and faithful friendship thosePage | 544 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

who knew you won’t forget! Though your body willdecay, your spirit lingers on in the quiet, web-spunplaces of your forest home. May your many-eyeddescendants ever flourish and your human friendsfind solace for the loss they have sustained.”

“Tha’was ... tha’was ... beau’iful!” howled Hagrid,and he collapsed onto the compost heap, cryingharder than ever.

“There, there,” said Slughorn, waving his wand sothat the huge pile of earth rose up and then fell, witha muffled sort of crash, onto the dead spider, forminga smooth mound. “Let’s get inside and have a drink.Get on his other side, Harry. ... That’s it. ... Up youcome, Hagrid ... Well done ...”

They deposited Hagrid in a chair at the table. Fang,who had been skulking in his basket during theburial, now came padding softly across to them andput his heavy head into Harry’s lap as usual.

Slughorn uncorked one of the bottles of wine he hadbrought.

“I have had it all tested for poison,” he assured Harry,pouring most of the first bottle into one of Hagrid’sbucket-sized mugs and handing it to Hagrid. “Had ahouse-elf taste every bottle after what happened toyour poor friend Rupert.”

Harry saw, in his mind’s eye, the expression onHermione’s face if she ever heard about this abuse ofhouse-elves, and decided never to mention it to her.

“One for Harry ...” said Slughorn, dividing a secondbottle between two mugs, "... and one for me. Well” —he raised his mug high — “to Aragog.”

“Aragog,” said Harry and Hagrid together.

Page | 545 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Both Slughorn and Hagrid drank deeply. Harry,however, with the way ahead illuminated for him byFelix Felicis, knew that he must not drink, so hemerely pretended to take a gulp and then set the mugback on the table before him.

“I had him from an egg, yeh know,” said Hagridmorosely. “Tiny little thing he was when he hatched.Bout the size of a Pekingese.”

“Sweet,” said Slughorn.

“Used ter keep him in a cupboard up at the schooluntil ... well ...”

Hagrid’s face darkened and Harry knew why: TomRiddle had contrived to have Hagrid thrown out ofschool, blamed for opening the Chamber of Secrets.Slughorn, however, did not seem to be listening; hewas looking up at the ceiling, from which a number ofbrass pots hung, and also a long, silky skein of brightwhite hair.

“That’s never unicorn hair, Hagrid?”

“Oh, yeah,” said Hagrid indifferently. “Gets pulled outof their tails, they catch it on branches an’ stuff in theforest, yeh know ...”

“But my dear chap, do you know how much that’sworth?”

“I use it fer bindin’ on bandages an’ stuff if a creaturegets injured,” said Hagrid, shrugging. “It’s dead useful... very strong, see.”

Slughorn took another deep draught from his mug,his eyes moving carefully around the cabin now,looking, Harry knew, for more treasures that he might

Page | 546 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

be able to convert into a plentiful supply of oak-matured mead, crystalized pineapple, and velvetsmoking jackets. He refilled Hagrid’s mug and hisown, and questioned him about the creatures thatlived in the forest these days and how Hagrid wasable to look after them all. Hagrid, becomingexpansive under the influence of the drink andSlughorn’s flattering interest, stopped mopping hiseyes and entered happily into a long explanation ofbowtruckle husbandry.

The Felix Felicis gave Harry a little nudge at thispoint, and he noticed that the supply of drink thatSlughorn had brought was running out fast. Harryhad not yet managed to bring off the Refilling Charmwithout saying the incantation aloud, but the ideathat he might not be able to do it tonight waslaughable: Indeed, Harry grinned to himself as,unnoticed by either Hagrid or Slughorn (nowswapping tales of the illegal trade in dragon eggs) hepointed his wand under the table at the emptyingbottles and they immediately began to refill.

After an hour or so, Hagrid and Slughorn beganmaking extravagant toasts: to Hogwarts, toDumbledore, to elf-made wine, and to —

“Harry Potter!” bellowed Hagrid, slopping some of hisfourteenth bucket of wine down his chin as hedrained it.

“Yes, indeed,” cried Slughorn a little thickly, “ParryOtter, the Chosen Boy Who — well — something ofthat sort,” he mumbled, and drained his mug too.

Not long after this, Hagrid became tearful again andpressed the whole unicorn tail upon Slughorn, whopocketed it with cries of, “To friendship! To generosity!To ten Galleons a hair!”

Page | 547 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

And for a while after that, Hagrid and Slughorn weresitting side by side, arms around each other, singinga slow sad song about a dying wizard called Odo.

“Aaargh, the good die young,” muttered Hagrid,slumping low onto the table, a little cross-eyed, whileSlughorn continued to warble the refrain. “Me dadwas no age ter go ... nor were yer mum an’ dad,Harry...”

Great fat tears oozed out of the corners of Hagrid’scrinkled eyes again; he grasped Harry’s arm andshook it.

“Bes’ wiz and witchard o’ their age I never knew ...terrible thing ... terrible thing ...”

And Odo the hero, they bore him back homeTo the place that he’d known as a lad,

sang Slughorn plaintively.

They laid him to rest with his hat inside outAnd his wand snapped in two, which was sad.

"... terrible,” Hagrid grunted, and his great shaggyhead rolled sideways onto his arms and he fell asleep,snoring deeply.

“Sorry,” said Slughorn with a hiccup. “Can’t carry atune to save my life.”

“Hagrid wasn’t talking about your singing,” said Harryquietly. “He was talking about my mum and daddying.”

“Oh,” said Slughorn, repressing a large belch. “Ohdear. Yes, that was — was terrible indeed. Terrible ...terrible ...”

Page | 548 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He looked quite at a loss for what to say, and resortedto refilling their mugs.

“I don’t — don’t suppose you remember it, Harry?” heasked awkwardly.

“No — well, I was only one when they died,” saidHarry, his eyes on the flame of the candle flickering inHagrid’s heavy snores. “But I’ve found out prettymuch what happened since. My dad died first. Didyou know that?”

“I — I didn’t,” said Slughorn in a hushed voice.

“Yeah ... Voldemort murdered him and then steppedover his body toward my mum,” said Harry.

Slughorn gave a great shudder, but he did not seemable to tear his horrified gaze away from Harry’s face.

“He told her to get out of the way,” said Harryremorselessly. “He told me she needn’t have died. Heonly wanted me. She could have run.”

“Oh dear,” breathed Slughorn. “She could have ... sheneedn’t ... That’s awful. ...”

“It is, isn’t it?” said Harry, in a voice barely more thana whisper. “But she didn’t move. Dad was alreadydead, but she didn’t want me to go too. She tried toplead with Voldemort ... but he just laughed. ...”

“That’s enough!” said Slughorn suddenly, raising ashaking hand. “Really, my dear boy, enough ... I’m anold man ... I don’t need to hear ... I don’t want to hear

“I forgot,” lied Harry, Felix Felicis leading him on.

“You liked her, didn’t you?”

Page | 549 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Liked her?” said Slughorn, his eyes brimming withtears once more. “I don’t imagine anyone who met herwouldn’t have liked her. ... Very brave ... Very funny...It was the most horrible thing. ...”

“But you won’t help her son,” said Harry. “She gaveme her life, but you won’t give me a memory.”

Hagrid’s rumbling snores filled the cabin. Harrylooked steadily into Slughorn’s tear-filled eyes. ThePotions master seemed unable to look away.

“Don’t say that,” he whispered. “It isn’t a question ...

If it were to help you, of course ... but no purpose canbe served ...”

“It can,” said Harry clearly. “Dumbledore needsinformation. I need information.”

He knew he was safe: Felix was telling him thatSlughorn would remember nothing of this in themorning. Looking Slughorn straight in the eye, Harryleaned forward a little.

“I am the Chosen One. I have to kill him. I need thatmemory.”

Slughorn turned paler than ever; his shiny foreheadgleamed with sweat.

“You are the Chosen One?”

“Of course I am,” said Harry calmly.

“But then ... my dear boy ... you’re asking a great deal... you’re asking me, in fact, to aid you in yourattempt to destroy —”

Page | 550 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You don’t want to get rid of the wizard who killed LilyEvans?”

“Harry, Harry, of course I do, but —”

“You’re scared he’ll find out you helped me?”

Slughorn said nothing; he looked terrified.

“Be brave like my mother, Professor. ...”

Slughorn raised a pudgy hand and pressed hisshaking fingers to his mouth; he looked for a momentlike an enormously overgrown baby.

“I am not proud ...” he whispered through his fingers.“I am ashamed of what — of what that memoryshows. ... I think I may have done great damage thatday. ...”

“You’d cancel out anything you did by giving me thememory,” said Harry. “It would be a very brave andnoble thing to do.”

Hagrid twitched in his sleep and snored on. Slughornand Harry stared at each other over the gutteringcandle. There was a long, long silence, but FelixFelicis told Harry not to break it, to wait.

Then, very slowly, Slughorn put his hand in hispocket and pulled out his wand. He put his otherhand inside his cloak and took out a small, emptybottle. Still looking into Harry’s eyes, Slughorntouched the tip of his wand to his temple andwithdrew it, so that a long, silver thread of memorycame away too, clinging to the wand tip. Longer andlonger the memory stretched until it broke andswung, silvery bright, from the wand. Slughornlowered it into the bottle where it coiled, then spread,Page | 551 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

swirling like gas. He corked the bottle with atrembling hand and then passed it across the table toHarry.

“Thank you very much, Professor.”

“You’re a good boy,” said Professor Slughorn, tearstrickling down his fat cheeks into his walrusmustache. “And you’ve got her eyes. ... Just don’tthink too badly of me once you’ve seen it. ...”

And he too put his head on his arms, gave a deepsigh, and fell asleep.

Page | 552 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





HORCRUXES

Harry could feel the Felix Felicis wearing off as hecrept back into the castle. The front door hadremained unlocked for him, but on the third floor hemet Peeves and only narrowly avoided detection bydiving sideways through one of his shortcuts. By thetime he got up to the portrait of the Fat Lady andpulled off his Invisibility Cloak, he was not surprisedto find her in a most unhelpful mood.

“What sort of time do you call this?”

“I’m really sorry — I had to go out for somethingimportant —”

“Well, the password changed at midnight, so you’lljust have to sleep in the corridor, won’t you?”

“You’re joking!” said Harry. “Why did it have tochange at midnight?”

Page | 553 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“That’s the way it is,” said the Fat Lady. “If you’reangry, go and take it up with the headmaster, he’s theone who’s tightened security.”

“Fantastic,” said Harry bitterly, looking around at thehard floor. “Really brilliant. Yeah, I would go and takeit up with Dumbledore if he was here, because he’sthe one who wanted me to —”

“He is here,” said a voice behind Harry. “ProfessorDumbledore returned to the school an hour ago.”

Nearly Headless Nick was gliding toward Harry, hishead wobbling as usual upon his ruff.

“I had it from the Bloody Baron, who saw him arrive,”said Nick. “He appeared, according to the Baron, to bein good spirits, though a little tired, of course.”

“Where is he?” said Harry, his heart leaping.

“Oh, groaning and clanking up on the AstronomyTower, it’s a favorite pastime of his —”

“Not the Bloody Baron — Dumbledore!”

“Oh — in his office,” said Nick. “I believe, from whatthe Baron said, that he had business to attend tobefore turning in —”

“Yeah, he has,” said Harry, excitement blazing in hischest at the prospect of telling Dumbledore he hadsecured the memory. He wheeled about and sprintedoff again, ignoring the Fat Lady who was calling afterhim.

“Come back! All right, I lied! I was annoyed you wokeme up! The password’s still ‘tapeworm’!”

Page | 554 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

But Harry was already hurtling back along thecorridor and within minutes, he was saying “toffeeeclairs” to Dumbledore’s gargoyle, which leapt aside,permitting Harry entrance onto the spiral staircase.

“Enter,” said Dumbledore when Harry knocked. Hesounded exhausted.

Harry pushed open the door. There was Dumbledore’soffice, looking the same as ever, but with black, star-strewn skies beyond the windows.

“Good gracious, Harry,” said Dumbledore in surprise.“To what do I owe this very late pleasure?”

“Sir — I’ve got it. I’ve got the memory from Slughorn.”

Harry pulled out the tiny glass bottle and showed it toDumbledore. For a moment or two, the headmasterlooked stunned. Then his face split in a wide smile.

“Harry, this is spectacular news! Very well doneindeed! I knew you could do it!”

All thought of the lateness of the hour apparentlyforgotten, he hurried around his desk, took the bottlewith Slughorn’s memory in his uninjured hand, andstrode over to the cabinet where he kept the Pensieve.

“And now,” said Dumbledore, placing the stone basinupon his desk and emptying the contents of the bottleinto it. “Now, at last, we shall see. Harry, quickly ...”

Harry bowed obediently over the Pensieve and felt hisfeet leave the office floor. ... Once again he fellthrough darkness and landed in Horace Slughorn’soffice many years before.

Page | 555 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There was the much younger Slughorn, with histhick, shiny, straw-colored hair and his gingery-blondmustache, sitting again in the comfortable wingedarmchair in his office, his feet resting upon a velvetpouffe, a small glass of wine in one hand, the otherrummaging in a box of crystalized pineapple. Andthere were the half-dozen teenage boys sitting aroundSlughorn with Tom Riddle in the midst of them,Marvolo’s gold-and-black ring gleaming on his finger.

Dumbledore landed beside Harry just as Riddleasked, “Sir, is it true that Professor Merrythought isretiring?”

“Tom, Tom, if I knew I couldn’t tell you,” saidSlughorn, wagging his finger reprovingly at Riddle,though winking at the same time. “I must say, I’d liketo know where you get your information, boy, moreknowledgeable than half the staff, you are.”

Riddle smiled; the other boys laughed and cast himadmiring looks.

“What with your uncanny ability to know things youshouldn’t, and your careful flattery of the people whomatter — thank you for the pineapple, by the way,you’re quite right, it is my favorite —”

Several of the boys tittered again.

“— I confidently expect you to rise to Minister ofMagic within twenty years. Fifteen, if you keepsending me pineapple, I have excellent contacts at theMinistry.”

Tom Riddle merely smiled as the others laughedagain. Harry noticed that he was by no means theeldest of the group of boys, but that they all seemedto look to him as their leader.

Page | 556 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t know that politics would suit me, sir,” he saidwhen the laughter had died away. “I don’t have theright kind of background, for one thing.”

A couple of the boys around him smirked at eachother. Harry was sure they were enjoying a privatejoke, undoubtedly about what they knew, orsuspected, regarding their gang leader’s famousancestor.

“Nonsense,” said Slughorn briskly, “couldn’t beplainer you come from decent Wizarding stock,abilities like yours. No, you’ll go far, Tom, I’ve neverbeen wrong about a student yet.”

The small golden clock standing upon Slughorn’sdesk chimed eleven o’clock behind him and he lookedaround.

“Good gracious, is it that time already? You’d betterget going, boys, or we’ll all be in trouble. Lestrange, Iwant your essay by tomorrow or it’s detention. Samegoes for you, Avery.”

One by one, the boys filed out of the room. Slughornheaved himself out of his armchair and carried hisempty glass over to his desk. A movement behind himmade him look around; Riddle was still standingthere.

“Look sharp, Tom, you don’t want to be caught out ofbed out of hours, and you a prefect ...”

“Sir, I wanted to ask you something.”

“Ask away, then, m’boy, ask away. ...”

“Sir, I wondered what you know about ... aboutHorcruxes?”

Page | 557 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Slughorn stared at him, his thick fingersabsentmindedly caressing the stem of his wine glass.

“Project for Defense Against the Dark Arts, is it?”

But Harry could tell that Slughorn knew perfectly wellthat this was not schoolwork.

“Not exactly, sir,” said Riddle. “I came across the termwhile reading and I didn’t fully understand it.”

“No ... well ... you’d be hard-pushed to find a book atHogwarts that’ll give you details on Horcruxes, Tom,that’s very Dark stuff, very Dark indeed,” saidSlughorn.

“But you obviously know all about them, sir? I mean,a wizard like you — sorry, I mean, if you can’t tell me,obviously — I just knew if anyone could tell me, youcould — so I just thought I’d ask —”

It was very well done, thought Harry, the hesitancy,the casual tone, the careful flattery, none of itoverdone. He, Harry, had had too much experience oftrying to wheedle information out of reluctant peoplenot to recognize a master at work. He could tell thatRiddle wanted the information very, very much;perhaps had been working toward this moment forweeks.

“Well,” said Slughorn, not looking at Riddle, butfiddling with the ribbon on top of his box ofcrystalized pineapple, “well, it can’t hurt to give youan overview, of course. Just so that you understandthe term. A Horcrux is the word used for an object inwhich a person has concealed part of their soul.”

“I don’t quite understand how that works, though,sir,” said Riddle.

Page | 558 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

His voice was carefully controlled, but Harry couldsense his excitement.

“Well, you split your soul, you see,” said Slughorn,“and hide part of it in an object outside the body.Then, even if one’s body is attacked or destroyed, onecannot die, for part of the soul remains earthboundand undamaged. But of course, existence in such aform ...”

Slughorn’s face crumpled and Harry found himselfremembering words he had heard nearly two yearsbefore: “I was ripped from my body, I was less thanspirit, less than the meanest ghost... but still, I wasalive.”

“... few would want it, Tom, very few. Death would bepreferable.”

But Riddle’s hunger was now apparent; hisexpression was greedy, he could no longer hide hislonging.

“How do you split your soul?”

“Well,” said Slughorn uncomfortably, “you mustunderstand that the soul is supposed to remain intactand whole. Splitting it is an act of violation, it isagainst nature.”

“But how do you do it?”

“By an act of evil — the supreme act of evil. Bycommitting murder. Killing rips the soul apart. Thewizard intent upon creating a Horcrux would use thedamage to his advantage: He would encase the tornportion —”

“Encase? But how — ?”

Page | 559 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“There is a spell, do not ask me, I don’t know!” saidSlughorn, shaking his head like an old elephantbothered by mosquitoes. “Do I look as though I havetried it — do I look like a killer?”

“No, sir, of course not,” said Riddle quickly. “I’m sorry...I didn’t mean to offend ...”

“Not at all, not at all, not offended,” said Slughorngruffly. “It’s natural to feel some curiosity about thesethings. ... Wizards of a certain caliber have alwaysbeen drawn to that aspect of magic. ...”

“Yes, sir,” said Riddle. “What I don’t understand,though —just out of curiosity — I mean, would oneHorcrux be much use? Can you only split your soulonce? Wouldn’t it be better, make you stronger, tohave your soul in more pieces, I mean, for instance,isn’t seven the most powerfully magical number,wouldn’t seven — ?”

“Merlin’s beard, Tom!” yelped Slughorn. “Seven! Isn’tit bad enough to think of killing one person? And inany case ... bad enough to divide the soul ... but torip it into seven pieces ...”

Slughorn looked deeply troubled now: He was gazingat Riddle as though he had never seen him plainlybefore, and Harry could tell that he was regrettingentering into the conversation at all.

“Of course,” he muttered, “this is all hypothetical,what we’re discussing, isn’t it? All academic ...”

“Yes, sir, of course,” said Riddle quickly.

“But all the same, Tom ... keep it quiet, what I’ve told— that’s to say, what we’ve discussed. Peoplewouldn’t like to think we’ve been chatting about

Page | 560 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Horcruxes. It’s a banned subject at Hogwarts, youknow. ... Dumbledore’s particularly fierce about it. ...”

“I won’t say a word, sir,” said Riddle, and he left, butnot before Harry had glimpsed his face, which wasfull of that same wild happiness it had worn when hehad first found out that he was a wizard, the sort ofhappiness that did not enhance his handsomefeatures, but made them, somehow, less human. ...

“Thank you, Harry,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Let usgo. ...” '

When Harry landed back on the office floorDumbledore was already sitting down behind hisdesk. Harry sat too and waited for Dumbledore tospeak.

“I have been hoping for this piece of evidence for avery long time,” said Dumbledore at last. “It confirmsthe theory on which I have been working, it tells methat I am right, and also how very far there is still togo. ...”

Harry suddenly noticed that every single one of theold headmasters and headmistresses in the portraitsaround the walls was awake and listening in on theirconversation. A corpulent, red-nosed wizard hadactually taken out an ear trumpet.

“Well, Harry,” said Dumbledore, “I am sure youunderstood the significance of what we just heard. Atthe same age as you are now, give or take a fewmonths, Tom Riddle was doing all he could to find outhow to make himself immortal.”

“You think he succeeded then, sir?” asked Harry. “Hemade a Horcrux? And that’s why he didn’t die when

Page | 561 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

he attacked me? He had a Horcrux hiddensomewhere? A bit of his soul was safe?”

“A bit ... or more,” said Dumbledore. “You heardVoldemort: What he particularly wanted from Horacewas an opinion on what would happen to the wizardwho created more than one Horcrux, what wouldhappen to the wizard so determined to evade deaththat he would be prepared to murder many times, riphis soul repeatedly, so as to store it in many,separately concealed Horcruxes. No book would havegiven him that information. As far as I know — as far,I am sure, as Voldemort knew — no wizard had everdone more than tear his soul in two.”

Dumbledore paused for a moment, marshaling histhoughts, and then said, “Four years ago, I receivedwhat I considered certain proof that Voldemort hadsplit his soul.”

“Where?” asked Harry “How?”

“You handed it to me, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Thediary, Riddle’s diary, the one giving instructions onhow to reopen the Chamber of Secrets.”

“I don’t understand, sir,” said Harry.

“Well, although I did not see the Riddle who came outof the diary, what you described to me was aphenomenon I had never witnessed. A mere memorystarting to act and think for itself? A mere memory,sapping the life out of the girl into whose hands it hadfallen? No, something much more sinister had livedinside that book. ... a fragment of soul, I was almostsure of it. The diary had been a Horcrux. But thisraised as many questions as it answered.

Page | 562 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“What intrigued and alarmed me most was that thatdiary had been intended as a weapon as much as asafeguard.”

“I still don’t understand,” said Harry.

“Well, it worked as a Horcrux is supposed to work —in other words, the fragment of soul concealed insideit was kept safe and had undoubtedly played its partin preventing the death of its owner. But there couldbe no doubt that Riddle really wanted that diary read,wanted the piece of his soul to inhabit or possesssomebody else, so that Slytherin’s monster would beunleashed again.”

“Well, he didn’t want his hard work to be wasted,”said Harry. “He wanted people to know he wasSlytherin’s heir, because he couldn’t take credit at thetime.”

“Quite correct,” said Dumbledore, nodding. “But don’tyou see, Harry, that if he intended the diary to bepassed to, or planted on, some future Hogwartsstudent, he was being remarkably blase about thatprecious fragment of his soul concealed within it. Thepoint of a Horcrux is, as Professor Slughornexplained, to keep part of the self hidden and safe,not to fling it into somebody else’s path and run therisk that they might destroy it — as indeed happened:That particular fragment of soul is no more; you sawto that.

“The careless way in which Voldemort regarded thisHorcrux seemed most ominous to me. It suggestedthat he must have made — or been planning to make— more Horcruxes, so that the loss of his first wouldnot be so detrimental. I did not wish to believe it, butnothing else seemed to make sense.

Page | 563 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Then you told me, two years later, that on the nightthat Voldemort returned to his body, he made a mostilluminating and alarming statement to his DeathEaters. % who have gone further than anybody alongthe path that leads to immortality.’ That was what youtold me he said. ‘Further than anybody,’ And I thoughtI knew what that meant, though the Death Eaters didnot. He was referring to his Horcruxes, Horcruxes inthe plural, Harry, which I do not believe any otherwizard has ever had. Yet it fitted: Lord Voldemort hasseemed to grow less human with the passing years,and the transformation he has undergone seemed tome to be only explicable if his soul was mutilatedbeyond the realms of what we might call ‘usual evil’

“So he’s made himself impossible to kill by murderingother people?” said Harry. “Why couldn’t he make aSorcerer’s Stone, or steal one, if he was so interestedin immortality?”

“Well, we know that he tried to do just that, five yearsago,” said Dumbledore. “But there are several reasonswhy, I think, a Sorcerer’s Stone would appeal lessthan Horcruxes to Lord Voldemort.

“While the Elixir of Life does indeed extend life, itmust be drunk regularly, for all eternity, if the drinkeris to maintain their immortality. Therefore, Voldemortwould be entirely dependent on the Elixir, and if itran out, or was contaminated, or if the Stone wasstolen, he would die just like any other man.Voldemort likes to operate alone, remember. I believethat he would have found the thought of beingdependent, even on the Elixir, intolerable. Of coursehe was prepared to drink it if it would take him out ofthe horrible part-life to which he was condemnedafter attacking you, but only to regain a body.Thereafter, I am convinced, he intended to continue toPage | 564 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

rely on his Horcruxes: He would need nothing more, ifonly he could regain a human form. He was alreadyimmortal, you see ... or as close to immortal as anyman can be.

“But now, Harry, armed with this information, thecrucial memory you have succeeded in procuring forus, we are closer to the secret of finishing LordVoldemort than anyone has ever been before. Youheard him, Harry: ‘Wouldn’t it be better, make youstronger, to have your soul in more pieces ... isn’tseven the most powerfully magical number ...’ Isn’tseven the most powerfully magical number. Yes, Ithink the idea of a seven-part soul would greatlyappeal to Lord Voldemort.”

“He made seven Horcruxes?” said Harry, horror-struck, while several of the portraits on the wallsmade similar noises of shock and outrage. “But theycould be anywhere in the world — hidden — buried orinvisible —”

“I am glad to see you appreciate the magnitude of theproblem,” said Dumbledore calmly. “But firstly, no,Harry, not seven Horcruxes: six. The seventh part ofhis soul, however maimed, resides inside hisregenerated body. That was the part of him that liveda spectral existence for so many years during hisexile; without that, he has no self at all. That seventhpiece of soul will be the last that anybody wishing tokill Voldemort must attack — the piece that lives inhis body.”

“But the six Horcruxes, then,” said Harry, a littledesperately, “how are we supposed to find them?”

“You are forgetting ... you have already destroyed oneof them. And I have destroyed another.”

Page | 565 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You have?” said Harry eagerly.

“Yes indeed,” said Dumbledore, and he raised hisblackened, burned-looking hand. “The ring, Harry.Marvolo’s ring. And a terrible curse there was upon ittoo. Had it not been — forgive me the lack of seemlymodesty — for my own prodigious skill, and forProfessor Snape’s timely action when I returned toHogwarts, desperately injured, I might not have livedto tell the tale. However, a withered hand does notseem an unreasonable exchange for a seventh ofVoldemort’s soul. The ring is no longer a Horcrux.”

“But how did you find it?”

“Well, as you now know, for many years I have madeit my business to discover as much as I can aboutVoldemort’s past life. I have traveled widely, visitingthose places he once knew. I stumbled across the ringhidden in the ruin of the Gaunts’ house. It seems thatonce Voldemort had succeeded in sealing a piece ofhis soul inside it, he did not want to wear it anymore.He hid it, protected by many powerful enchantments,in the shack where his ancestors had once lived(Morfin having been carted off to Azkaban, of course),never guessing that I might one day take the troubleto visit the ruin, or that I might be keeping an eyeopen for traces of magical concealment.

“However, we should not congratulate ourselves tooheartily. You destroyed the diary and I the ring, but ifwe are right in our theory of a seven-part soul, fourHorcruxes remain.”

“And they could be anything?” said Harry. “Theycould be old tin cans or, I dunno, empty potionbottles. ...”

Page | 566 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You are thinking of Portkeys, Harry, which must beordinary objects, easy to overlook. But would LordVoldemort use tin cans or old potion bottles to guardhis own precious soul? You are forgetting what I haveshowed you. Lord Voldemort liked to collect trophies,and he preferred objects with a powerful magicalhistory. His pride, his belief in his own superiority,his determination to carve for himself a startling placein magical history; these things suggest to me thatVoldemort would have chosen his Horcruxes withsome care, favoring objects worthy of the honor.”

“The diary wasn’t that special.”

“The diary, as you have said yourself, was proof thathe was the Heir of Slytherin; I am sure thatVoldemort considered it of stupendous importance.”

“So, the other Horcruxes?” said Harry. “Do you thinkyou know what they are, sir?”

“I can only guess,” said Dumbledore. “For the reasonsI have already given, I believe that Lord Voldemortwould prefer objects that, in themselves, have acertain grandeur. I have therefore trawled backthrough Voldemort’s past to see if I can find evidencethat such artifacts have disappeared around him.”

“The locket!” said Harry loudly. “Hufflepuff’s cup!”

“Yes,” said Dumbledore, smiling, “I would be preparedto bet — perhaps not my other hand — but a coupleof fingers, that they became Horcruxes three andfour. The remaining two, assuming again that hecreated a total of six, are more of a problem, but I willhazard a guess that, having secured objects fromHufflepuff and Slytherin, he set out to track downobjects owned by Gryffindor or Ravenclaw. Fourobjects from the four founders would, I am sure, havePage | 567 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

exerted a powerful pull over Voldemort’s imagination.

I cannot answer for whether he ever managed to findanything of Ravenclaw’s. I am confident, however,that the only known relic of Gryffindor remains safe.”

Dumbledore pointed his blackened fingers to the wallbehind him, where a ruby-encrusted sword reposedwithin a glass case.

“Do you think that’s why he really wanted to comeback to Hogwarts, sir?” said Harry. “To try and findsomething from one of the other founders?”

“My thoughts precisely,” said Dumbledore. “Butunfortunately, that does not advance us muchfurther, for he was turned away, or so I believe,without the chance to search the school. I am forcedto conclude that he never fulfilled his ambition ofcollecting four founders’ objects. He definitely had two— he may have found three — that is the best we cando for now.”

“Even if he got something of Ravenclaw’s or ofGryffindor’s, that leaves a sixth Horcrux,” said Harry,counting on his fingers. “Unless he got both?”

“I don’t think so,” said Dumbledore. “I think I knowwhat the sixth Horcrux is. I wonder what you will saywhen I confess that I have been curious for a whileabout the behavior of the snake, Nagini?”

“The snake?” said Harry, startled. “You can useanimals as Horcruxes?”

“Well, it is inadvisable to do so,” said Dumbledore,“because to confide a part of your soul to somethingthat can think and move for itself is obviously a veryrisky business. However, if my calculations arecorrect, Voldemort was still at least one Horcrux shortPage | 568 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

of his goal of six when he entered your parents’ housewith the intention of killing you.

“He seems to have reserved the process of makingHorcruxes for particularly significant deaths. Youwould certainly have been that. He believed that inkilling you, he was destroying the danger theprophecy had outlined. He believed he was makinghimself invincible. I am sure that he was intending tomake his final Horcrux with your death.

“As we know, he failed. After an interval of someyears, however, he used Nagini to kill an old Muggleman, and it might then have occurred to him to turnher into his last Horcrux. She underlines theSlytherin connection, which enhances LordVoldemort’s mystique; I think he is perhaps as fond ofher as he can be of anything; he certainly likes tokeep her close, and he seems to have an unusualamount of control over her, even for a Parselmouth.”

“So,” said Harry, “the diary’s gone, the ring’s gone.

The cup, the locket, and the snake are still intact,and you think there might be a Horcrux that wasonce Ravenclaw’s or Gryffindor’s?”

“An admirably succinct and accurate summary, yes,”said Dumbledore, bowing his head.

“So ... are you still looking for them, sir? Is that whereyou’ve been going when you’ve been leaving theschool?”

“Correct,” said Dumbledore. “I have been looking for avery long time. I think ... perhaps ... I may be close tofinding another one. There are hopeful signs.”

“And if you do,” said Harry quickly, “can I come withyou and help get rid of it?”

Page | 569 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore looked at Harry very intently for amoment before saying, “Yes, I think so.”

“I can?” said Harry, thoroughly taken aback.

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore, smiling slightly. “I thinkyou have earned that right.”

Harry felt his heart lift. It was very good not to hearwords of caution and protection for once. Theheadmasters and headmistresses around the wallsseemed less impressed by Dumbledore’s decision;Harry saw a few of them shaking their heads andPhineas Nigellus actually snorted.

“Does Voldemort know when a Horcrux is destroyed,sir? Can he feel it?” Harry asked, ignoring theportraits.

“A very interesting question, Harry. I believe not. Ibelieve that Voldemort is now so immersed in evil,and these crucial parts of himself have been detachedfor so long, he does not feel as we do. Perhaps, at thepoint of death, he might be aware of his loss ... but hewas not aware, for instance, that the diary had beendestroyed until he forced the truth out of LuciusMalfoy. When Voldemort discovered that the diaryhad been mutilated and robbed of all its powers, I amtold that his anger was terrible to behold.”

“But I thought he meant Lucius Malfoy to smuggle itinto Hogwarts?”

“Yes, he did, years ago, when he was sure he wouldbe able to create more Horcruxes, but still Lucius wassupposed to wait for Voldemort’s say-so, and he neverreceived it, for Voldemort vanished shortly after givinghim the diary.

Page | 570 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No doubt he thought that Lucius would not dare doanything with the Horcrux other than guard itcarefully, but he was counting too much uponLucius’s fear of a master who had been gone for yearsand whom Lucius believed dead. Of course, Luciusdid not know what the diary really was. I understandthat Voldemort had told him the diary would causethe Chamber of Secrets to reopen because it wascleverly enchanted. Had Lucius known he held aportion of his master’s soul in his hands, he wouldundoubtedly have treated it with more reverence —but instead he went ahead and carried out the oldplan for his own ends: By planting the diary uponArthur Weasley’s daughter, he hoped to discreditArthur and get rid of a highly incriminating magicalobject in one stroke. Ah, poor Lucius ... what withVoldemort’s fury about the fact that he threw awaythe Horcrux for his own gain, and the fiasco at theMinistry last year, I would not be surprised if he isnot secretly glad to be safe in Azkaban at themoment.”

Harry sat in thought for a moment, then asked, “So ifall of his Horcruxes are destroyed, Voldemort could bekilled?”

“Yes, I think so,” said Dumbledore. “Without hisHorcruxes, Voldemort will be a mortal man with amaimed and diminished soul. Never forget, though,that while his soul may be damaged beyond repair,his brain and his magical powers remain intact. It willtake uncommon skill and power to kill a wizard likeVoldemort even without his Horcruxes.”

“But I haven’t got uncommon skill and power,” saidHarry, before he could stop himself.

“Yes, you have,” said Dumbledore firmly. “You have apower that Voldemort has never had. You can —”

Page | 571 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I know!” said Harry impatiently. “I can love!” It wasonly with difficulty that he stopped himself adding,“Big deal!”

“Yes, Harry, you can love,” said Dumbledore, wholooked as though he knew perfectly well what Harryhad just refrained from saying. “Which, giveneverything that has happened to you, is a great andremarkable thing. You are still too young tounderstand how unusual you are, Harry.”

“So, when the prophecy says that I’ll have ‘power theDark Lord knows not,’ it just means — love?” askedHarry, feeling a little let down.

“Yes —just love,” said Dumbledore. “But Harry, neverforget that what the prophecy says is only significantbecause Voldemort made it so. I told you this at theend of last year. Voldemort singled you out as theperson who would be most dangerous to him — andin doing so, he made you the person who would bemost dangerous to him!”

“But it comes to the same —”

“No, it doesn’t!” said Dumbledore, sounding impatientnow. Pointing at Harry with his black, withered hand,he said, “You are setting too much store by theprophecy!”

“But,” spluttered Harry, “but you said the prophecymeans —”

“If Voldemort had never heard of the prophecy, wouldit have been fulfilled? Would it have meant anything?Of course not! Do you think every prophecy in theHall of Prophecy has been fulfilled?”

Page | 572 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But,” said Harry, bewildered, “but last year, you saidone of us would have to kill the other —”

“Harry, Harry, only because Voldemort made a graveerror, and acted on Professor Trelawney’s words! IfVoldemort had never murdered your father, would hehave imparted in you a furious desire for revenge? Ofcourse not! If he had not forced your mother to die foryou, would he have given you a magical protection hecould not penetrate? Of course not, Harry! Don’t yousee? Voldemort himself created his worst enemy, justas tyrants everywhere do! Have you any idea howmuch tyrants fear the people they oppress? All ofthem realize that, one day, amongst their manyvictims, there is sure to be one who rises againstthem and strikes back! Voldemort is no different!Always he was on the lookout for the one who wouldchallenge him. He heard the prophecy and he leaptinto action, with the result that he not onlyhandpicked the man most likely to finish him, hehanded him uniquely deadly weapons!”

“But —”

“It is essential that you understand this!” saidDumbledore, standing up and striding about theroom, his glittering robes swooshing in his wake;Harry had never seen him so agitated. “By attemptingto kill you, Voldemort himself singled out theremarkable person who sits here in front of me, andgave him the tools for the job! It is Voldemort’s faultthat you were able to see into his thoughts, hisambitions, that you even understand the snakelikelanguage in which he gives orders, and yet, Harry,despite your privileged insight into Voldemort’s world(which, incidentally, is a gift any Death Eater wouldkill to have), you have never been seduced by theDark Arts, never, even for a second, shown the

Page | 573 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

slightest desire to become one of Voldemort’sfollowers!”

“Of course I haven’t!” said Harry indignantly. “Hekilled my mum and dad!”

“You are protected, in short, by your ability to love!”said Dumbledore loudly. “The only protection that canpossibly work against the lure of power likeVoldemort’s! In spite of all the temptation you haveendured, all the suffering, you remain pure of heart,just as pure as you were at the age of eleven, whenyou stared into a mirror that reflected your heart’sdesire, and it showed you only the way to thwart LordVoldemort, and not immortality or riches. Harry, haveyou any idea how few wizards could have seen whatyou saw in that mirror? Voldemort should haveknown then what he was dealing with, but he did not!

“But he knows it now. You have flitted into LordVoldemort’s mind without damage to yourself, but hecannot possess you without enduring mortal agony,as he discovered in the Ministry. I do not think heunderstands why, Harry, but then, he was in such ahurry to mutilate his own soul, he never paused tounderstand the incomparable power of a soul that isuntarnished and whole.”

“But, sir,” said Harry, making valiant efforts not tosound argumentative, “it all comes to the same thing,doesn’t it? I’ve got to try and kill him, or —”

“Got to?” said Dumbledore. “Of course you’ve got to!But not because of the prophecy! Because you,yourself, will never rest until you’ve tried! We bothknow it! Imagine, please, just for a moment, that youhad never heard that prophecy! How would you feelabout Voldemort now? Think!”

Page | 574 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry watched Dumbledore striding up and down infront of him, and thought. He thought of his mother,his father, and Sirius. He thought of Cedric Diggory.He thought of all the terrible deeds he knew LordVoldemort had done. A flame seemed to leap insidehis chest, searing his throat.

“I’d want him finished,” said Harry quietly. “And I’dwant to do it.”

“Of course you would!” cried Dumbledore. “You see,the prophecy does not mean you have to do anything!But the prophecy caused Lord Voldemort to mark youas his equal. ... In other words, you are free to chooseyour way, quite free to turn your back on theprophecy! But Voldemort continues to set store by theprophecy. He will continue to hunt you ... whichmakes it certain, really, that —”

“That one of us is going to end up killing the other,”said Harry. “Yes.”

But he understood at last what Dumbledore had beentrying to tell him. It was, he thought, the differencebetween being dragged into the arena to face a battleto the death and walking into the arena with yourhead held high. Some people, perhaps, would say thatthere was little to choose between the two ways, butDumbledore knew — and so do I, thought Harry, witha rush of fierce pride, and so did my parents — thatthere was all the difference in the world.

Page | 575 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





SECTUMSEMPRA

Exhausted but delighted with his night’s work, Harrytold Ron and Hermione everything that had happenedduring next morning’s Charms lesson (having firstcast the Muffliato spell upon those nearest them).They were both satisfyingly impressed by the way hehad wheedled the memory out of Slughorn andpositively awed when he told them about Voldemort’sHorcruxes and Dumbledore’s promise to take Harryalong, should he find another one.

“Wow,” said Ron, when Harry had finally finishedtelling them everything; Ron was waving his wandvery vaguely in the direction of the ceiling withoutpaying the slightest bit of attention to what he wasdoing. “Wow. You’re actually going to go withDumbledore ... and try and destroy ... wow.”

“Ron, you’re making it snow,” said Hermionepatiently, grabbing his wrist and redirecting his wandaway from the ceiling from which, sure enough, largewhite flakes had started to fall. Lavender Brown,

Page | 576 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry noticed, glared at Hermione from a neighboringtable through very red eyes, and Hermioneimmediately let go of Ron’s arm.

“Oh yeah,” said Ron, looking down at his shoulders invague surprise. “Sorry ... looks like we’ve all gothorrible dandruff now. ...”

He brushed some of the fake snow off Hermione’sshoulder. Lavender burst into tears. Ron lookedimmensely guilty and turned his back on her.

“We split up,” he told Harry out of the corner of hismouth. “Last night. When she saw me coming out ofthe dormitory with Hermione. Obviously she couldn’tsee you, so she thought it had just been the two ofus.”

“Ah,” said Harry. “Well — you don’t mind it’s over, doyou?”

“No,” Ron admitted. “It was pretty bad while she wasyelling, but at least I didn’t have to finish it.”

“Coward,” said Hermione, though she looked amused.“Well, it was a bad night for romance all around.Ginny and Dean split up too, Harry.”

Harry thought there was a rather knowing look in hereye as she told him that, but she could not possiblyknow that his insides were suddenly dancing theconga. Keeping his face as immobile and his voice asindifferent as he could, he asked, “How come?”

“Oh, something really silly ... She said he was alwaystrying to help her through the portrait hole, like shecouldn’t climb in herself ... but they’ve been a bitrocky for ages.”

Page | 577 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry glanced over at Dean on the other side of theclassroom. He certainly looked unhappy.

“Of course, this puts you in a bit of a dilemma,doesn’t it?” said Hermione.

“What d’you mean?” said Harry quickly.

“The Quidditch team,” said Hermione. “If Ginny andDean aren’t speaking ...”

“Oh — oh yeah,” said Harry.

“Flitwick,” said Ron in a warning tone. The tiny littleCharms master was bobbing his way toward them,and Hermione was the only one who had managed toturn vinegar into wine; her glass flask was full of deepcrimson liquid, whereas the contents of Harry’s andRon’s were still murky brown.

“Now, now, boys,” squeaked Professor Flitwickreproachfully. “A little less talk, a little more action ...Let me see you try. ...”

Together they raised their wands, concentrating withall their might, and pointed them at their flasks.Harry’s vinegar turned to ice; Ron’s flask exploded.

“Yes ... for homework,” said Professor Flitwick,reemerging from under the table and pulling shardsof glass out of the top of his hat, “practice.”

They had one of their rare joint free periods afterCharms and walked back to the common roomtogether. Ron seemed to be positively lightheartedabout the end of his relationship with Lavender, andHermione seemed cheery too, though when askedwhat she was grinning about she simply said, “It’s a

Page | 578 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

nice day.” Neither of them seemed to have noticedthat a fierce battle was raging inside Harry’s brain:

She’s Ron’s sister.

But she’s ditched Dean!

She’s still Ron’s sister.

I’m his best mate!

That’ll make it worse.

If I talked to him first —

He’d hit you.

What if I don’t care?

He’s your best mate\

Harry barely noticed that they were climbing throughthe portrait hole into the sunny common room, andonly vaguely registered the small group of seventhyears clustered together there, until Hermione cried,“Katie! You’re back! Are you okay?”

Harry stared: It was indeed Katie Bell, lookingcompletely healthy and surrounded by her jubilantfriends.

“I’m really well!” she said happily. “They let me out ofSt. Mungo’s on Monday, I had a couple of days athome with Mum and Dad and then came back herethis morning. Leanne was just telling me aboutMcLaggen and the last match, Harry. ...”

“Yeah,” said Harry, “well, now you’re back and Ron’sfit, we’ll have a decent chance of thrashing

Page | 579 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ravenclaw, which means we could still be in therunning for the Cup. Listen, Katie ...”

He had to put the question to her at once; hiscuriosity even drove Ginny temporarily from hisbrain. He dropped his voice as Katie’s friends startedgathering up their things; apparently they were latefor Transfiguration.

"... that necklace ... can you remember who gave it toyou now?”

“No,” said Katie, shaking her head ruefully.“Everyone’s been asking me, but I haven’t got a clue.The last thing I remember was walking into the ladies’in the Three Broomsticks.”

“You definitely went into the bathroom, then?” saidHermione.

“Well, I know I pushed open the door,” said Katie, “soI suppose whoever Imperiused me was standing justbehind it. After that, my memory’s a blank untilabout two weeks ago in St. Mungo’s. Listen, I’d bettergo, I wouldn’t put it past McGonagall to give me lineseven if it is my first day back. ...”

She caught up her bag and books and hurried afterher friends, leaving Harry, Ron, and Hermione to sitdown at a window table and ponder what she had toldthem.

“So it must have been a girl or a woman who gaveKatie the necklace,” said Hermione, “to be in theladies’ bathroom.”

“Or someone who looked like a girl or a woman,” saidHarry. “Don’t forget, there was a cauldron full of

Page | 580 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Polyjuice Potion at Hogwarts. We know some of it gotstolen. ...”

In his mind’s eye, he watched a parade of Crabbesand Goyles prance past, all transformed into girls.

“I think I’m going to take another swig of Felix,” saidHarry, “and have a go at the Room of Requirementagain.”

“That would be a complete waste of potion,” saidHermione flatly, putting down the copy of Spellman’sSyllabary she had just taken out of her bag. “Luckcan only get you so far, Harry. The situation withSlughorn was different; you always had the ability topersuade him, you just needed to tweak thecircumstances a bit. Luck isn’t enough to get youthrough a powerful enchantment, though. Don’t gowasting the rest of that potion! You’ll need all the luckyou can get if Dumbledore takes you along with him...” She dropped her voice to a whisper.

“Couldn’t we make some more?” Ron asked Harry,ignoring Hermione. “It’d be great to have a stock of it.... Have a look in the book ...”

Harry pulled his copy of Advanced Potion-Making outof his bag and looked up Felix Felicis.

“Blimey, it’s seriously complicated,” he said, runningan eye down the list of ingredients. “And it takes sixmonths ... You’ve got to let it stew. ...”

“Typical,” said Ron.

Harry was about to put his book away again when henoticed the corner of a page folded down; turning toit, he saw the Sectumsempra spell, captioned “ForEnemies,” that he had marked a few weeks

Page | 581 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

previously. He had still not found out what it did,mainly because he did not want to test it aroundHermione, but he was considering trying it out onMcLaggen next time he came up behind himunawares.

The only person who was not particularly pleased tosee Katie Bell back at school was Dean Thomas,because he would no longer be required to fill herplace as Chaser. He took the blow stoically enoughwhen Harry told him, merely grunting and shrugging,but Harry had the distinct feeling as he walked awaythat Dean and Seamus were muttering mutinouslybehind his back.

The following fortnight saw the best Quidditchpractices Harry had known as Captain. His team wasso pleased to be rid of McLaggen, so glad to haveKatie back at last, that they were flying extremelywell.

Ginny did not seem at all upset about the breakupwith Dean; on the contrary, she was the life and soulof the team. Her imitations of Ron anxiously bobbingup and down in front of the goal posts as the Quafflesped toward him, or of Harry bellowing orders atMcLaggen before being knocked out cold, kept themall highly amused. Harry, laughing with the others,was glad to have an innocent reason to look at Ginny;he had received several more Bludger injuries duringpractice because he had not been keeping his eyes onthe Snitch.

The battle still raged inside his head: Ginny or Ron?Sometimes he thought that the post-Lavender Ronmight not mind too much if he asked Ginny out, butthen he remembered Ron’s expression when he hadseen her kissing Dean, and was sure that Ron would

Page | 582 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

consider it base treachery if Harry so much as heldher hand. ...

Yet Harry could not help himself talking to Ginny,laughing with her, walking back from practice withher; however much his conscience ached, he foundhimself wondering how best to get her on her own. Itwould have been ideal if Slughorn had given anotherof his little parties, for Ron would not be around —but unfortunately, Slughorn seemed to have giventhem up. Once or twice Harry considered asking forHermione’s help, but he did not think he could standseeing the smug look on her face; he thought hecaught it sometimes when Hermione spotted himstaring at Ginny or laughing at her jokes. And tocomplicate matters, he had the nagging worry that ifhe didn’t do it, somebody else was sure to ask Ginnyout soon: He and Ron were at least agreed on the factthat she was too popular for her own good.

All in all, the temptation to take another gulp of FelixFelicis was becoming stronger by the day, for surelythis was a case for, as Hermione put it, “tweaking thecircumstances”? The balmy days slid gently throughMay, and Ron seemed to be there at Harry’s shoulderevery time he saw Ginny. Harry found himself longingfor a stroke of luck that would somehow cause Ron torealize that nothing would make him happier than hisbest friend and his sister falling for each other and toleave them alone together for longer than a fewseconds. There seemed no chance of either while thefinal Quidditch game of the season was looming; Ronwanted to talk tactics with Harry all the time and hadlittle thought for anything else.

Ron was not unique in this respect; interest in theGryffindor-Ravenclaw game was running extremelyhigh throughout the school, for the match woulddecide the Championship, which was still wide open.

Page | 583 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

If Gryffindor beat Ravenclaw by a margin of threehundred points (a tall order, and yet Harry had neverknown his team to fly better) then they would win theChampionship. If they won by less than threehundred points, they would come second toRavenclaw; if they lost by a hundred points theywould be third behind Hufflepuff and if they lost bymore than a hundred, they would be in fourth placeand nobody, Harry thought, would ever, ever let himforget that it had been he who had captainedGryffindor to their first bottom-of-the-table defeat intwo centuries.

The run-up to this crucial match had all the usualfeatures: members of rival Houses attempting tointimidate opposing teams in the corridors;unpleasant chants about individual players beingrehearsed loudly as they passed; the team membersthemselves either swaggering around enjoying all theattention or else dashing into bathrooms betweenclasses to throw up. Somehow, the game had becomeinextricably linked in Harry’s mind with success orfailure in his plans for Ginny. He could not helpfeeling that if they won by more than three hundredpoints, the scenes of euphoria and a nice loud after-match party might be just as good as a hearty swig ofFelix Felicis.

In the midst of all his preoccupations, Harry had notforgotten his other ambition: finding out what Malfoywas up to in the Room of Requirement. He was stillchecking the Marauder’s Map, and as he was unableto locate Malfoy on it, deduced that Malfoy was stillspending plenty of time within the room. AlthoughHarry was losing hope that he would ever succeed ingetting inside the Room of Requirement, he attemptedit whenever he was in the vicinity, but no matter howhe reworded his request, the wall remained firmlydoorless.

Page | 584 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

A few days before the match against Ravenclaw,

Harry found himself walking down to dinner alonefrom the common room, Ron having rushed off into anearby bathroom to throw up yet again, andHermione having dashed off to see Professor Vectorabout a mistake she thought she might have made inher last Arithmancy essay. More out of habit thananything, Harry made his usual detour along theseventh-floor corridor, checking the Marauder’s Mapas he went. For a moment he could not find Malfoyanywhere and assumed he must indeed be inside theRoom of Requirement again, but then he saw Malfoy’stiny, labeled dot standing in a boys’ bathroom on thefloor below, accompanied, not by Crabbe or Goyle,but by Moaning Myrtle.

Harry only stopped staring at this unlikely couplingwhen he walked right into a suit of armor. The loudcrash brought him out of his reverie; hurrying fromthe scene lest Filch turn up, he dashed down themarble staircase and along the passageway below.Outside the bathroom, he pressed his ear against thedoor. He could not hear anything. He very quietlypushed the door open.

Draco Malfoy was standing with his back to the door,his hands clutching either side of the sink, his white-blond head bowed.

“Don’t,” crooned Moaning Myrtle’s voice from one ofthe cubicles. “Don’t ... tell me what’s wrong ... I canhelp you. ...”

“No one can help me,” said Malfoy. His whole bodywas shaking. “I can’t do it. ... I can’t. ... It won’t work... and unless I do it soon ... he says he’ll kill me. ...”

And Harry realized, with a shock so huge it seemed toroot him to the spot, that Malfoy was crying —

Page | 585 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

actually crying — tears streaming down his pale faceinto the grimy basin. Malfoy gasped and gulped andthen, with a great shudder, looked up into thecracked mirror and saw Harry staring at him over hisshoulder.

Malfoy wheeled around, drawing his wand.Instinctively, Harry pulled out his own. Malfoy’s hexmissed Harry by inches, shattering the lamp on thewall beside him; Harry threw himself sideways,thought Levicorpus\ and flicked his wand, but Malfoyblocked the jinx and raised his wand for another —

“No! No! Stop it!” squealed Moaning Myrtle, her voiceechoing loudly around the tiled room. “Stop! STOP!”

There was a loud bang and the bin behind Harryexploded; Harry attempted a Leg-Locker Curse thatbackfired off the wall behind Malfoy’s ear andsmashed the cistern beneath Moaning Myrtle, whoscreamed loudly; water poured everywhere and Harryslipped as Malfoy, his face contorted, cried, “Cruci—”

“SECTUMSEMPRAl” bellowed Harry from the floor,waving his wand wildly.

Blood spurted from Malfoy’s face and chest as thoughhe had been slashed with an invisible sword. Hestaggered backward and collapsed onto thewaterlogged floor with a great splash, his wand fallingfrom his limp right hand.

“No —” gasped Harry.

Slipping and staggering, Harry got to his feet andplunged toward Malfoy, whose face was now shiningscarlet, his white hands scrabbling at his blood-soaked chest.

Page | 586 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No — I didn’t —”

Harry did not know what he was saying; he fell to hisknees beside Malfoy, who was shaking uncontrollablyin a pool of his own blood. Moaning Myrtle let out adeafening scream: “MURDER! MURDER IN THEBATHROOM! MURDER!”

The door banged open behind Harry and he lookedup, terrified: Snape had burst into the room, his facelivid. Pushing Harry roughly aside, he knelt overMalfoy, drew his wand, and traced it over the deepwounds Harry’s curse had made, muttering anincantation that sounded almost like song. The flowof blood seemed to ease; Snape wiped the residuefrom Malfoy’s face and repeated his spell. Now thewounds seemed to be knitting.

Harry was still watching, horrified by what he haddone, barely aware that he too was soaked in bloodand water. Moaning Myrtle was still sobbing andwailing overhead. When Snape had performed hiscountercurse for the third time, he half-lifted Malfoyinto a standing position.

“You need the hospital wing. There may be a certainamount of scarring, but if you take dittanyimmediately we might avoid even that. ... Come. ...”

He supported Malfoy across the bathroom, turning atthe door to say in a voice of cold fury, “And you,

Potter ... You wait here for me.”

It did not occur to Harry for a second to disobey. Hestood up slowly, shaking, and looked down at the wetfloor. There were bloodstains floating like crimsonflowers across its surface. He could not even find it inhimself to tell Moaning Myrtle to be quiet, as she

Page | 587 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

continued to wail and sob with increasingly evidentenjoyment.

Snape returned ten minutes later. He stepped into thebathroom and closed the door behind him.

“Go,” he said to Myrtle, and she swooped back intoher toilet at once, leaving a ringing silence behindher.

“I didn’t mean it to happen,” said Harry at once. Hisvoice echoed in the cold, watery space. “I didn’t knowwhat that spell did.”

But Snape ignored this. “Apparently I underestimatedyou, Potter,” he said quietly. “Who would havethought you knew such Dark Magic? Who taught youthat spell?”

“I — read about it somewhere.”

“Where?”

“It was — a library book,” Harry invented wildly. “Ican’t remember what it was call —”

“Liar,” said Snape. Harry’s throat went dry. He knewwhat Snape was going to do and he had never beenable to prevent it. ...

The bathroom seemed to shimmer before his eyes; hestruggled to block out all thought, but try as hemight, the Half-Blood Prince’s copy of AdvancedPotion-Making swam hazily to the forefront of hismind.

And then he was staring at Snape again, in the midstof this wrecked, soaked bathroom. He stared into

Page | 588 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Snape’s black eyes, hoping against hope that Snapehad not seen what he feared, but —

“Bring me your schoolbag,” said Snape softly, “and allof your schoolbooks. All of them. Bring them to mehere. Now!”

There was no point arguing. Harry turned at once andsplashed out of the bathroom. Once in the corridor,he broke into a run toward Gryffindor Tower. Mostpeople were walking the other way; they gaped at him,drenched in water and blood, but he answered noneof the questions fired at him as he ran past.

He felt stunned; it was as though a beloved pet hadturned suddenly savage; what had the Prince beenthinking to copy such a spell into his book? And whatwould happen when Snape saw it? Would he tellSlughorn — Harry’s stomach churned — how Harryhad been achieving such good results in Potions allyear? Would he confiscate or destroy the book thathad taught Harry so much ... the book that hadbecome a kind of guide and friend? Harry could notlet it happen. ... He could not ...

“Where Ve you — ? Why are you soaking — ? Is thatblood?”

Ron was standing at the top of the stairs, lookingbewildered at the sight of Harry.

“I need your book,” Harry panted. “Your Potions book.Quick ... give it to me ...”

“But what about the Half-Blood —”

“I’ll explain later!”

Page | 589 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Ron pulled his copy of Advanced Potion-Making out ofhis bag and handed it over; Harry sprinted off pasthim and back to the common room. Here, he seizedhis schoolbag, ignoring the amazed looks of severalpeople who had already finished their dinner, threwhimself back out of the portrait hole, and hurtled offalong the seventh-floor corridor.

He skidded to a halt beside the tapestry of dancingtrolls, closed his eyes, and began to walk.

I need a place to hide my book. ... I need a place tohide my book. ... I need a place to hide my book. ...

Three times he walked up and down in front of thestretch of blank wall. When he opened his eyes, thereit was at last: the door to the Room of Requirement.Harry wrenched it open, flung himself inside, andslammed it shut.

He gasped. Despite his haste, his panic, his fear ofwhat awaited him back in the bathroom, he could nothelp but be overawed by what he was looking at. Hewas standing in a room the size of a large cathedral,whose high windows were sending shafts of lightdown upon what looked like a city with toweringwalls, built of what Harry knew must be objectshidden by generations of Hogwarts inhabitants. Therewere alleyways and roads bordered by teetering pilesof broken and damaged furniture, stowed away,perhaps, to hide the evidence of mishandled magic, orelse hidden by castle-proud house-elves. There werethousands and thousands of books, no doubt bannedor graffitied or stolen. There were winged catapultsand Fanged Frisbees, some still with enough life inthem to hover halfheartedly over the mountains ofother forbidden items; there were chipped bottles ofcongealed potions, hats, jewels, cloaks; there werewhat looked like dragon eggshells, corked bottlesPage | 590 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

whose contents still shimmered evilly, several rustingswords, and a heavy, bloodstained axe.

Harry hurried forward into one of the many alleywaysbetween all this hidden treasure. He turned right pastan enormous stuffed troll, ran on a short way, took aleft at the broken Vanishing Cabinet in whichMontague had got lost the previous year, finallypausing beside a large cupboard that seemed to havehad acid thrown at its blistered surface. He openedone of the cupboard’s creaking doors: It had alreadybeen used as a hiding place for something in a cagethat had long since died; its skeleton had five legs. Hestuffed the Half-Blood Prince’s book behind the cageand slammed the door. He paused for a moment, hisheart thumping horribly, gazing around at all theclutter. ... Would he be able to find this spot againamidst all this junk? Seizing the chipped bust of anugly old warlock from on top of a nearby crate, hestood it on top of the cupboard where the book wasnow hidden, perched a dusty old wig and a tarnishedtiara on the statue’s head to make it more distinctive,then sprinted back through the alleyways of hiddenjunk as fast as he could go, back to the door, backout onto the corridor, where he slammed the doorbehind him, and it turned at once back into stone.

Harry ran flat-out toward the bathroom on the floorbelow, cramming Ron’s copy of Advanced Potion-Making into his bag as he did so. A minute later, hewas back in front of Snape, who held out his handwordlessly for Harry’s schoolbag. Harry handed itover, panting, a searing pain in his chest, and waited.

One by one, Snape extracted Harry’s books andexamined them. Finally, the only book left was thePotions book, which he looked at very carefully beforespeaking.

Page | 591 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“This is your copy of Advanced Potion-Making, is it,Potter?”

“Yes,” said Harry, still breathing hard.

“You’re quite sure of that, are you, Potter?”

“Yes,” said Harry, with a touch more defiance.

“This is the copy of Advanced Potion-Making that youpurchased from Flourish and Blotts?”

“Yes,” said Harry firmly.

“Then why,” asked Snape, “does it have the name‘Roonil Wazlib’ written inside the front cover?”

Harry’s heart missed a beat. “That’s my nickname,”he said.

“Your nickname,” repeated Snape.

“Yeah ... that’s what my friends call me,” said Harry.

“I understand what a nickname is,” said Snape. Thecold, black eyes were boring once more into Harry’s;he tried not to look into them. Close your mind. ...Close your mind. ... But he had never learned how todo it properly. ...

“Do you know what I think, Potter?” said Snape, veryquietly. “I think that you are a liar and a cheat andthat you deserve detention with me every Saturdayuntil the end of term. What do you think, Potter?”

“I — I don’t agree, sir,” said Harry, still refusing tolook into Snape’s eyes.

Page | 592 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, we shall see how you feel after yourdetentions,” said Snape. “Ten o’clock Saturdaymorning, Potter. My office.”

“But sir ...” said Harry, looking up desperately.“Quidditch ... the last match of the ...”

“Ten o’clock,” whispered Snape, with a smile thatshowed his yellow teeth. “Poor Gryffindor ... fourthplace this year, I fear ...”

And he left the bathroom without another word,leaving Harry to stare into the cracked mirror, feelingsicker, he was sure, than Ron had ever felt in his life.

“I won’t say ‘I told you so,’ ” said Hermione, an hourlater in the common room.

“Leave it, Hermione,” said Ron angrily.

Harry had never made it to dinner; he had no appetiteat all. He had just finished telling Ron, Hermione, andGinny what had happened, not that there seemed tohave been much need. The news had traveled veryfast: Apparently Moaning Myrtle had taken it uponherself to pop up in every bathroom in the castle totell the story; Malfoy had already been visited in thehospital wing by Pansy Parkinson, who had lost notime in vilifying Harry far and wide, and Snape hadtold the staff precisely what had happened. Harry hadalready been called out of the common room toendure fifteen highly unpleasant minutes in thecompany of Professor McGonagall, who had told himhe was lucky not to have been expelled and that shesupported wholeheartedly Snape’s punishment ofdetention every Saturday until the end of term.

Page | 593 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I told you there was something wrong with thatPrince person,” Hermione said, evidently unable tostop herself. “And I was right, wasn’t I?”

“No, I don’t think you were,” said Harry stubbornly.

He was having a bad enough time without Hermionelecturing him; the looks on the Gryffindor team’sfaces when he had told them he would not be able toplay on Saturday had been the worst punishment ofall. He could feel Ginny’s eyes on him now but did notmeet them; he did not want to see disappointment oranger there. He had just told her that she would beplaying Seeker on Saturday and that Dean would berejoining the team as Chaser in her place. Perhaps, ifthey won, Ginny and Dean would make up during thepost-match euphoria. ... The thought went throughHarry like an icy knife. ...

“Harry,” said Hermione, “how can you still stick upfor that book when that spell —”

“Will you stop harping on about the book!” snappedHarry. “The Prince only copied it out! It’s not like hewas advising anyone to use it! For all we know, hewas making a note of something that had been usedagainst him!”

“I don’t believe this,” said Hermione. “You’re actuallydefending —”

“I’m not defending what I did!” said Harry quickly. “Iwish I hadn’t done it, and not just because I’ve gotabout a dozen detentions. You know I wouldn’t’veused a spell like that, not even on Malfoy, but youcan’t blame the Prince, he hadn’t written ‘try this out,it’s really good’ — he was just making notes forhimself, wasn’t he, not for anyone else. ...”

Page | 594 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Are you telling me,” said Hermione, “that you’regoing to go back — ?”

“And get the book? Yeah, I am,” said Harry forcefully.“Listen, without the Prince I’d never have won theFelix Felicis. I’d never have known how to save Ronfrom poisoning, I’d never have —”

“— got a reputation for Potions brilliance you don’tdeserve,” said Hermione nastily.

“Give it a rest, Hermione!” said Ginny, and Harry wasso amazed, so grateful, he looked up. “By the soundof it, Malfoy was trying to use an Unforgivable Curse,you should be glad Harry had something good up hissleeve!”

“Well, of course I’m glad Harry wasn’t cursed!” saidHermione, clearly stung. “But you can’t call thatSectumsempra spell good, Ginny, look where it’slanded him! And I’d have thought, seeing what thishas done to your chances in the match —”

“Oh, don’t start acting as though you understandQuidditch,” snapped Ginny, “you’ll only embarrassyourself.”

Harry and Ron stared: Hermione and Ginny, who hadalways got on together very well, were now sittingwith their arms folded, glaring in opposite directions.Ron looked nervously at Harry, then snatched up abook at random and hid behind it. Harry, however,little though he knew he deserved it, felt unbelievablycheerful all of a sudden, even though none of themspoke again for the rest of the evening.

His lightheartedness was short-lived. There wereSlytherin taunts to be endured next day, not tomention much anger from fellow Gryffindors, who

Page | 595 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

were most unhappy that their Captain had gothimself banned from the final match of the season. BySaturday morning, whatever he might have toldHermione, Harry would have gladly exchanged all theFelix Felicis in the world to be walking down to theQuidditch pitch with Ron, Ginny, and the others. Itwas almost unbearable to turn away from the mass ofstudents streaming out into the sunshine, all of themwearing rosettes and hats and brandishing bannersand scarves, to descend the stone steps into thedungeons and walk until the distant sounds of thecrowd were quite obliterated, knowing that he wouldnot be able to hear a word of commentary or a cheeror groan.

“Ah, Potter,” said Snape, when Harry had knocked onhis door and entered the unpleasantly familiar officethat Snape, despite teaching floors above now, hadnot vacated; it was as dimly lit as ever and the sameslimy dead objects were suspended in colored potionsall around the walls. Ominously, there were manycobwebbed boxes piled on a table where Harry wasclearly supposed to sit; they had an aura of tedious,hard, and pointless work about them.

“Mr. Filch has been looking for someone to clear outthese old files,” said Snape softly. “They are therecords of other Hogwarts wrongdoers and theirpunishments. Where the ink has grown faint, or thecards have suffered damage from mice, we would likeyou to copy out the crimes and punishments afreshand, making sure that they are in alphabetical order,replace them in the boxes. You will not use magic.”

“Right, Professor,” said Harry, with as much contemptas he could put into the last three syllables.

“I thought you could start,” said Snape, a malicioussmile on his lips, “with boxes one thousand and

Page | 596 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

twelve to one thousand and fifty-six. You will findsome familiar names in there, which should addinterest to the task. Here, you see ...”

He pulled out a card from one of the topmost boxeswith a flourish and read, “ ‘James Potter and SiriusBlack. Apprehended using an illegal hex upon BertramAubrey. Aubrey’s head twice normal size. Doubledetention.’ ” Snape sneered. “It must be such acomfort to think that, though they are gone, a recordof their great achievements remains. ...”

Harry felt the familiar boiling sensation in the pit ofhis stomach. Biting his tongue to prevent himselfretaliating, he sat down in front of the boxes andpulled one toward him.

It was, as Harry had anticipated, useless, boringwork, punctuated (as Snape had clearly planned) withthe regular jolt in the stomach that meant he had justread his father or Sirius’s names, usually coupledtogether in various petty misdeeds, occasionallyaccompanied by those of Remus Lupin and PeterPettigrew. And while he copied out all their variousoffenses and punishments, he wondered what wasgoing on outside, where the match would have juststarted ... Ginny playing Seeker against Cho ...

Harry glanced again and again at the large clockticking on the wall. It seemed to be moving half asfast as a regular clock; perhaps Snape had bewitchedit to go extra slowly? He could not have been here foronly half an hour ... an hour ... an hour and a half. ...

Harry’s stomach started rumbling when the clockshowed half past twelve. Snape, who had not spokenat all since setting Harry his task, finally looked up atten past one.

Page | 597 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I think that will do,” he said coldly. “Mark the placeyou have reached. You will continue at ten o’clocknext Saturday.”

“Yes, sir.”

Harry stuffed a bent card into the box at random andhurried out of the door before Snape could change hismind, racing back up the stone steps, straining hisears to hear a sound from the pitch, but all was quiet....It was over, then. ...

He hesitated outside the crowded Great Hall, then ranup the marble staircase; whether Gryffindor had wonor lost, the team usually celebrated or commiseratedin their own common room.

“Quid agis?” he said tentatively to the Fat Lady,wondering what he would find inside.

Her expression was unreadable as she replied, “You’llsee.”

And she swung forward.

A roar of celebration erupted from the hole behindher. Harry gaped as people began to scream at thesight of him; several hands pulled him into the room.

“We won!” yelled Ron, bounding into sight andbrandishing the silver Cup at Harry. “We won! Fourhundred and fifty to a hundred and forty! We won!”

Harry looked around; there was Ginny runningtoward him; she had a hard, blazing look in her faceas she threw her arms around him. And withoutthinking, without planning it, without worrying aboutthe fact that fifty people were watching, Harry kissedher.

Page | 598 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

After several long moments — or it might have beenhalf an hour — or possibly several sunlit days — theybroke apart. The room had gone very quiet. Thenseveral people wolf-whistled and there was anoutbreak of nervous giggling. Harry looked over thetop of Ginny’s head to see Dean Thomas holding ashattered glass in his hand, and Romilda Vanelooking as though she might throw something.Hermione was beaming, but Harry’s eyes sought Ron.At last he found him, still clutching the Cup andwearing an expression appropriate to having beenclubbed over the head. For a fraction of a second theylooked at each other, then Ron gave a tiny jerk of thehead that Harry understood to mean, Well— if youmust.

The creature in his chest roaring in triumph, hegrinned down at Ginny and gestured wordlessly out ofthe portrait hole. A long walk in the grounds seemedindicated, during which — if they had time — theymight discuss the match.

Page | 599 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





THE SEER OVERHEARD

The fact that Harry Potter was going out with GinnyWeasley seemed to interest a great number of people,most of them girls, yet Harry found himself newly andhappily impervious to gossip over the next few weeks.After all, it made a very nice change to be talkedabout because of something that was making himhappier than he could remember being for a very longtime, rather than because he had been involved inhorrific scenes of Dark Magic.

“You’d think people had better things to gossipabout,” said Ginny, as she sat on the common roomfloor, leaning against Harry’s legs and reading theDaily Prophet “Three dementor attacks in a week, andall Romilda Vane does is ask me if it’s true you’ve gota hippogriff tattooed across your chest.”

Ron and Hermione both roared with laughter. Harryignored them.

“What did you tell her?”

Page | 600 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I told her it’s a Hungarian Horntail,” said Ginny,turning a page of the newspaper idly. “Much moremacho.”

“Thanks,” said Harry, grinning. “And what did you tellher Ron’s got?”

“A Pygmy Puff, but I didn’t say where.”

Ron scowled as Hermione rolled around laughing.

“Watch it,” he said, pointing warningly at Harry andGinny. “Just because I’ve given my permission doesn’tmean I can’t withdraw it —”

“ ‘Your permission,’ ” scoffed Ginny. “Since when didyou give me permission to do anything? Anyway, yousaid yourself you’d rather it was Harry than Michaelor Dean.”

“Yeah, I would,” said Ron grudgingly. “And just aslong as you don’t start snogging each other in public

“You filthy hypocrite! What about you and Lavender,thrashing around like a pair of eels all over theplace?” demanded Ginny.

But Ron’s tolerance was not to be tested much asthey moved into June, for Harry and Ginny’s timetogether was becoming increasingly restricted.

Ginny’s O.W.L.s were approaching and she wastherefore forced to study for hours into the night. Onone such evening, when Ginny had retired to thelibrary, and Harry was sitting beside the window inthe common room, supposedly finishing hisHerbology homework but in reality reliving aparticularly happy hour he had spent down by thelake with Ginny at lunchtime, Hermione dropped intoPage | 601 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

the seat between him and Ron with an unpleasantlypurposeful look on her face.

“I want to talk to you, Harry.”

“What about?” said Harry suspiciously. Only theprevious day, Hermione had told him off fordistracting Ginny when she ought to be working hardfor her examinations.

“The so-called Half-Blood Prince.”

“Oh, not again,” he groaned. “Will you please drop it?”

He had not dared to return to the Room ofRequirement to retrieve his book, and hisperformance in Potions was suffering accordingly(though Slughorn, who approved of Ginny, hadjocularly attributed this to Harry being lovesick). ButHarry was sure that Snape had not yet given up hopeof laying hands on the Prince’s book, and wasdetermined to leave it where it was while Snaperemained on the lookout.

“I’m not dropping it,” said Hermione firmly, “untilyou’ve heard me out. Now, I’ve been trying to find outa bit about who might make a hobby of inventingDark spells —”

“He didn’t make a hobby of it —”

“He, he — who says it’s a he?”

“We’ve been through this,” said Harry crossly. “Prince,Hermione, PrinceV’

“Right!” said Hermione, red patches blazing in hercheeks as she pulled a very old piece of newsprint out

Page | 602 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

of her pocket and slammed it down on the table infront of Harry. “Look at that! Look at the picture!”

Harry picked up the crumbling piece of paper andstared at the moving photograph, yellowed with age;Ron leaned over for a look too. The picture showed askinny girl of around fifteen. She was not pretty; shelooked simultaneously cross and sullen, with heavybrows and a long, pallid face. Underneath thephotograph was the caption: EILEEN PRINCE,CAPTAIN OF THE HOGWARTS GOBSTONES TEAM.

“So?” said Harry, scanning the short news item towhich the picture belonged; it was a rather dull storyabout interschool competitions.

“Her name was Eileen Prince. Prince, Harry.”

They looked at each other, and Harry realized whatHermione was trying to say. He burst out laughing.

“No way.”

“What?”

“You think she was the Half-Blood ... ? Oh, come on.”

“Well, why not? Harry, there aren’t any real princes inthe Wizarding world! It’s either a nickname, a made-up title somebody’s given themselves, or it could betheir actual name, couldn’t it? No, listen! If, say, herfather was a wizard whose surname was Prince, andher mother was a Muggle, then that would make hera “half-blood Prince’!”

“Yeah, very ingenious, Hermione ...”

“But it would! Maybe she was proud of being half aPrince!”

Page | 603 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Listen, Hermione, I can tell it’s not a girl. I can justtell.”

“The truth is that you don’t think a girl would havebeen clever enough,” said Hermione angrily.

“How can I have hung round with you for five yearsand not think girls are clever?” said Harry, stung bythis. “It’s the way he writes, I just know the Princewas a bloke, I can tell. This girl hasn’t got anything todo with it. Where did you get this anyway?”

“The library,” said Hermione predictably. “There’s awhole collection of old Prophets up there. Well, I’mgoing to find out more about Eileen Prince if I can.”

“Enjoy yourself,” said Harry irritably.

“I will,” said Hermione. “And the first place I’ll look,”she shot at him, as she reached the portrait hole, “isrecords of old Potions awards!”

Harry scowled after her for a moment, then continuedhis contemplation of the darkening sky.

“She’s just never got over you outperforming her inPotions,” said Ron, returning to his copy of AThousand Magical Herbs and Fungi.

“You don’t think I’m mad, wanting that book back, doyou?”

“ ’Course not,” said Ron robustly. “He was a genius,the Prince. Anyway ... without his bezoar tip ...” Hedrew his finger significantly across his own throat. “Iwouldn’t be here to discuss it, would I? I mean, I’mnot saying that spell you used on Malfoy was great —”

“Nor am I,” said Harry quickly.

Page | 604 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But he healed all right, didn’t he? Back on his feet inno time.”

“Yeah,” said Harry; this was perfectly true, althoughhis conscience squirmed slightly all the same.

“Thanks to Snape ...”

“You still got detention with Snape this Saturday?”Ron continued.

“Yeah, and the Saturday after that, and the Saturdayafter that,” sighed Harry. “And he’s hinting now that ifI don’t get all the boxes done by the end of term, we’llcarry on next year.”

He was finding these detentions particularly irksomebecause they cut into the already limited time hecould have been spending with Ginny. Indeed, he hadfrequently wondered lately whether Snape did notknow this, for he was keeping Harry later and laterevery time, while making pointed asides about Harryhaving to miss the good weather and the variedopportunities it offered.

Harry was shaken from these bitter reflections by theappearance at his side of Jimmy Peakes, who washolding out a scroll of parchment.

“Thanks, Jimmy ... Hey, it’s from Dumbledore!” saidHarry excitedly, unrolling the parchment andscanning it. “He wants me to go to his office as quickas I can!”

They stared at each other.

“Blimey,” whispered Ron. “You don’t reckon ... hehasn’t found ... ?”

Page | 605 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Better go and see, hadn’t I?” said Harry, jumping tohis feet.

He hurried out of the common room and along theseventh floor as fast as he could, passing nobody butPeeves, who swooped past in the opposite direction,throwing bits of chalk at Harry in a routine sort ofway and cackling loudly as he dodged Harry’sdefensive jinx. Once Peeves had vanished, there wassilence in the corridors; with only fifteen minutes leftuntil curfew, most people had already returned totheir common rooms.

And then Harry heard a scream and a crash. Hestopped in his tracks, listening.

“How — dare — you — aaaaargh!”

The noise was coming from a corridor nearby; Harrysprinted toward it, his wand at the ready, hurtledaround another corner, and saw Professor Trelawneysprawled upon the floor, her head covered in one ofher many shawls, several sherry bottles lying besideher, one broken.

“Professor —”

Harry hurried forward and helped ProfessorTrelawney to her feet. Some of her glittering beadshad become entangled with her glasses. She hiccupedloudly, patted her hair, and pulled herself up onHarry’s helping arm.

“What happened, Professor?”

“You may well ask!” she said shrilly. “I was strollingalong, brooding upon certain dark portents I happento have glimpsed ...”

Page | 606 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

But Harry was not paying much attention. He hadjust noticed where they were standing: There on theright was the tapestry of dancing trolls, and on theleft, that smoothly impenetrable stretch of stone wallthat concealed —

“Professor, were you trying to get into the Room ofRequirement?”

"... omens I have been vouchsafed — what?” Shelooked suddenly shifty.

“The Room of Requirement,” repeated Harry. “Wereyou trying to get in there?”

“I — well — I didn’t know students knew about —”

“Not all of them do,” said Harry. “But what happened?You screamed. ... It sounded as though you werehurt. ...”

“I — well,” said Professor Trelawney, drawing hershawls around her defensively and staring down athim with her vastly magnified eyes. “I wished to — ah— deposit certain — um — personal items in theroom. ...” And she muttered something about “nastyaccusations.”

“Right,” said Harry, glancing down at the sherrybottles. “But you couldn’t get in and hide them?”

He found this very odd; the room had opened for him,after all, when he had wanted to hide the Half-BloodPrince’s book.

“Oh, I got in all right,” said Professor Trelawney,glaring at the wall. “But there was somebody alreadyin there.”

Page | 607 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Somebody in — ? Who?” demanded Harry. “Who wasin there?”

“I have no idea,” said Professor Trelawney, lookingslightly taken aback at the urgency in Harry’s voice. “Iwalked into the room and I heard a voice, which hasnever happened before in all my years of hiding — ofusing the room, I mean.”

“A voice? Saying what?”

“I don’t know that it was saying anything,” saidProfessor Trelawney. “It was ... whooping.”

“ Whooping?”

“Gleefully,” she said, nodding.

Harry stared at her.

“Was it male or female?”

“I would hazard a guess at male,” said ProfessorTrelawney.

“And it sounded happy?”

“Very happy,” said Professor Trelawney sniffily.

“As though it was celebrating?”

“Most definitely.”

“And then — ?”

“And then I called out Who’s there?’ ”

“You couldn’t have found out who it was withoutasking?” Harry asked her, slightly frustrated.

Page | 608 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“The Inner Eye,” said Professor Trelawney withdignity, straightening her shawls and many strands ofglittering beads, “was fixed upon matters well outsidethe mundane realms of whooping voices.”

“Right,” said Harry hastily; he had heard aboutProfessor Trelawney’s Inner Eye all too often before.“And did the voice say who was there?”

“No, it did not,” she said. “Everything went pitch-black and the next thing I knew, I was being hurledheadfirst out of the room!”

“And you didn’t see that coming?” said Harry, unableto help himself.

“No, I did not, as I say, it was pitch —” She stoppedand glared at him suspiciously.

“I think you’d better tell Professor Dumbledore,” saidHarry. “He ought to know Malfoy’s celebrating — Imean, that someone threw you out of the room.”

To his surprise, Professor Trelawney drew herself upat this suggestion, looking haughty.

“The headmaster has intimated that he would preferfewer visits from me,” she said coldly. “I am not one topress my company upon those who do not value it. IfDumbledore chooses to ignore the warnings the cardsshow —” Her bony hand closed suddenly aroundHarry’s wrist. “Again and again, no matter how I laythem out —” And she pulled a card dramatically fromunderneath her shawls. “— the lightning-strucktower,” she whispered. “Calamity. Disaster. Comingnearer all the time ...”

“Right,” said Harry again. “Well ... I still think youshould tell Dumbledore about this voice, and

Page | 609 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

everything going dark and being thrown out of theroom. ...”

“You think so?” Professor Trelawney seemed toconsider the matter for a moment, but Harry couldtell that she liked the idea of retelling her littleadventure.

“I’m going to see him right now,” said Harry. “I’ve gota meeting with him. We could go together.”

“Oh, well, in that case,” said Professor Trelawney witha smile. She bent down, scooped up her sherrybottles, and dumped them unceremoniously in a largeblue-and-white vase standing in a nearby niche.

“I miss having you in my classes, Harry,” she saidsoulfully as they set off together. “You were nevermuch of a Seer ... but you were a wonderful Object

Harry did not reply; he had loathed being the Objectof Professor Trelawney’s continual predictions ofdoom.

“I am afraid,” she went on, “that the nag — I’m sorry,the centaur — knows nothing of cartomancy. I askedhim — one Seer to another — had he not, too, sensedthe distant vibrations of coming catastrophe? But heseemed to find me almost comical. Yes, comical!”

Her voice rose rather hysterically, and Harry caught apowerful whiff of sherry even though the bottles hadbeen left behind.

“Perhaps the horse has heard people say that I havenot inherited my great-great-grandmother’s gift.

Those rumors have been bandied about by the jealousfor years. You know what I say to such people, Harry?

Page | 610 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

Would Dumbledore have let me teach at this greatschool, put so much trust in me all these years, had Inot proved myself to him?”

Harry mumbled something indistinct.

“I well remember my first interview with Dumbledore,”went on Professor Trelawney, in throaty tones. “Hewas deeply impressed, of course, deeply impressed. ...I was staying at the Hog’s Head, which I do notadvise, incidentally — bedbugs, dear boy — but fundswere low. Dumbledore did me the courtesy of callingupon me in my room. He questioned me. ... I mustconfess that, at first, I thought he seemed ill-disposedtoward Divination ... and I remember I was starting tofeel a little odd, I had not eaten much that day ... butthen ...”

And now Harry was paying attention properly for thefirst time, for he knew what had happened then:Professor Trelawney had made the prophecy that hadaltered the course of his whole life, the prophecyabout him and Voldemort.

"... but then we were rudely interrupted by SeverusSnape!”

“What?”

“Yes, there was a commotion outside the door and itflew open, and there was that rather uncouth barmanstanding with Snape, who was waffling about havingcome the wrong way up the stairs, although I’m afraidthat I myself rather thought he had beenapprehended eavesdropping on my interview withDumbledore — you see, he himself was seeking a jobat the time, and no doubt hoped to pick up tips! Well,after that, you know, Dumbledore seemed much moredisposed to give me a job, and I could not helpPage | 611 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

thinking, Harry, that it was because he appreciatedthe stark contrast between my own unassumingmanners and quiet talent, compared to the pushing,thrusting young man who was prepared to listen atkeyholes — Harry, dear?”

She looked back over her shoulder, having only justrealized that Harry was no longer with her; he hadstopped walking and they were now ten feet from eachother.

“Harry?” she repeated uncertainly.

Perhaps his face was white to make her look soconcerned and frightened. Harry was standing stock-still as waves of shock crashed over him, wave afterwave, obliterating everything except the informationthat had been kept from him for so long. ...

It was Snape who had overheard the prophecy. It wasSnape who had carried the news of the prophecy toVoldemort. Snape and Peter Pettigrew together hadsent Voldemort hunting after Lily and James andtheir son. ...

Nothing else mattered to Harry just now.

“Harry?” said Professor Trelawney again. “Harry — Ithought we were going to see the headmastertogether?”

“You stay here,” said Harry through numb lips.

“But dear ... I was going to tell him how I wasassaulted in the Room of—”

“You stay here!” Harry repeated angrily.

Page | 612 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She looked alarmed as he ran past her, around thecorner into Dumbledore’s corridor, where the lonegargoyle stood sentry. Harry shouted the password atthe gargoyle and ran up the moving spiral staircasethree steps at a time. He did not knock uponDumbledore’s door, he hammered; and the calm voiceanswered, “Enter” after Harry had already flunghimself into the room.

Fawkes the phoenix looked around, his bright blackeyes gleaming with reflected gold from the sunsetbeyond the windows. Dumbledore was standing at thewindow looking out at the grounds, a long, blacktraveling cloak in his arms.

“Well, Harry, I promised that you could come withme.”

For a moment or two, Harry did not understand; theconversation with Trelawney had driven everythingelse out of his head and his brain seemed to bemoving very slowly.

“Come ... with you ... ?”

“Only if you wish it, of course.”

“If I ...”

And then Harry remembered why he had been eagerto come to Dumbledore’s office in the first place.“You’ve found one? You’ve found a Horcrux?”

“I believe so.”

Rage and resentment fought shock and excitement:For several moments, Harry could not speak.

“It is natural to be afraid,” said Dumbledore.

Page | 613 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

‘Tm not scared!” said Harry at once, and it wasperfectly true; fear was one emotion he was notfeeling at all. “Which Horcrux is it? Where is it?”

“I am not sure which it is — though I think we canrule out the snake — but I believe it to be hidden in acave on the coast many miles from here, a cave I havebeen trying to locate for a very long time: the cave inwhich Tom Riddle once terrorized two children fromhis orphanage on their annual trip; you remember?”

“Yes,” said Harry. “How is it protected?”

“I do not know; I have suspicions that may be entirelywrong.” Dumbledore hesitated, then said, “Harry, Ipromised you that you could come with me, and Istand by that promise, but it would be very wrong ofme not to warn you that this will be exceedinglydangerous.”

“I’m coming,” said Harry, almost before Dumbledorehad finished speaking. Boiling with anger at Snape,his desire to do something desperate and risky hadincreased tenfold in the last few minutes. Thisseemed to show on Harry’s face, for Dumbledoremoved away from the window and looked more closelyat Harry, a slight crease between his silver eyebrows.

“What has happened to you?”

“Nothing,” lied Harry promptly.

“What has upset you?”

“I’m not upset.”

“Harry, you were never a good Occlumens —”

The word was the spark that ignited Harry’s fury.

Page | 614 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Snape!” he said, very loudly, and Fawkes gave a softsquawk behind them. “Snape’s what’s happened! Hetold Voldemort about the prophecy, it was him, helistened outside the door, Trelawney told me!”

Dumbledore’s expression did not change, but Harrythought his face whitened under the bloody tinge castby the setting sun. For a long moment, Dumbledoresaid nothing. “When did you find out about this?” heasked at last.

“Just now!” said Harry, who was refraining fromyelling with enormous difficulty. And then, suddenly,he could not stop himself. “AND YOU LET HIMTEACH HERE AND HE TOLD VOLDEMORT TO GOAFTER MY MUM AND DAD!”

Breathing hard as though he was fighting, Harryturned away from Dumbledore, who still had notmoved a muscle, and paced up and down the study,rubbing his knuckles in his hand and exercisingevery last bit of restraint to prevent himself knockingthings over. He wanted to rage and storm atDumbledore, but he also wanted to go with him to tryand destroy the Horcrux; he wanted to tell him thathe was a foolish old man for trusting Snape, but hewas terrified that Dumbledore would not take himalong unless he mastered his anger. ...

“Harry,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Please listen tome.”

It was as difficult to stop his relentless pacing as torefrain from shouting. Harry paused, biting his lip,and looked into Dumbledore’s lined face.

“Professor Snape made a terrible —”

Page | 615 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t tell me it was a mistake, sir, he was listeningat the door!”

“Please let me finish.” Dumbledore waited until Harryhad nodded curtly, then went on. “Professor Snapemade a terrible mistake. He was still in LordVoldemort’s employ on the night he heard the firsthalf of Professor Trelawney’s prophecy. Naturally, hehastened to tell his master what he had heard, for itconcerned his master most deeply. But he did notknow — he had no possible way of knowing — whichboy Voldemort would hunt from then onward, or thatthe parents he would destroy in his murderous questwere people that Professor Snape knew, that theywere your mother and father —”

Harry let out a yell of mirthless laughter.

“He hated my dad like he hated Sirius! Haven’t younoticed, Professor, how the people Snape hates tendto end up dead?”

“You have no idea of the remorse Professor Snape feltwhen he realized how Lord Voldemort had interpretedthe prophecy, Harry. I believe it to be the greatestregret of his life and the reason that he returned —”

“But he’s a very good Occlumens, isn’t he, sir?” saidHarry, whose voice was shaking with the effort ofkeeping it steady. “And isn’t Voldemort convinced thatSnape’s on his side, even now? Professor ... how canyou be sure Snape’s on our side?”

Dumbledore did not speak for a moment; he looked asthough he was trying to make up his mind aboutsomething. At last he said, “I am sure. I trust SeverusSnape completely.”

Page | 616 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry breathed deeply for a few moments in an effortto steady himself. It did not work.

“Well, I don’t!” he said, as loudly as before. “He’s up tosomething with Draco Malfoy right now, right underyour nose, and you still —”

“We have discussed this, Harry,” said Dumbledore,and now he sounded stern again. “I have told you myviews.”

“You’re leaving the school tonight, and I’ll bet youhaven’t even considered that Snape and Malfoy mightdecide to —”

“To what?” asked Dumbledore, his eyebrows raised.“What is it that you suspect them of doing, precisely?”

“I ... they’re up to something!” said Harry, and hishands curled into fists as he said it. “ProfessorTrelawney was just in the Room of Requirement,trying to hide her sherry bottles, and she heardMalfoy whooping, celebrating! He’s trying to mendsomething dangerous in there and if you ask me, he’sfixed it at last and you’re about to just walk out ofschool without —”

“Enough,” said Dumbledore. He said it quite calmly,and yet Harry fell silent at once; he knew that he hadfinally crossed some invisible line. “Do you think thatI have once left the school unprotected during myabsences this year? I have not. Tonight, when I leave,there will again be additional protection in place.Please do not suggest that I do not take the safety ofmy students seriously, Harry.”

“I didn’t —” mumbled Harry, a little abashed, butDumbledore cut across him.

Page | 617 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I do not wish to discuss the matter any further.”

Harry bit back his retort, scared that he had gone toofar, that he had ruined his chance of accompanyingDumbledore, but Dumbledore went on, “Do you wishto come with me tonight?”

“Yes,” said Harry at once.

“Very well, then: Listen.” Dumbledore drew himself upto his full height. “I take you with me on onecondition: that you obey any command I might giveyou at once, and without question.”

“Of course.”

“Be sure to understand me, Harry. I mean that youmust follow even such orders as ‘run,’ ‘hide,’ or ‘goback.’ Do I have your word?”

“I — yes, of course.”

“If I tell you to hide, you will do so?”

“Yes.”

“If I tell you to flee, you will obey?”

“Yes.”

“If I tell you to leave me and save yourself, you will doas I tell you?

“Harry?”

They looked at each other for a moment.

Page | 618 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, sir.”

“Very good. Then I wish you to go and fetch yourInvisibility Cloak and meet me in the entrance hall infive minutes’ time.”

Dumbledore turned back to look out of the fierywindow; the sun was now a ruby red glare along thehorizon. Harry walked quickly from the office anddown the spiral staircase. His mind was oddly clearall of a sudden. He knew what to do.

Ron and Hermione were sitting together in thecommon room when he came back. “What does hewant?” Hermione said at once. “Harry, are you okay?”she added anxiously.

“I’m fine,” said Harry shortly, racing past them. Hedashed up the stairs and into his dormitory, where heflung open his trunk and pulled out the Marauder’sMap and a pair of balled-up socks. Then he sped backdown the stairs and into the common room, skiddingto a halt where Ron and Hermione sat, lookingstunned.

“I’ve got to be quick,” Harry panted. “Dumbledorethinks I’m getting my Invisibility Cloak. Listen. ...”

Quickly he told them where he was going and why. Hedid not pause either for Hermione’s gasps of horror orfor Ron’s hasty questions; they could work out thefiner details for themselves later.

“... so you see what this means?” Harry finished at agallop. “Dumbledore won’t be here tonight, soMalfoy’s going to have another clear shot at whateverhe’s up to. No, listen to me!” he hissed angrily, as bothRon and Hermione showed every sign of interrupting.“I know it was Malfoy celebrating in the Room ofPage | 619 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Requirement. Here —” He shoved the Marauder’s Mapinto Hermione’s hands. “You’ve got to watch him andyou’ve got to watch Snape too. Use anyone else whoyou can rustle up from the D.A., Hermione, thosecontact Galleons will still work, right? Dumbledoresays he’s put extra protection in the school, but ifSnape’s involved, he’ll know what Dumbledore’sprotection is, and how to avoid it — but he won’t beexpecting you lot to be on the watch, will he?”

“Harry —” began Hermione, her eyes huge with fear.

“I haven’t got time to argue,” said Harry curtly. “Takethis as well —”

He thrust the socks into Ron’s hands.

“Thanks,” said Ron. “Er — why do I need socks?”

“You need what’s wrapped in them, it’s the FelixFelicis. Share it between yourselves and Ginny too.Say good-bye to her for me. I’d better go,

Dumbledore’s waiting —”

“No!” said Hermione, as Ron unwrapped the tiny littlebottle of golden potion, looking awestruck. “We don’twant it, you take it, who knows what you’re going tobe facing?”

“I’ll be fine, I’ll be with Dumbledore,” said Harry. “Iwant to know you lot are okay. ... Don’t look like that,Hermione, I’ll see you later. ...”

And he was off, hurrying back through the portraithole and toward the entrance hall.

Dumbledore was waiting beside the oaken frontdoors. He turned as Harry came skidding out onto the

Page | 620 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

topmost stone step, panting hard, a searing stitch inhis side.

“I would like you to wear your cloak, please,” saidDumbledore, and he waited until Harry had thrown iton before saying, “Very good. Shall we go?”

Dumbledore set off at once down the stone steps, hisown traveling cloak barely stirring in the still summerair. Harry hurried alongside him under the InvisibilityCloak, still panting and sweating rather a lot.

“But what will people think when they see youleaving, Professor?” Harry asked, his mind on Malfoyand Snape.

“That I am off into Hogsmeade for a drink,” saidDumbledore lightly. “I sometimes offer Rosmerta mycustom, or else visit the Hog’s Head ... or I appear to.It is as good a way as any of disguising one’s truedestination.”

They made their way down the drive in the gatheringtwilight. The air was full of the smells of warm grass,lake water, and wood smoke from Hagrid’s cabin. Itwas difficult to believe that they were heading foranything dangerous or frightening.

“Professor,” said Harry quietly, as the gates at thebottom of the drive came into view, “will we beApparating?”

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “You can Apparate now, Ibelieve?”

“Yes,” said Harry, “but I haven’t got a license.”

Page | 621 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He felt it best to be honest; what if he spoiledeverything by turning up a hundred miles from wherehe was supposed to go?

“No matter,” said Dumbledore, “I can assist youagain.”

They turned out of the gates into the twilit, desertedlane to Hogsmeade. Darkness descended fast as theywalked, and by the time they reached the High Streetnight was falling in earnest. Lights twinkled fromwindows over shops and as they neared the ThreeBroomsticks they heard raucous shouting.

“— and stay out!” shouted Madam Rosmerta, forciblyejecting a grubby-looking wizard. “Oh, hello, Albus ...You’re out late ...”

“Good evening, Rosmerta, good evening ... forgive me,I’m off to the Hog’s Head. ... No offense, but I feel likea quieter atmosphere tonight. ...”

A minute later they turned the corner into the sidestreet where the Hog’s Head’s sign creaked a little,though there was no breeze. In contrast to the ThreeBroomsticks, the pub appeared to be completelyempty.

“It will not be necessary for us to enter,” mutteredDumbledore, glancing around. “As long as nobodysees us go ... now place your hand upon my arm,Harry. There is no need to grip too hard, I am merelyguiding you. On the count of three ... One ... two ...three ...”

Harry turned. At once, there was that horriblesensation that he was being squeezed through a thickrubber tube; he could not draw breath, every part ofhim was being compressed almost past endurance

Page | 622 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

and then, just when he thought he must suffocate,the invisible bands seemed to burst open, and he wasstanding in cool darkness, breathing in lungfuls offresh, salty air.

Page | 623 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





THE CAVE

Harry could smell salt and hear rushing waves; alight, chilly breeze ruffled his hair as he looked out atmoonlit sea and star-strewn sky. He was standingupon a high outcrop of dark rock, water foaming andchurning below him. He glanced over his shoulder. Atowering cliff stood behind them, a sheer drop, blackand faceless. A few large chunks of rock, such as theone upon which Harry and Dumbledore werestanding, looked as though they had broken awayfrom the cliff face at some point in the past. It was ableak, harsh view, the sea and the rock unrelieved byany tree or sweep of grass or sand.

“What do you think?” asked Dumbledore. He mighthave been asking Harry’s opinion on whether it was agood site for a picnic.

“They brought the kids from the orphanage here?”asked Harry, who could not imagine a less cozy spotfor a day trip.

Page | 624 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Not here, precisely,” said Dumbledore. “There is avillage of sorts about halfway along the cliffs behindus. I believe the orphans were taken there for a littlesea air and a view of the waves. No, I think it was onlyever Tom Riddle and his youthful victims who visitedthis spot. No Muggle could reach this rock unlessthey were uncommonly good mountaineers, and boatscannot approach the cliffs, the waters around themare too dangerous. I imagine that Riddle climbeddown; magic would have served better than ropes.

And he brought two small children with him,probably for the pleasure of terrorizing them. I thinkthe journey alone would have done it, don’t you?”

Harry looked up at the cliff again and felt goosebumps.

“But his final destination — and ours — lies a littlefarther on. Come.”

Dumbledore beckoned Harry to the very edge of therock where a series of jagged niches made footholdsleading down to boulders that lay half-submerged inwater and closer to the cliff. It was a treacherousdescent and Dumbledore, hampered slightly by hiswithered hand, moved slowly. The lower rocks wereslippery with seawater. Harry could feel flecks of coldsalt spray hitting his face.

“Lumos,” said Dumbledore, as he reached the boulderclosest to the cliff face. A thousand flecks of goldenlight sparkled upon the dark surface of the water afew feet below where he crouched; the black wall ofrock beside him was illuminated too.

“You see?” said Dumbledore quietly, holding his wanda little higher. Harry saw a fissure in the cliff intowhich dark water was swirling.

Page | 625 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You will not object to getting a little wet?”

“No,” said Harry.

“Then take off your Invisibility Cloak — there is noneed for it now — and let us take the plunge.”

And with the sudden agility of a much younger man,Dumbledore slid from the boulder, landed in the sea,and began to swim, with a perfect breaststroke,toward the dark slit in the rock face, his lit wand heldin his teeth. Harry pulled off his cloak, stuffed it intohis pocket, and followed.

The water was icy; Harry’s waterlogged clothesbillowed around him and weighed him down. Takingdeep breaths that filled his nostrils with the tang ofsalt and seaweed, he struck out for the shimmering,shrinking light now moving deeper into the cliff.

The fissure soon opened into a dark tunnel that Harrycould tell would be filled with water at high tide. Theslimy walls were barely three feet apart andglimmered like wet tar in the passing light ofDumbledore’s wand. A little way in, the passagewaycurved to the left, and Harry saw that it extended farinto the cliff. He continued to swim in Dumbledore’swake, the tips of his benumbed fingers brushing therough, wet rock.

Then he saw Dumbledore rising out of the waterahead, his silver hair and dark robes gleaming. WhenHarry reached the spot he found steps that led into alarge cave. He clambered up them, water streamingfrom his soaking clothes, and emerged, shiveringuncontrollably, into the still and freezing air.

Page | 626 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore was standing in the middle of the cave,his wand held high as he turned slowly on the spot,examining the walls and ceiling.

“Yes, this is the place,” said Dumbledore.

“How can you tell?” Harry spoke in a whisper.

“It has known magic,” said Dumbledore simply.

Harry could not tell whether the shivers he wasexperiencing were due to his spine-deep coldness orto the same awareness of enchantments. He watchedas Dumbledore continued to revolve on the spot,evidently concentrating on things Harry could not see.

“This is merely the antechamber, the entrance hall,”said Dumbledore after a moment or two. “We need topenetrate the inner place. ... Now it is LordVoldemort’s obstacles that stand in our way, ratherthan those nature made. ...”

Dumbledore approached the wall of the cave andcaressed it with his blackened fingertips, murmuringwords in a strange tongue that Harry did notunderstand. Twice Dumbledore walked right aroundthe cave, touching as much of the rough rock as hecould, occasionally pausing, running his fingersbackward and forward over a particular spot, untilfinally he stopped, his hand pressed flat against thewall.

“Here,” he said. “We go on through here. The entranceis concealed.”

Harry did not ask how Dumbledore knew. He hadnever seen a wizard work things out like this, simplyby looking and touching; but Harry had long since

Page | 627 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

learned that bangs and smoke were more often themarks of ineptitude than expertise.

Dumbledore stepped back from the cave wall andpointed his wand at the rock. For a moment, anarched outline appeared there, blazing white asthough there was a powerful light behind the crack.

“You’ve d-done it!” said Harry through chatteringteeth, but before the words had left his lips theoutline had gone, leaving the rock as bare and solidas ever. Dumbledore looked around.

“Harry, I’m so sorry, I forgot,” he said; he now pointedhis wand at Harry and at once, Harry’s clothes wereas warm and dry as if they had been hanging in frontof a blazing fire.

“Thank you,” said Harry gratefully, but Dumbledorehad already turned his attention back to the solidcave wall. He did not try any more magic, but simplystood there staring at it intently, as though somethingextremely interesting was written on it. Harry stayedquite still; he did not want to break Dumbledore’sconcentration. Then, after two solid minutes,Dumbledore said quietly, “Oh, surely not. So crude.”

“What is it, Professor?”

“I rather think,” said Dumbledore, putting hisuninjured hand inside his robes and drawing out ashort silver knife of the kind Harry used to choppotion ingredients, “that we are required to makepayment to pass.”

“Payment?” said Harry. “You’ve got to give the doorsomething?”

Page | 628 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “Blood, if I am not muchmistaken.”

“Blood?”

“I said it was crude,” said Dumbledore, who soundeddisdainful, even disappointed, as though Voldemorthad fallen short of the standards Dumbledoreexpected. “The idea, as I am sure you will havegathered, is that your enemy must weaken him- orherself to enter. Once again, Lord Voldemort fails tograsp that there are much more terrible things thanphysical injury.”

“Yeah, but still, if you can avoid it ...” said Harry, whohad experienced enough pain not to be keen for more.

“Sometimes, however, it is unavoidable,” saidDumbledore, shaking back the sleeve of his robes andexposing the forearm of his injured hand.

“Professor!” protested Harry, hurrying forward asDumbledore raised his knife. “Ill do it, I’m —”

He did not know what he was going to say — younger,fitter? But Dumbledore merely smiled. There was aflash of silver, and a spurt of scarlet; the rock facewas peppered with dark, glistening drops.

“You are very kind, Harry,” said Dumbledore, nowpassing the tip of his wand over the deep cut he hadmade in his own arm, so that it healed instantly, justas Snape had healed Malfoy’s wounds. “But yourblood is worth more than mine. Ah, that seems tohave done the trick, doesn’t it?”

The blazing silver outline of an arch had appeared inthe wall once more, and this time it did not fadeaway: The blood-spattered rock within it simply

Page | 629 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

vanished, leaving an opening into what seemed totaldarkness.

“After me, I think,” said Dumbledore, and he walkedthrough the archway with Harry on his heels, lightinghis own wand hastily as he went.

An eerie sight met their eyes: They were standing onthe edge of a great black lake, so vast that Harrycould not make out the distant banks, in a cavern sohigh that the ceiling too was out of sight. A mistygreenish light shone far away in what looked like themiddle of the lake; it was reflected in the completelystill water below. The greenish glow and the light fromthe two wands were the only things that broke theotherwise velvety blackness, though their rays did notpenetrate as far as Harry would have expected. Thedarkness was somehow denser than normaldarkness.

“Let us walk,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Be verycareful not to step into the water. Stay close to me.”

He set off around the edge of the lake, and Harryfollowed close behind him. Their footsteps madeechoing, slapping sounds on the narrow rim of rockthat surrounded the water. On and on they walked,but the view did not vary: on one side of them, therough cavern wall, on the other, the boundlessexpanse of smooth, glassy blackness, in the verymiddle of which was that mysterious greenish glow.Harry found the place and the silence oppressive,unnerving.

“Professor?” he said finally. “Do you think theHorcrux is here?”

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore. “Yes, I’m sure it is. Thequestion is, how do we get to it?”

Page | 630 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“We couldn’t ... we couldn’t just try a SummoningCharm?” Harry said, sure that it was a stupidsuggestion. But he was much keener than he wasprepared to admit on getting out of this place as soonas possible.

“Certainly we could,” said Dumbledore, stopping sosuddenly that Harry almost walked into him. “Whydon’t you do it?”

“Me? Oh ... okay ...”

Harry had not expected this, but cleared his throatand said loudly, wand aloft, “Accio Horcruxl”

With a noise like an explosion, something very largeand pale erupted out of the dark water some twentyfeet away; before Harry could see what it was, it hadvanished again with a crashing splash that madegreat, deep ripples on the mirrored surface. Harryleapt backward in shock and hit the wall; his heartwas still thundering as he turned to Dumbledore.

“What was that?”

“Something, I think, that is ready to respond shouldwe attempt to seize the Horcrux.”

Harry looked back at the water. The surface of thelake was once more shining black glass: The rippleshad vanished unnaturally fast; Harry’s heart,however, was still pounding.

“Did you think that would happen, sir?”

“I thought something would happen if we made anobvious attempt to get our hands on the Horcrux.

That was a very good idea, Harry; much the simplestway of finding out what we are facing.”

Page | 631 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince-J.K. Rowling

“But we don’t know what the thing was,” said Harry,looking at the sinisterly smooth water.

“What the things are, you mean,” said Dumbledore. “Idoubt very much that there is only one of them. Shallwe walk on?”

“Professor?”

“Yes, Harry?”

“Do you think we’re going to have to go into the lake?”

“Into it? Only if we are very unfortunate.”

“You don’t think the Horcrux is at the bottom?”

“Oh no ... I think the Horcrux is in the middle.”

And Dumbledore pointed toward the misty green lightin the center of the lake.

“So we’re going to have to cross the lake to get to it?”“Yes, I think so.”

Harry did not say anything. His thoughts were all ofwater monsters, of giant serpents, of demons, kelpies,and sprites. ...

“Aha,” said Dumbledore, and he stopped again; thistime, Harry really did walk into him; for a moment hetoppled on the edge of the dark water, andDumbledore’s uninjured hand closed tightly aroundhis upper arm, pulling him back. “So sorry, Harry, Ishould have given warning. Stand back against thewall, please; I think I have found the place.”

Page | 632 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry had no idea what Dumbledore meant; thispatch of dark bank was exactly like every other bit asfar as he could tell, but Dumbledore seemed to havedetected something special about it. This time he wasrunning his hand, not over the rocky wall, butthrough the thin air, as though expecting to find andgrip something invisible.

“Oho,” said Dumbledore happily, seconds later. Hishand had closed in midair upon something Harrycould not see. Dumbledore moved closer to the water;Harry watched nervously as the tips of Dumbledore’sbuckled shoes found the utmost edge of the rock rim.Keeping his hand clenched in midair, Dumbledoreraised his wand with the other and tapped his fistwith the point.

Immediately a thick coppery green chain appearedout of thin air, extending from the depths of the waterinto Dumbledore’s clenched hand. Dumbledoretapped the chain, which began to slide through hisfist like a snake, coiling itself on the ground with aclinking sound that echoed noisily off the rocky walls,pulling something from the depths of the black water.Harry gasped as the ghostly prow of a tiny boat brokethe surface, glowing as green as the chain, andfloated, with barely a ripple, toward the place on thebank where Harry and Dumbledore stood.

“How did you know that was there?” Harry asked inastonishment.

“Magic always leaves traces,” said Dumbledore, as theboat hit the bank with a gentle bump, “sometimesvery distinctive traces. I taught Tom Riddle. I knowhis style.”

“Is ... is this boat safe?”

Page | 633 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Oh yes, I think so. Voldemort needed to create ameans to cross the lake without attracting the wrathof those creatures he had placed within it in case heever wanted to visit or remove his Horcrux.”

“So the things in the water won’t do anything to us ifwe cross in Voldemort’s boat?”

“I think we must resign ourselves to the fact that theywill, at some point, realize we are not Lord Voldemort.Thus far, however, we have done well. They haveallowed us to raise the boat.”

“But why have they let us?” asked Harry, who couldnot shake off the vision of tentacles rising out of thedark water the moment they were out of sight of thebank.

“Voldemort would have been reasonably confidentthat none but a very great wizard would have beenable to find the boat,” said Dumbledore. “I think hewould have been prepared to risk what was, to hismind, the most unlikely possibility that somebodyelse would find it, knowing that he had set otherobstacles ahead that only he would be able topenetrate. We shall see whether he is right.”

Harry looked down into the boat. It really was verysmall.

“It doesn’t look like it was built for two people. Will ithold both of us? Will we be too heavy together?”

Dumbledore chuckled.

“Voldemort will not have cared about the weight, butabout the amount of magical power that crossed hislake. I rather think an enchantment will have been

Page | 634 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

placed upon this boat so that only one wizard at atime will be able to sail in it.”

“But then — ?”

“I do not think you will count, Harry: You areunderage and unqualified. Voldemort would neverhave expected a sixteen-year-old to reach this place: Ithink it unlikely that your powers will registercompared to mine.”

These words did nothing to raise Harry’s morale;perhaps Dumbledore knew it, for he added,“Voldemort’s mistake, Harry, Voldemort’s mistake ...Age is foolish and forgetful when it underestimatesyouth. ... Now, you first this time, and be careful notto touch the water.”

Dumbledore stood aside and Harry climbed carefullyinto the boat. Dumbledore stepped in too, coiling thechain onto the floor. They were crammed in together;Harry could not comfortably sit, but crouched, hisknees jutting over the edge of the boat, which beganto move at once. There was no sound other than thesilken rustle of the boat’s prow cleaving the water; itmoved without their help, as though an invisible ropewas pulling it onward toward the light in the center.Soon they could no longer see the walls of the cavern;they might have been at sea except that there were nowaves.

Harry looked down and saw the reflected gold of hiswandlight sparkling and glittering on the black wateras they passed. The boat was carving deep ripplesupon the glassy surface, grooves in the dark mirror.

And then Harry saw it, marble white, floating inchesbelow the surface.

Page | 635 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Professor!” he said, and his startled voice echoedloudly over the silent water.

“Harry?”

“I think I saw a hand in the water — a human hand!”

“Yes, I am sure you did,” said Dumbledore calmly.

Harry stared down into the water, looking for thevanished hand, and a sick feeling rose in his throat.

“So that thing that jumped out of the water — ?”

But Harry had his answer before Dumbledore couldreply; the wandlight had slid over a fresh patch ofwater and showed him, this time, a dead man lyingfaceup inches beneath the surface, his open eyesmisted as though with cobwebs, his hair and hisrobes swirling around him like smoke.

“There are bodies in here!” said Harry, and his voicesounded much higher than usual and most unlike hisown.

“Yes,” said Dumbledore placidly, “but we do not needto worry about them at the moment.”

“At the moment?” Harry repeated, tearing his gazefrom the water to look at Dumbledore.

“Not while they are merely drifting peacefully belowus,” said Dumbledore. “There is nothing to be fearedfrom a body, Harry, any more than there is anythingto be feared from the darkness. Lord Voldemort, whoof course secretly fears both, disagrees. But onceagain he reveals his own lack of wisdom. It is theunknown we fear when we look upon death anddarkness, nothing more.”

Page | 636 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry said nothing; he did not want to argue, but hefound the idea that there were bodies floating aroundthem and beneath them horrible and, what was more,he did not believe that they were not dangerous.

“But one of them jumped,” he said, trying to make hisvoice as level and calm as Dumbledore’s. “When Itried to Summon the Horcrux, a body leapt out of thelake.”

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “I am sure that once we takethe Horcrux, we shall find them less peaceable.However, like many creatures that dwell in cold anddarkness, they fear light and warmth, which we shalltherefore call to our aid should the need arise. Fire,Harry,” Dumbledore added with a smile, in responseto Harry’s bewildered expression.

“Oh ... right ...” said Harry quickly. He turned hishead to look at the greenish glow toward which theboat was still inexorably sailing. He could not pretendnow that he was not scared. The great black lake,teeming with the dead ... It seemed hours and hoursago that he had met Professor Trelawney, that he hadgiven Ron and Hermione Felix Felicis. ... He suddenlywished he had said a better good-bye to them ... andhe hadn’t seen Ginny at all. ...

“Nearly there,” said Dumbledore cheerfully.

Sure enough, the greenish light seemed to be growinglarger at last, and within minutes, the boat had cometo a halt, bumping gently into something that Harrycould not see at first, but when he raised hisilluminated wand he saw that they had reached asmall island of smooth rock in the center of the lake.

“Careful not to touch the water,” said Dumbledoreagain as Harry climbed out of the boat.

Page | 637 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The island was no larger than Dumbledore’s office, anexpanse of flat dark stone on which stood nothing butthe source of that greenish light, which looked muchbrighter when viewed close to. Harry squinted at it; atfirst, he thought it was a lamp of some kind, but thenhe saw that the light was coming from a stone basinrather like the Pensieve, which was set on top of apedestal.

Dumbledore approached the basin and Harryfollowed. Side by side, they looked down into it. Thebasin was full of an emerald liquid emitting thatphosphorescent glow.

“What is it?” asked Harry quietly.

“I am not sure,” said Dumbledore. “Something moreworrisome than blood and bodies, however.”

Dumbledore pushed back the sleeve of his robe overhis blackened hand, and stretched out the tips of hisburned fingers toward the surface of the potion.

“Sir, no, don’t touch — !”

“I cannot touch,” said Dumbledore, smiling faintly.“See? I cannot approach any nearer than this. Youtry.”

Staring, Harry put his hand into the basin andattempted to touch the potion. He met an invisiblebarrier that prevented him coming within an inch ofit. No matter how hard he pushed, his fingersencountered nothing but what seemed to be solid andinflexible air.

“Out of the way, please, Harry,” said Dumbledore. Heraised his wand and made complicated movementsover the surface of the potion, murmuring

Page | 638 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

soundlessly. Nothing happened, except perhaps thatthe potion glowed a little brighter. Harry remainedsilent while Dumbledore worked, but after a whileDumbledore withdrew his wand, and Harry felt it wassafe to talk again.

“You think the Horcrux is in there, sir?”

“Oh yes.” Dumbledore peered more closely into thebasin. Harry saw his face reflected, upside down, inthe smooth surface of the green potion. “But how toreach it? This potion cannot be penetrated by hand,Vanished, parted, scooped up, or siphoned away, norcan it be Transfigured, Charmed, or otherwise madeto change its nature.”

Almost absentmindedly, Dumbledore raised his wandagain, twirled it once in midair, and then caught thecrystal goblet that he had conjured out of nowhere.

“I can only conclude that this potion is supposed tobe drunk.”

“What?” said Harry. “No!”

“Yes, I think so: Only by drinking it can I empty thebasin and see what lies in its depths.”

“But what if — what if it kills you?”

“Oh, I doubt that it would work like that,” saidDumbledore easily. “Lord Voldemort would not wantto kill the person who reached this island.”

Harry couldn’t believe it. Was this more ofDumbledore’s insane determination to see good ineveryone?

Page | 639 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Sir,” said Harry, trying to keep his voice reasonable,“sir, this is Voldemort we’re —”

“I’m sorry, Harry; I should have said, he would notwant to immediately kill the person who reached thisisland,” Dumbledore corrected himself. “He wouldwant to keep them alive long enough to find out howthey managed to penetrate so far through hisdefenses and, most importantly of all, why they wereso intent upon emptying the basin. Do not forget thatLord Voldemort believes that he alone knows abouthis Horcruxes.”

Harry made to speak again, but this time Dumbledoreraised his hand for silence, frowning slightly at theemerald liquid, evidently thinking hard.

“Undoubtedly,” he said, finally, “this potion must actin a way that will prevent me taking the Horcrux. Itmight paralyze me, cause me to forget what I am herefor, create so much pain I am distracted, or render meincapable in some other way. This being the case,Harry, it will be your job to make sure I keepdrinking, even if you have to tip the potion into myprotesting mouth. You understand?”

Their eyes met over the basin, each pale face lit withthat strange, green light. Harry did not speak. Wasthis why he had been invited along — so that hecould force-feed Dumbledore a potion that mightcause him unendurable pain?

“You remember,” said Dumbledore, “the condition onwhich I brought you with me?”

Harry hesitated, looking into the blue eyes that hadturned green in the reflected light of the basin.

“But what if — ?”

Page | 640 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You swore, did you not, to follow any command Igave you?”

“Yes, but —”

“I warned you, did I not, that there might be danger?”“Yes,” said Harry, “but —”

“Well, then,” said Dumbledore, shaking back hissleeves once more and raising the empty goblet, “youhave my orders.”

“Why can’t I drink the potion instead?” asked Harrydesperately.

“Because I am much older, much cleverer, and muchless valuable,” said Dumbledore. “Once and for all,Harry, do I have your word that you will do all in yourpower to make me keep drinking?”

“Couldn’t — ?”

“Do I have it?”

“But —”

“ Your word, Harry.”

“I — all right, but —”

Before Harry could make any further protest,Dumbledore lowered the crystal goblet into thepotion. For a split second, Harry hoped that he wouldnot be able to touch the potion with the goblet, butthe crystal sank into the surface as nothing else had;when the glass was full to the brim, Dumbledore liftedit to his mouth.

Page | 641 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Your good health, Harry.”

And he drained the goblet. Harry watched, terrified,his hands gripping the rim of the basin so hard thathis fingertips were numb.

“Professor?” he said anxiously, as Dumbledorelowered the empty glass. “How do you feel?”

Dumbledore shook his head, his eyes closed. Harrywondered whether he was in pain. Dumbledoreplunged the glass blindly back into the basin, refilledit, and drank once more.

In silence, Dumbledore drank three gobletsful of thepotion. Then, halfway through the fourth goblet, hestaggered and fell forward against the basin. His eyeswere still closed, his breathing heavy.

“Professor Dumbledore?” said Harry, his voicestrained. “Can you hear me?”

Dumbledore did not answer. His face was twitchingas though he was deeply asleep, but dreaming ahorrible dream. His grip on the goblet was slackening;the potion was about to spill from it. Harry reachedforward and grasped the crystal cup, holding itsteady.

“Professor, can you hear me?” he repeated loudly, hisvoice echoing around the cavern.

Dumbledore panted and then spoke in a voice Harrydid not recognize, for he had never heard Dumbledorefrightened like this.

“I don’t want ... Don’t make me ...”

Page | 642 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry stared into the whitened face he knew so well,at the crooked nose and half-moon spectacles, anddid not know what to do.

"... don’t like ... want to stop ...” moaned Dumbledore.

“You ... you can’t stop, Professor,” said Harry. “You’vegot to keep drinking, remember? You told me you hadto keep drinking. Here ...”

Hating himself, repulsed by what he was doing, Harryforced the goblet back toward Dumbledore’s mouthand tipped it, so that Dumbledore drank theremainder of the potion inside.

“No ...” he groaned, as Harry lowered the goblet backinto the basin and refilled it for him. “I don’t want to....I don’t want to. ... Let me go. ...”

“It’s all right, Professor,” said Harry, his handshaking. “It’s all right, I’m here —”

“Make it stop, make it stop,” moaned Dumbledore.

“Yes ... yes, this’ll make it stop,” lied Harry. He tippedthe contents of the goblet into Dumbledore’s openmouth.

Dumbledore screamed; the noise echoed all aroundthe vast chamber, across the dead black water.

“No, no, no, no, I can’t, I can’t, don’t make me, I don’twant to. ...”

“It’s all right, Professor, it’s all right!” said Harryloudly, his hands shaking so badly he could hardlyscoop up the sixth gobletful of potion; the basin wasnow half empty. “Nothing’s happening to you, you’re

Page | 643 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

safe, it isn’t real, I swear it isn’t real — take this, now,take this. ...”

And obediently, Dumbledore drank, as though it wasan antidote Harry offered him, but upon draining thegoblet, he sank to his knees, shaking uncontrollably.

“It’s all my fault, all my fault,” he sobbed. “Pleasemake it stop, I know I did wrong, oh please make itstop and I’ll never, never again ...”

“This will make it stop, Professor,” Harry said, hisvoice cracking as he tipped the seventh glass ofpotion into Dumbledore’s mouth.

Dumbledore began to cower as though invisibletorturers surrounded him; his flailing hand almostknocked the refilled goblet from Harry’s tremblinghands as he moaned, “Don’t hurt them, don’t hurtthem, please, please, it’s my fault, hurt me instead ...”

“Here, drink this, drink this, you’ll be all right,” saidHarry desperately, and once again Dumbledoreobeyed him, opening his mouth even as he kept hiseyes tight shut and shook from head to foot.

And now he fell forward, screaming again, hammeringhis fists upon the ground, while Harry filled the ninthgoblet.

“Please, please, please, no ... not that, not that, I’ll doanything ...”

“Just drink, Professor, just drink ...”

Dumbledore drank like a child dying of thirst, butwhen he had finished, he yelled again as though hisinsides were on fire. “No more, please, no more ...”

Page | 644 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry scooped up a tenth gobletful of potion and feltthe crystal scrape the bottom of the basin.

“We’re nearly there, Professor. Drink this, drink it. ...”

He supported Dumbledore’s shoulders and again,Dumbledore drained the glass; then Harry was on hisfeet once more, refilling the goblet as Dumbledorebegan to scream in more anguish than ever, “I wantto die! I want to die! Make it stop, make it stop, I wantto die!”

“Drink this, Professor. Drink this. ...”

Dumbledore drank, and no sooner had he finishedthan he yelled, “KILL ME!”

“This — this one will!” gasped Harry. “Just drink this... It’ll be over ... all over!”

Dumbledore gulped at the goblet, drained every lastdrop, and then, with a great, rattling gasp, rolled overonto his face.

“No!” shouted Harry, who had stood to refill the gobletagain; instead he dropped the cup into the basin,flung himself down beside Dumbledore, and heavedhim over onto his back; Dumbledore’s glasses wereaskew, his mouth agape, his eyes closed. “No,” saidHarry, shaking Dumbledore, “no, you’re not dead, yousaid it wasn’t poison, wake up, wake up —Rennervatel” he cried, his wand pointing atDumbledore’s chest; there was a flash of red light butnothing happened. “Renneruate — sir — please —”

Dumbledore’s eyelids flickered; Harry’s heart leapt.

“Sir, are you — ?”

Page | 645 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Water,” croaked Dumbledore.

“Water,” panted Harry. “Yes —”

He leapt to his feet and seized the goblet he haddropped in the basin; he barely registered the goldenlocket lying curled beneath it.

“Aguamenti\” he shouted, jabbing the goblet with hiswand.

The goblet filled with clear water; Harry dropped tohis knees beside Dumbledore, raised his head, andbrought the glass to his lips — but it was empty.Dumbledore groaned and began to pant.

“But I had some — wait — AguamentiV’ said Harryagain, pointing his wand at the goblet. Once more, fora second, clear water gleamed within it, but as heapproached Dumbledore’s mouth, the water vanishedagain.

“Sir, I’m trying, I’m trying!” said Harry desperately,but he did not think that Dumbledore could hearhim; he had rolled onto his side and was drawinggreat, rattling breaths that sounded agonizing.“Aguamenti — Aguamenti — A GUAMENTP. ”

The goblet filled and emptied once more. And nowDumbledore’s breathing was fading. His brainwhirling in panic, Harry knew, instinctively, the onlyway left to get water, because Voldemort had plannedit so ...

He flung himself over to the edge of the rock andplunged the goblet into the lake, bringing it up full tothe brim of icy water that did not vanish.

Page | 646 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Sir — here!” Harry yelled, and lunging forward, hetipped the water clumsily over Dumbledore’s face.

It was the best he could do, for the icy feeling on hisarm not holding the cup was not the lingering chill ofthe water. A slimy white hand had gripped his wrist,and the creature to whom it belonged was pullinghim, slowly, backward across the rock. The surface ofthe lake was no longer mirror-smooth; it waschurning, and everywhere Harry looked, white headsand hands were emerging from the dark water, menand women and children with sunken, sightless eyeswere moving toward the rock: an army of the deadrising from the black water.

“Petrificus Totalusl” yelled Harry, struggling to cling tothe smooth, soaked surface of the island as hepointed his wand at the Inferius that had his arm: Itreleased him, falling backward into the water with asplash; he scrambled to his feet, but many more Inferiwere already climbing onto the rock, their bony handsclawing at its slippery surface, their blank, frostedeyes upon him, trailing waterlogged rags, sunkenfaces leering.

“Petrificus Totalusl” Harry bellowed again, backingaway as he swiped his wand through the air; six orseven of them crumpled, but more were comingtoward him. “Impedimental Incarcerousl”

A few of them stumbled, one or two of them bound inropes, but those climbing onto the rock behind themmerely stepped over or on the fallen bodies. Stillslashing at the air with his wand, Harry yelled,

“Sectumsempral SECTUMSEMPRAl”

But though gashes appeared in their sodden rags andtheir icy skin, they had no blood to spill: They walkedon, unfeeling, their shrunken hands outstretched

Page | 647 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

toward him, and as he backed away still farther, hefelt arms enclose him from behind, thin, fleshlessarms cold as death, and his feet left the ground asthey lifted him and began to carry him, slowly andsurely, back to the water, and he knew there wouldbe no release, that he would be drowned, and becomeone more dead guardian of a fragment of Voldemort’sshattered soul. ...

But then, through the darkness, fire erupted: crimsonand gold, a ring of fire that surrounded the rock sothat the Inferi holding Harry so tightly stumbled andfaltered; they did not dare pass through the flames toget to the water. They dropped Harry; he hit theground, slipped on the rock, and fell, grazing hisarms, but scrambled back up, raising his wand andstaring around.

Dumbledore was on his feet again, pale as any of thesurrounding Inferi, but taller than any too, the firedancing in his eyes; his wand was raised like a torchand from its tip emanated the flames, like a vastlasso, encircling them all with warmth.

The Inferi bumped into each other, attempting,blindly, to escape the fire in which they wereenclosed. ...

Dumbledore scooped the locket from the bottom ofthe stone basin and stowed it inside his robes.Wordlessly, he gestured to Harry to come to his side.Distracted by the flames, the Inferi seemed unawarethat their quarry was leaving as Dumbledore ledHarry back to the boat, the ring of fire moving withthem, around them, the bewildered Inferiaccompanying them to the water’s edge, where theyslipped gratefully back into their dark waters.

Page | 648 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry, who was shaking all over, thought for amoment that Dumbledore might not be able to climbinto the boat; he staggered a little as he attempted it;all his efforts seemed to be going into maintaining thering of protective flame around them. Harry seizedhim and helped him back to his seat. Once they wereboth safely jammed inside again, the boat began tomove back across the black water, away from therock, still encircled by that ring of fire, and it seemedthat the Inferi swarming below them did not dareresurface.

“Sir,” panted Harry, “sir, I forgot — about fire — theywere coming at me and I panicked —”

“Quite understandable,” murmured Dumbledore.Harry was alarmed to hear how faint his voice was.

They reached the bank with a little bump and Harryleapt out, then turned quickly to help Dumbledore.The moment that Dumbledore reached the bank helet his wand hand fall; the ring of fire vanished, butthe Inferi did not emerge again from the water. Thelittle boat sank into the water once more; clankingand tinkling, its chain slithered back into the laketoo. Dumbledore gave a great sigh and leaned againstthe cavern wall.

“I am weak. ...” he said.

“Don’t worry, sir,” said Harry at once, anxious aboutDumbledore’s extreme pallor and by his air ofexhaustion. “Don’t worry, I’ll get us back. ... Lean onme, sir. ...”

And pulling Dumbledore’s uninjured arm around hisshoulders, Harry guided his headmaster back aroundthe lake, bearing most of his weight.

Page | 649 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“The protection was ... after all ... well-designed,” saidDumbledore faintly. “One alone could not have doneit. ... You did well, very well, Harry. ...”

“Don’t talk now,” said Harry, fearing how slurredDumbledore’s voice had become, how much his feetdragged. “Save your energy, sir. ... We’ll soon be outof here. ...”

“The archway will have sealed again. ... My knife ...”

“There’s no need, I got cut on the rock,” said Harryfirmly. “Just tell me where. ...”

“Here ...”

Harry wiped his grazed forearm upon the stone:Having received its tribute of blood, the archwayreopened instantly. They crossed the outer cave, andHarry helped Dumbledore back into the icy seawaterthat filled the crevice in the cliff.

“It’s going to be all right, sir,” Harry said over andover again, more worried by Dumbledore’s silencethan he had been by his weakened voice. “We’renearly there. ... I can Apparate us both back. ... Don’tworry. ...”

“I am not worried, Harry,” said Dumbledore, his voicea little stronger despite the freezing water. “I am withyou.”

Page | 650 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





THE LIGHTNING-STRUCK TOWER

Once back under the starry sky, Harry heavedDumbledore onto the top of the nearest boulder andthen to his feet. Sodden and shivering, Dumbledore’sweight still upon him, Harry concentrated harderthan he had ever done upon his destination:Hogsmeade. Closing his eyes, gripping Dumbledore’sarm as tightly as he could, he stepped forward intothat feeling of horrible compression.

He knew it had worked before he opened his eyes: Thesmell of salt, the sea breeze had gone. He andDumbledore were shivering and dripping in themiddle of the dark High Street in Hogsmeade. For onehorrible moment Harry’s imagination showed himmore Inferi creeping toward him around the sides ofshops, but he blinked and saw that nothing wasstirring; all was still, the darkness complete but for afew streetlamps and lit upper windows.

Page | 651 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“We did it, Professor!” Harry whispered with difficulty;he suddenly realized that he had a searing stitch inhis chest. “We did it! We got the Horcrux!”

Dumbledore staggered against him. For a moment,Harry thought that his inexpert Apparition hadthrown Dumbledore off balance; then he saw his face,paler and damper than ever in the distant light of astreetlamp.

“Sir, are you all right?”

“I’ve been better,” said Dumbledore weakly, thoughthe corners of his mouth twitched. “That potion ...was no health drink. ...”

And to Harry’s horror, Dumbledore sank onto theground.

“Sir — it’s okay, sir, you’re going to be all right, don’tworry —”

He looked around desperately for help, but there wasnobody to be seen and all he could think was that hemust somehow get Dumbledore quickly to thehospital wing.

“We need to get you up to the school, sir. ... MadamPomfrey ...”

“No,” said Dumbledore. “It is ... Professor Snapewhom I need. ... But I do not think ... I can walk veryfar just yet. ...”

“Right — sir, listen — I’m going to knock on a door,find a place you can stay — then I can run and getMadam —”

Page | 652 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Severus,” said Dumbledore clearly. “I need Severus.

“All right then, Snape — but I’m going to have to leaveyou for a moment so I can —”

Before Harry could make a move, however, he heardrunning footsteps. His heart leapt: Somebody hadseen, somebody knew they needed help — andlooking around he saw Madam Rosmerta scurryingdown the dark street toward them on high-heeled,fluffy slippers, wearing a silk dressing gownembroidered with dragons.

“I saw you Apparate as I was pulling my bedroomcurtains! Thank goodness, thank goodness, I couldn’tthink what to — but what’s wrong with Albus?”

She came to a halt, panting, and stared down, wide-eyed, at Dumbledore.

“He’s hurt,” said Harry. “Madam Rosmerta, can hecome into the Three Broomsticks while I go up to theschool and get help for him?”

“You can’t go up there alone! Don’t you realize —haven’t you seen — ?

“If you help me support him,” said Harry, notlistening to her, “I think we can get him inside —”

“What has happened?” asked Dumbledore.

“Rosmerta, what’s wrong?”

“The — the Dark Mark, Albus.”

And she pointed into the sky, in the direction ofHogwarts. Dread flooded Harry at the sound of thewords. ... He turned and looked.

Page | 653 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

There it was, hanging in the sky above the school: theblazing green skull with a serpent tongue, the markDeath Eaters left behind whenever they had entered abuilding ... wherever they had murdered. ...

“When did it appear?” asked Dumbledore, and hishand clenched painfully upon Harry’s shoulder as hestruggled to his feet.

“Must have been minutes ago, it wasn’t there when Iput the cat out, but when I got upstairs —”

“We need to return to the castle at once,” saidDumbledore. “Rosmerta” — and though he staggereda little, he seemed wholly in command of the situation— “we need transport — brooms —”

“I’ve got a couple behind the bar,” she said, lookingvery frightened. “Shall I run and fetch — ?”

“No, Harry can do it.”

Harry raised his wand at once.

“Accio Rosmerta’s Broomsl”

A second later they heard a loud bang as the frontdoor of the pub burst open; two brooms had shot outinto the street and were racing each other to Harry’sside, where they stopped dead, quivering slightly atwaist height.

“Rosmerta, please send a message to the Ministry,”said Dumbledore, as he mounted the broom nearesthim. “It might be that nobody within Hogwarts hasyet realized anything is wrong. ... Harry, put on yourInvisibility Cloak.”

Page | 654 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry pulled his Cloak out of his pocket and threw itover himself before mounting his broom: MadamRosmerta was already tottering back toward her pubas Harry and Dumbledore kicked off from the groundand rose up into the air. As they sped toward thecastle, Harry glanced sideways at Dumbledore, readyto grab him should he fall, but the sight of the DarkMark seemed to have acted upon Dumbledore like astimulant: He was bent low over his broom, his eyesfixed upon the Mark, his long silver hair and beardflying behind him on the night air. And Harry toolooked ahead at the skull, and fear swelled inside himlike a venomous bubble, compressing his lungs,driving all other discomfort from his mind. ...

How long had they been away? Had Ron, Hermione,and Ginny’s luck run out by now? Was it one of themwho had caused the Mark to be set over the school, orwas it Neville, or Luna, or some other member of theD.A.? And if it was ... he was the one who had toldthem to patrol the corridors, he had asked them toleave the safety of their beds. ... Would he beresponsible, again, for the death of a friend?

As they flew over the dark, twisting lane down whichthey had walked earlier, Harry heard, over thewhistling of the night air in his ears, Dumbledoremuttering in some strange language again. Hethought he understood why as he felt his broomshudder when they flew over the boundary wall intothe grounds: Dumbledore was undoing theenchantments he himself had set around the castleso they could enter at speed. The Dark Mark wasglittering directly above the Astronomy Tower, thehighest of the castle. Did that mean the death hadoccurred there?

Page | 655 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore had already crossed the crenellatedramparts and was dismounting; Harry landed next tohim seconds later and looked around.

The ramparts were deserted. The door to the spiralstaircase that led back into the castle was closed.There was no sign of a struggle, of a fight to thedeath, of a body.

“What does it mean?” Harry asked Dumbledore,looking up at the green skull with its serpent’s tongueglinting evilly above them. “Is it the real Mark? Hassomeone definitely been — Professor?”

In the dim green glow from the Mark, Harry sawDumbledore clutching at his chest with his blackenedhand.

“Go and wake Severus,” said Dumbledore faintly butclearly. “Tell him what has happened and bring himto me. Do nothing else, speak to nobody else, and donot remove your cloak. I shall wait here.”

“But —”

“You swore to obey me, Harry — go!”

Harry hurried over to the door leading to the spiralstaircase, but his hand had only just closed upon theiron ring of the door when he heard running footstepson the other side. He looked around at Dumbledore,who gestured him to retreat. Harry backed away,drawing his wand as he did so.

The door burst open and somebody erupted throughit and shouted, “Expelliarmus\”

Harry’s body became instantly rigid and immobile,and he felt himself fall back against the tower wall,

Page | 656 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

propped like an unsteady statue, unable to move orspeak. He could not understand how it had happened— Expelliarmus was not a Freezing Charm —

Then, by the light of the Mark, he saw Dumbledore’swand flying in an arc over the edge of the rampartsand understood. ... Dumbledore had wordlesslyimmobilized Harry, and the second he had taken toperform the spell had cost him the chance ofdefending himself.

Standing against the ramparts, very white in the face,Dumbledore still showed no sign of panic or distress.He merely looked across at his disarmer and said,“Good evening, Draco.”

Malfoy stepped forward, glancing around quickly tocheck that he and Dumbledore were alone. His eyesfell upon the second broom.

“Who else is here?”

“A question I might ask you. Or are you acting alone?”

Harry saw Malfoy’s pale eyes shift back toDumbledore in the greenish glare of the Mark.

“No,” he said. “I’ve got backup. There are DeathEaters here in your school tonight.”

“Well, well,” said Dumbledore, as though Malfoy wasshowing him an ambitious homework project. “Verygood indeed. You found a way to let them in, didyou?”

“Yeah,” said Malfoy, who was panting. “Right underyour nose and you never realized!”

Page | 657 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Ingenious,” said Dumbledore. “Yet ... forgive me ...where are they now? You seem unsupported.”

“They met some of your guards. They’re having a fightdown below. They won’t be long. ... I came on ahead. I— I’ve got a job to do.”

“Well, then, you must get on and do it, my dear boy,”said Dumbledore softly.

There was silence. Harry stood imprisoned within hisown invisible, paralyzed body, staring at the two ofthem, his ears straining to hear sounds of the DeathEaters’ distant fight, and in front of him, DracoMalfoy did nothing but stare at Albus Dumbledore,who, incredibly, smiled.

“Draco, Draco, you are not a killer.”

“How do you know?” said Malfoy at once.

He seemed to realize how childish the words hadsounded; Harry saw him flush in the Mark’s greenishlight.

“You don’t know what I’m capable of,” said Malfoymore forcefully. “You don’t know what I’ve done!”

“Oh yes, I do,” said Dumbledore mildly. “You almostkilled Katie Bell and Ronald Weasley. You have beentrying, with increasing desperation, to kill me all year.Forgive me, Draco, but they have been feebleattempts. ... So feeble, to be honest, that I wonderwhether your heart has been really in it.”

“It has been in it!” said Malfoy vehemently. “I’ve beenworking on it all year, and tonight —”

Page | 658 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Somewhere in the depths of the castle below Harryheard a muffled yell. Malfoy stiffened and glancedover his shoulder.

“Somebody is putting up a good fight,” saidDumbledore conversationally. “But you were saying ...yes, you have managed to introduce Death Eatersinto my school, which, I admit, I thought impossible.

... How did you do it?”

But Malfoy said nothing: He was still listening towhatever was happening below and seemed almost asparalyzed as Harry was.

“Perhaps you ought to get on with the job alone,”suggested Dumbledore. “What if your backup hasbeen thwarted by my guard? As you have perhapsrealized, there are members of the Order of thePhoenix here tonight too. And after all, you don’treally need help. ... I have no wand at the moment. ...

I cannot defend myself.”

Malfoy merely stared at him.

“I see,” said Dumbledore kindly, when Malfoy neithermoved nor spoke. “You are afraid to act until they joinyou.”

“I’m not afraid!” snarled Malfoy, though he still madeno move to hurt Dumbledore. “It’s you who should bescared!”

“But why? I don’t think you will kill me, Draco. Killingis not nearly as easy as the innocent believe. ... So tellme, while we wait for your friends ... how did yousmuggle them in here? It seems to have taken you along time to work out how to do it.”

Page | 659 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy looked as though he was fighting down theurge to shout, or to vomit. He gulped and took severaldeep breaths, glaring at Dumbledore, his wandpointing directly at the latter’s heart. Then, as thoughhe could not help himself, he said, “I had to mendthat broken Vanishing Cabinet that no one’s used foryears. The one Montague got lost in last year.”

“Aaaah.” Dumbledore’s sigh was half a groan. Heclosed his eyes for a moment. “That was clever. ...There is a pair, I take it?”

“In Borgin and Burkes,” said Malfoy, “and they makea kind of passage between them. Montague told methat when he was stuck in the Hogwarts one, he wastrapped in limbo but sometimes he could hear whatwas going on at school, and sometimes what wasgoing on in the shop, as if the cabinet was travelingbetween them, but he couldn’t make anyone hearhim. ... In the end, he managed to Apparate out, eventhough he’d never passed his test. He nearly dieddoing it. Everyone thought it was a really good story,but I was the only one who realized what it meant —even Borgin didn’t know — I was the one who realizedthere could be a way into Hogwarts through thecabinets if I fixed the broken one.”

“Very good,” murmured Dumbledore. “So the DeathEaters were able to pass from Borgin and Burkes intothe school to help you. ... A clever plan, a very cleverplan ... and, as you say, right under my nose.”

“Yeah,” said Malfoy, who bizarrely seemed to drawcourage and comfort from Dumbledore’s praise.

“Yeah, it was!”

“But there were times,” Dumbledore went on, “weren’tthere, when you were not sure you would succeed inmending the cabinet? And you resorted to crude and

Page | 660 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

badly judged measures such as sending me a cursednecklace that was bound to reach the wrong hands ..poisoning mead there was only the slightest chance Imight drink. ...”

“Yeah, well, you still didn’t realize who was behindthat stuff, did you?” sneered Malfoy, as Dumbledoreslid a little down the ramparts, the strength in hislegs apparently fading, and Harry struggledfruitlessly, mutely, against the enchantment bindinghim.

“As a matter of fact, I did,” said Dumbledore. “I wassure it was you.

“Why didn’t you stop me, then?” Malfoy demanded.

“I tried, Draco. Professor Snape has been keepingwatch over you on my orders —”

“He hasn’t been doing your orders, he promised mymother —”

“Of course that is what he would tell you, Draco, but

“He’s a double agent, you stupid old man, he isn’tworking for you, you just think he is!”

“We must agree to differ on that, Draco. It so happensthat I trust Professor Snape —”

“Well, you’re losing your grip, then!” sneered Malfoy.“He’s been offering me plenty of help — wanting allthe glory for himself— wanting a bit of the action —What are you doing?’ ‘Did you do the necklace, thatwas stupid, it could have blown everything —’ But Ihaven’t told him what I’ve been doing in the Room ofRequirement, he’s going to wake up tomorrow and it’llPage | 661 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

all be over and he won’t be the Dark Lord’s favoriteanymore, he’ll be nothing compared to me, nothing!”

“Very gratifying,” said Dumbledore mildly. “We all likeappreciation for our own hard work, of course. Butyou must have had an accomplice, all the same ...someone in Hogsmeade, someone who was able toslip Katie the — the — aaaah ...”

Dumbledore closed his eyes again and nodded, asthough he was about to fall asleep. "... of course ...Rosmerta. How long has she been under the ImperiusCurse?”

“Got there at last, have you?” Malfoy taunted.

There was another yell from below, rather louder thanthe last. Malfoy looked nervously over his shoulderagain, then back at Dumbledore, who went on: “Sopoor Rosmerta was forced to lurk in her ownbathroom and pass that necklace to any Hogwartsstudent who entered the room unaccompanied? Andthe poisoned mead ... well, naturally, Rosmerta wasable to poison it for you before she sent the bottle toSlughorn, believing that it was to be my Christmaspresent. ... Yes, very neat ... very neat ... Poor Mr.Filch would not, of course, think to check a bottle ofRosmerta’s. Tell me, how have you beencommunicating with Rosmerta? I thought we had allmethods of communication in and out of the schoolmonitored.”

“Enchanted coins,” said Malfoy, as though he wascompelled to keep talking, though his wand hand wasshaking badly. “I had one and she had the other and Icould send her messages —”

“Isn’t that the secret method of communication thegroup that called themselves Dumbledore’s Army

Page | 662 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

used last year?” asked Dumbledore. His voice waslight and conversational, but Harry saw him slip aninch lower down the wall as he said it.

“Yeah, I got the idea from them,” said Malfoy, with atwisted smile. “I got the idea of poisoning the meadfrom the Mudblood Granger as well, I heard hertalking in the library about Filch not recognizingpotions.”

“Please do not use that offensive word in front of me,”said Dumbledore.

Malfoy gave a harsh laugh. “You care about me saying‘Mudblood’ when I’m about to kill you?”

“Yes, I do,” said Dumbledore, and Harry saw his feetslide a little on the floor as he struggled to remainupright. “But as for being about to kill me, Draco, youhave had several long minutes now, we are quitealone, I am more defenseless than you can havedreamed of finding me, and still you have not acted.

Malfoy’s mouth contorted involuntarily, as though hehad tasted something very bitter.

“Now, about tonight,” Dumbledore went on, “I am alittle puzzled about how it happened. ... You knewthat I had left the school? But of course,” heanswered his own question, “Rosmerta saw meleaving, she tipped you off using your ingeniouscoins, I’m sure.”

“That’s right,” said Malfoy. “But she said you werejust going for a drink, you’d be back. ...”

Page | 663 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, I certainly did have a drink ... and I came back... after a fashion,” mumbled Dumbledore. “So youdecided to spring a trap for me?”

“We decided to put the Dark Mark over the tower andget you to hurry up here, to see who’d been killed,”said Malfoy. “And it worked!”

“Well ... yes and no ...” said Dumbledore. “But am I totake it, then, that nobody has been murdered?”

“Someone’s dead,” said Malfoy, and his voice seemedto go up an octave as he said it. “One of your people...I don’t know who, it was dark. ... I stepped over thebody. ... I was supposed to be waiting up here whenyou got back, only your Phoenix lot got in the way. ...”

“Yes, they do that,” said Dumbledore.

There was a bang and shouts from below, louder thanever; it sounded as though people were fighting on theactual spiral staircase that led to where Dumbledore,Malfoy, and Harry stood, and Harry’s heart thunderedunheard in his invisible chest. ... Someone was dead.

... Malfoy had stepped over the body ... but who wasit?

“There is little time, one way or another,” saidDumbledore. “So let us discuss your options, Draco.”

“My options!” said Malfoy loudly. “I’m standing herewith a wand — I’m about to kill you —”

“My dear boy, let us have no more pretense aboutthat. If you were going to kill me, you would havedone it when you first disarmed me, you would nothave stopped for this pleasant chat about ways andmeans.”

Page | 664 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I haven’t got any options!” said Malfoy, and he wassuddenly white as Dumbledore. “I’ve got to do it! He’llkill me! He’ll kill my whole family!”

“I appreciate the difficulty of your position,” saidDumbledore. “Why else do you think I have notconfronted you before now? Because I knew that youwould have been murdered if Lord Voldemort realizedthat I suspected you.”

Malfoy winced at the sound of the name.

“I did not dare speak to you of the mission with whichI knew you had been entrusted, in case he usedLegilimency against you,” continued Dumbledore.

“But now at last we can speak plainly to each other.

... No harm has been done, you have hurt nobody,though you are very lucky that your unintentionalvictims survived. ... I can help you, Draco.”

“No, you can’t,” said Malfoy, his wand hand shakingvery badly indeed. “Nobody can. He told me to do it orhe’ll kill me. I’ve got no choice.”

“Come over to the right side, Draco, and we can hideyou more completely than you can possibly imagine.What is more, I can send members of the Order toyour mother tonight to hide her likewise. Your fatheris safe at the moment in Azkaban. ... When the timecomes, we can protect him too. Come over to the rightside, Draco ... you are not a killer. ...”

Malfoy stared at Dumbledore.

“But I got this far, didn’t I?” he said slowly. “Theythought I’d die in the attempt, but I’m here ... andyou’re in my power. ... I’m the one with the wand. ...You’re at my mercy. ...”

Page | 665 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No, Draco,” said Dumbledore quietly. “It is my mercy,and not yours, that matters now.”

Malfoy did not speak. His mouth was open, his wandhand still trembling. Harry thought he saw it drop bya fraction —

But suddenly footsteps were thundering up the stairs,and a second later Malfoy was buffeted out of the wayas four people in black robes burst through the dooronto the ramparts. Still paralyzed, his eyes staringunblinkingly, Harry gazed in terror upon fourstrangers: It seemed the Death Eaters had won thefight below.

A lumpy-looking man with an odd lopsided leer gave awheezy giggle.

“Dumbledore cornered!” he said, and he turned to astocky little woman who looked as though she couldbe his sister and who was grinning eagerly.“Dumbledore wandless, Dumbledore alone! Well done,Draco, well done!”

“Good evening, Amycus,” said Dumbledore calmly, asthough welcoming the man to a tea party. “And you’vebrought Alecto too. ... Charming ...”

The woman gave an angry little titter. “Think yourlittle jokes’ll help you on your deathbed then?” shejeered.

“Jokes? No, no, these are manners,” repliedDumbledore.

“Do it,” said the stranger standing nearest to Harry, abig, rangy man with matted gray hair and whiskers,whose black Death Eater’s robes lookeduncomfortably tight. He had a voice like none that

Page | 666 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry had ever heard: a rasping bark of a voice. Harrycould smell a powerful mixture of dirt, sweat, and,unmistakably, of blood coming from him. His filthyhands had long yellowish nails.

“Is that you, Fenrir?” asked Dumbledore.

“That’s right,” rasped the other. “Pleased to see me,Dumbledore?”

“No, I cannot say that I am.”

Greyback grinned, showing pointed teeth. Bloodtrickled down his chin and he licked his lips slowly,obscenely.

“But you know how much I like kids, Dumbledore.”

“Am I to take it that you are attacking even withoutthe full moon now? This is most unusual. ... You havedeveloped a taste for human flesh that cannot besatisfied once a month?”

“That’s right,” said Fenrir Greyback. “Shocks youthat, does it, Dumbledore? Frightens you?”

“Well, I cannot pretend it does not disgust me a little,”said Dumbledore. “And, yes, I am a little shocked thatDraco here invited you, of all people, into the schoolwhere his friends live. ...”

“I didn’t,” breathed Malfoy. He was not looking atFenrir; he did not seem to want to even glance at him.“I didn’t know he was going to come —”

“I wouldn’t want to miss a trip to Hogwarts,Dumbledore,” rasped Greyback. “Not when there arethroats to be ripped out... Delicious, delicious ...”

Page | 667 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

And he raised a yellow fingernail and picked at hisfront teeth, leering at Dumbledore. “I could do you forafters, Dumbledore.”

“No,” said the fourth Death Eater sharply. He had aheavy, brutal-looking face. “We’ve got orders. Draco’sgot to do it. Now, Draco, and quickly.”

Malfoy was showing less resolution than ever. Helooked terrified as he stared into Dumbledore’s face,which was even paler, and rather lower than usual,as he had slid so far down the rampart wall.

“He’s not long for this world anyway, if you ask me!”said the lopsided man, to the accompaniment of hissister’s wheezing giggles. “Look at him — what’shappened to you, then, Dumby?”

“Oh, weaker resistance, slower reflexes, Amycus,”said Dumbledore. “Old age, in short ... One day,perhaps, it will happen to you ... if you are lucky. ...”

“What’s that mean, then, what’s that mean?” yelledthe Death Eater, suddenly violent. “Always the same,weren’t yeh, Dumby, talking and doing nothing,nothing. I don’t even know why the Dark Lord’sbothering to kill yer! Come on, Draco, do it!”

But at that moment there were renewed sounds ofscuffling from below and a voice shouted, “They’veblocked the stairs — Reductol REDUCTOl”

Harry’s heart leapt: So these four had not eliminatedall opposition, but merely broken through the fight tothe top of the tower, and, by the sound of it, created abarrier behind them —

“Now, Draco, quickly!” said the brutal-faced manangrily.

Page | 668 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

But Malfoy’s hand was shaking so badly that he couldbarely aim.

“I’ll do it,” snarled Fenrir, moving toward Dumbledorewith his hands outstretched, his teeth bared.

“I said no!” shouted the brutal-faced man; there was aflash of light and the werewolf was blasted out of theway; he hit the ramparts and staggered, lookingfurious. Harry’s heart was hammering so hard itseemed impossible that nobody could hear himstanding there, imprisoned by Dumbledore’s spell —if he could only move, he could aim a curse fromunder the cloak —

“Draco, do it or stand aside so one of us —” screechedthe woman, but at that precise moment, the door tothe ramparts burst open once more and there stoodSnape, his wand clutched in his hand as his blackeyes swept the scene, from Dumbledore slumpedagainst the wall, to the four Death Eaters, includingthe enraged werewolf, and Malfoy.

“We’ve got a problem, Snape,” said the lumpyAmycus, whose eyes and wand were fixed alike uponDumbledore, “the boy doesn’t seem able —”

But somebody else had spoken Snape’s name, quitesoftly.

“Severus ...”

The sound frightened Harry beyond anything he hadexperienced all evening. For the first time,

Dumbledore was pleading.

Snape said nothing, but walked forward and pushedMalfoy roughly out of the way. The three Death Eaters

Page | 669 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

fell back without a word. Even the werewolf seemedcowed.

Snape gazed for a moment at Dumbledore, and therewas revulsion and hatred etched in the harsh lines ofhis face.

“Severus ... please ...”

Snape raised his wand and pointed it directly atDumbledore.

“Avada KedavraV’

A jet of green light shot from the end of Snape’s wandand hit Dumbledore squarely in the chest. Harry’sscream of horror never left him; silent and unmoving,he was forced to watch as Dumbledore was blastedinto the air. For a split second, he seemed to hangsuspended beneath the shining skull, and then he fellslowly backward, like a great rag doll, over thebattlements and out of sight.

Page | 670 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





FLIGHT OF THE PRINCE

Harry felt as though he too were hurtling throughspace; it had not happened. ...It could not havehappened. ...

“Out of here, quickly,” said Snape.

He seized Malfoy by the scruff of the neck and forcedhim through the door ahead of the rest; Greyback andthe squat brother and sister followed, the latter bothpanting excitedly. As they vanished through the door,Harry realized he could move again. What was nowholding him paralyzed against the wall was not magic,but horror and shock. He threw the Invisibility Cloakaside as the brutal-faced Death Eater, last to leavethe tower top, was disappearing through the door.

“Petrificus Totalusl”

The Death Eater buckled as though hit in the backwith something solid and fell to the ground, rigid as awaxwork, but he had barely hit the floor when Harry

Page | 671 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

was clambering over him and running down thedarkened staircase.

Terror tore at Harry’s heart. ... He had to get toDumbledore and he had to catch Snape. ... Somehowthe two things were linked. ... He could reverse whathad happened if he had them both together. ...Dumbledore could not have died. ...

He leapt the last ten steps of the spiral staircase andstopped where he landed, his wand raised: The dimlylit corridor was full of dust; half the ceiling seemed tohave fallen in; and a battle was raging before him, buteven as he attempted to make out who was fightingwhom, he heard the hated voice shout, “It’s over, timeto go\” and saw Snape disappearing around the cornerat the far end of the corridor; he and Malfoy seemedto have forced their way through the fight unscathed.As Harry plunged after them, one of the fightersdetached themselves from the fray and flew at him: Itwas the werewolf, Fenrir. He was on top of Harrybefore Harry could raise his wand: Harry fellbackward, with filthy matted hair in his face, thestench of sweat and blood filling his nose and mouth,hot greedy breath at his throat —

“Petrificus Totalusl”

Harry felt Fenrir collapse against him; with astupendous effort he pushed the werewolf off andonto the floor as a jet of green light came flyingtoward him; he ducked and ran, headfirst, into thefight. His feet met something squashy and slippery onthe floor and he stumbled: There were two bodieslying there, lying facedown in a pool of blood, butthere was no time to investigate. Harry now saw redhair flying like flames in front of him: Ginny waslocked in combat with the lumpy Death Eater,Amycus, who was throwing hex after hex at her whilePage | 672 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

she dodged them: Amycus was giggling, enjoying thesport: “Crucio — Crucio — you can’t dance forever,pretty —”

“Impedimenta).” yelled Harry.

His jinx hit Amycus in the chest: He gave a piglikesqueal of pain, was lifted off his feet and slammedinto the opposite wall, slid down it, and fell out ofsight behind Ron, Professor McGonagall, and Lupin,each of whom was battling a separate Death Eater.Beyond them, Harry saw Tonks fighting an enormousblond wizard who was sending curses flying in alldirections, so that they ricocheted off the wallsaround them, cracking stone, shattering the nearestwindow —

“Harry, where did you come from?” Ginny cried, butthere was no time to answer her. He put his headdown and sprinted forward, narrowly avoiding a blastthat erupted over his head, showering them all in bitsof wall. Snape must not escape, he must catch upwith Snape —

“Take that\” shouted Professor McGonagall, and Harryglimpsed the female Death Eater, Alecto, sprintingaway down the corridor with her arms over her head,her brother right behind her. He launched himselfafter them but his foot caught on something, and nextmoment he was lying across someone’s legs. Lookingaround, he saw Neville’s pale, round face flat againstthe floor.

“Neville, are you — ?”

“M’all right,” muttered Neville, who was clutching hisstomach, “Harry ... Snape ’n’ Malfoy ... ran past ...”

Page | 673 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I know, I’m on it!” said Harry, aiming a hex from thefloor at the enormous blond Death Eater who wascausing most of the chaos. The man gave a howl ofpain as the spell hit him in the face: He wheeledaround, staggered, and then pounded away after thebrother and sister. Harry scrambled up from the floorand began to sprint along the corridor, ignoring thebangs issuing from behind him, the yells of the othersto come back, and the mute call of the figures on theground whose fate he did not yet know. ...

He skidded around the corner, his trainers slipperywith blood; Snape had an immense head start. Was itpossible that he had already entered the cabinet inthe Room of Requirement, or had the Order madesteps to secure it, to prevent the Death Eatersretreating that way? He could hear nothing but hisown pounding feet, his own hammering heart as hesprinted along the next empty corridor, but thenspotted a bloody footprint that showed at least one ofthe fleeing Death Eaters was heading toward the frontdoors — perhaps the Room of Requirement wasindeed blocked —

He skidded around another corner and a curse flewpast him; he dived behind a suit of armor thatexploded. He saw the brother and sister runningdown the marble staircase ahead and aimed jinxes atthem, but merely hit several bewigged witches in aportrait on the landing, who ran screeching intoneighboring paintings. As he leapt the wreckage ofarmor, Harry heard more shouts and screams; otherpeople within the castle seemed to have awoken. ...

He pelted toward a shortcut, hoping to overtake thebrother and sister and close in on Snape and Malfoy,who must surely have reached the grounds by now.Remembering to leap the vanishing step halfwaydown the concealed staircase, he burst through aPage | 674 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

tapestry at the bottom and out into a corridor where anumber of bewildered and pajama-clad Hufflepuffsstood.

“Harry! We heard a noise, and someone saidsomething about the Dark Mark —” began ErnieMacmillan.

“Out of the way!” yelled Harry, knocking two boysaside as he sprinted toward the landing and down theremainder of the marble staircase. The oak frontdoors had been blasted open, there were smears ofblood on the flagstones, and several terrified studentsstood huddled against the walls, one or two stillcowering with their arms over their faces. The giantGryffindor hourglass had been hit by a curse, and therubies within were still falling, with a loud rattle, ontothe flagstones below.

Harry flew across the entrance hall and out into thedark grounds: He could just make out three figuresracing across the lawn, heading for the gates beyondwhich they could Disapparate — by the looks of them,the huge blond Death Eater and, some way ahead ofhim, Snape and Malfoy ...

The cold night air ripped at Harry’s lungs as he toreafter them; he saw a flash of light in the distance thatmomentarily silhouetted his quarry. He did not knowwhat it was but continued to run, not yet nearenough to get a good aim with a curse —

Another flash, shouts, retaliatory jets of light, andHarry understood: Hagrid had emerged from hiscabin and was trying to stop the Death Eatersescaping, and though every breath seemed to shredhis lungs and the stitch in his chest was like fire,Harry sped up as an unbidden voice in his head said:not Hagrid ... not Hagrid too ...

Page | 675 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Something caught Harry hard in the small of the backand he fell forward, his face smacking the ground,blood pouring out of both nostrils: He knew, even ashe rolled over, his wand ready, that the brother andsister he had overtaken using his shortcut wereclosing in behind him. ...

“Impedimenta).” he yelled as he rolled over again,crouching close to the dark ground, and miraculouslyhis jinx hit one of them, who stumbled and fell,tripping up the other; Harry leapt to his feet andsprinted on after Snape.

And now he saw the vast outline of Hagrid,illuminated by the light of the crescent moon revealedsuddenly behind clouds; the blond Death Eater wasaiming curse after curse at the gamekeeper; butHagrid’s immense strength and the toughened skinhe had inherited from his giantess mother seemed tobe protecting him. Snape and Malfoy, however, werestill running; they would soon be beyond the gates,able to Disapparate —

Harry tore past Hagrid and his opponent, took aim atSnape’s back, and yelled, “Stupefy\”

He missed; the jet of red light soared past Snape’shead; Snape shouted, “Run, Draco\” and turned.Twenty yards apart, he and Harry looked at eachother before raising their wands simultaneously.

“Cruc —”

But Snape parried the curse, knocking Harrybackward off his feet before he could complete it;Harry rolled over and scrambled back up again as thehuge Death Eater behind him yelled, “Incendiol” Harryheard an explosive bang and a dancing orange lightspilled over all of them: Hagrid’s house was on fire.Page | 676 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Fang’s in there, yer evil — !” Hagrid bellowed.

“Cruc —” yelled Harry for the second time, aiming forthe figure ahead illuminated in the dancing firelight,but Snape blocked the spell again. Harry could seehim sneering.

“No Unforgivable Curses from you, Potter!” heshouted over the rushing of the flames, Hagrid’s yells,and the wild yelping of the trapped Fang. “You haven’tgot the nerve or the ability —”

“Incarc —” Harry roared, but Snape deflected the spellwith an almost lazy flick of his arm.

“Fight back!” Harry screamed at him. “Fight back, youcowardly —”

“Coward, did you call me, Potter?” shouted Snape.“Your father would never attack me unless it was fouron one, what would you call him, I wonder?”

“Stupe —”

“Blocked again and again and again until you learn tokeep your mouth shut and your mind closed, Potter!”sneered Snape, deflecting the curse once more. “Nowcome!” he shouted at the huge Death Eater behindHarry. “It is time to be gone, before the Ministry turnsup —”

“Impedi —”

But before he could finish this jinx, excruciating painhit Harry; he keeled over in the grass. Someone wasscreaming, he would surely die of this agony, Snapewas going to torture him to death or madness —

Page | 677 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“No!” roared Snape’s voice and the pain stopped assuddenly as it had started; Harry lay curled on thedark grass, clutching his wand and panting;somewhere overhead Snape was shouting, “Have youforgotten our orders? Potter belongs to the Dark Lord— we are to leave him! Go! Go!”

And Harry felt the ground shudder under his face asthe brother and sister and the enormous Death Eaterobeyed, running toward the gates. Harry uttered aninarticulate yell of rage: In that instant, he cared notwhether he lived or died. Pushing himself to his feetagain, he staggered blindly toward Snape, the man henow hated as much as he hated Voldemort himself —

“Sectum— !”

Snape flicked his wand and the curse was repelled yetagain; but Harry was mere feet away now and hecould see Snape’s face clearly at last: He was nolonger sneering or jeering; the blazing flames showeda face full of rage. Mustering all his powers ofconcentration, Harry thought, Levi —

“No, Potter!” screamed Snape. There was a loud BANGand Harry was soaring backward, hitting the groundhard again, and this time his wand flew out of hishand. He could hear Hagrid yelling and Fang howlingas Snape closed in and looked down on him where helay, wandless and defenseless as Dumbledore hadbeen. Snape’s pale face, illuminated by the flamingcabin, was suffused with hatred just as it had beenbefore he had cursed Dumbledore.

“You dare use my own spells against me, Potter? Itwas I who invented them — I, the Half-Blood Prince!And you’d turn my inventions on me, like your filthyfather, would you? I don’t think so ... no!”

Page | 678 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Harry had dived for his wand; Snape shot a hex at itand it flew feet away into the darkness and out ofsight.

“Kill me then,” panted Harry, who felt no fear at all,but only rage and contempt. “Kill me like you killedhim, you coward —”

“DONT—” screamed Snape, and his face wassuddenly demented, inhuman, as though he was inas much pain as the yelping, howling dog stuck in theburning house behind them — “CALL ME COWARD!”

And he slashed at the air: Harry felt a white-hot,whiplike something hit him across the face and wasslammed backward into the ground. Spots of lightburst in front of his eyes and for a moment all thebreath seemed to have gone from his body, then heheard a rush of wings above him and somethingenormous obscured the stars. Buckbeak had flown atSnape, who staggered backward as the razor-sharpclaws slashed at him. As Harry raised himself into asitting position, his head still swimming from its lastcontact with the ground, he saw Snape running ashard as he could, the enormous beast flapping behindhim and screeching as Harry had never heard himscreech —

Harry struggled to his feet, looking around groggily forhis wand, hoping to give chase again, but even as hisfingers fumbled in the grass, discarding twigs, heknew it would be too late, and sure enough, by thetime he had located his wand, he turned only to seethe hippogriff circling the gates. Snape had managedto Disapparate just beyond the school’s boundaries.

“Hagrid,” muttered Harry, still dazed, looking around.“HAGRID?”

Page | 679 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

He stumbled toward the burning house as anenormous figure emerged from out of the flamescarrying Fang on his back. With a cry ofthankfulness, Harry sank to his knees; he wasshaking in every limb, his body ached all over, andhis breath came in painful stabs.

“Yeh all righ’, Harry? Yeh all righ’? Speak ter me,Harry. ...”

Hagrid’s huge, hairy face was swimming above Harry,blocking out the stars. Harry could smell burnt woodand dog hair; he put out a hand and felt Fang’sreassuringly warm and alive body quivering besidehim.

“I’m all right,” panted Harry. “Are you?”

“ ’Course I am ... take more’n that ter finish me.”

Hagrid put his hands under Harry’s arms and raisedhim up with such force that Harry’s feet momentarilyleft the ground before Hagrid set him upright again.

He could see blood trickling down Hagrid’s cheekfrom a deep cut under one eye, which was swellingrapidly.

“We should put out your house,” said Harry, “thecharm’s ‘Aguamenti’ ...”

“Knew it was summat like that,” mumbled Hagrid,and he raised a smoldering pink, flowery umbrellaand said, “Aguamenti\”

A jet of water flew out of the umbrella tip. Harryraised his wand arm, which felt like lead, andmurmured “Aguamenti’ too: Together, he and Hagridpoured water on the house until the last flame wasextinguished.

Page | 680 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“S’not too bad,” said Hagrid hopefully a few minuteslater, looking at the smoking wreck. “Nothin’Dumbledore won’ be able to put righ’ ...”

Harry felt a searing pain in his stomach at the soundof the name. In the silence and the stillness, horrorrose inside him.

“Hagrid ...”

“I was bindin’ up a couple o’ bowtruckle legs when Iheard ’em cornin’,” said Hagrid sadly, still staring athis wrecked cabin. “They’ll’ve bin burnt ter twigs,poor little things. ...”

“Hagrid ...”

“But what happened, Harry? I jus’ saw them DeathEaters runnin’ down from the castle, but what theruddy hell was Snape doin’ with ’em? Where’s he gone— was he chasin’ them?”

“He ...” Harry cleared his throat; it was dry from panicand the smoke. “Hagrid, he killed ...”

“Killed?” said Hagrid loudly, staring down at Harry.“Snape killed? What’re yeh on abou’, Harry?”

“Dumbledore,” said Harry. “Snape killed ...Dumbledore.”

Hagrid simply looked at him, the little of his face thatcould be seen completely blank, uncomprehending.

“Dumbledore wha’, Harry?”

“He’s dead. Snape killed him. ...”

Page | 681 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Don’ say that,” said Hagrid roughly. “Snape killDumbledore — don’ be stupid, Harry. Wha’s madeyeh say tha’?”

“I saw it happen.”

“Yeh couldn’ have.”

“I saw it, Hagrid.”

Hagrid shook his head; his expression wasdisbelieving but sympathetic, and Harry knew thatHagrid thought he had sustained a blow to the head,that he was confused, perhaps by the aftereffects of ajinx. ...

“What musta happened was, Dumbledore musta toldSnape ter go with them Death Eaters,” Hagrid saidconfidently. “I suppose he’s gotta keep his cover.

Look, let’s get yeh back up ter the school. Come on,Harry. ...”

Harry did not attempt to argue or explain. He was stillshaking uncontrollably. Hagrid would find out soonenough, too soon. ... As they directed their steps backtoward the castle, Harry saw that many of itswindows were lit now. He could imagine, clearly, thescenes inside as people moved from room to room,telling each other that Death Eaters had got in, thatthe Mark was shining over Hogwarts, that somebodymust have been killed. ...

The oak front doors stood open ahead of them, lightflooding out onto the drive and the lawn. Slowly,uncertainly, dressing-gowned people were creepingdown the steps, looking around nervously for somesign of the Death Eaters who had fled into the night.Harry’s eyes, however, were fixed upon the ground atthe foot of the tallest tower. He imagined that hePage | 682 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

could see a black, huddled mass lying in the grassthere, though he was really too far away to seeanything of the sort. Even as he stared wordlessly atthe place where he thought Dumbledore’s body mustlie, however, he saw people beginning to move towardit.

“What’re they all lookin’ at?” said Hagrid, as he andHarry approached the castle front, Fang keeping asclose as he could to their ankles. “Wha’s tha’, lyin’ onthe grass?” Hagrid added sharply, heading nowtoward the foot of the Astronomy Tower, where asmall crowd was congregating. “See it, Harry? Righ’ atthe foot o’ the tower? Under where the Mark ... Blimey... yeh don’ think someone got thrown — ?”

Hagrid fell silent, the thought apparently too horribleto express aloud. Harry walked alongside him, feelingthe aches and pains in his face and his legs where thevarious hexes of the last half hour had hit him,though in an oddly detached way, as thoughsomebody near him was suffering them. What wasreal and inescapable was the awful pressing feeling inhis chest. ...

He and Hagrid moved, dreamlike, through themurmuring crowd to the very front, where thedumbstruck students and teachers had left a gap.

Harry heard Hagrid’s moan of pain and shock, but hedid not stop; he walked slowly forward until hereached the place where Dumbledore lay andcrouched down beside him. He had known there wasno hope from the moment that the full Body-BindCurse Dumbledore had placed upon him lifted,known that it could have happened only because itscaster was dead, but there was still no preparation forseeing him here, spread-eagled, broken: the greatestwizard Harry had ever, or would ever, meet.

Page | 683 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore’s eyes were closed; but for the strangeangle of his arms and legs, he might have beensleeping. Harry reached out, straightened the half-moon spectacles upon the crooked nose, and wiped atrickle of blood from the mouth with his own sleeve.Then he gazed down at the wise old face and tried toabsorb the enormous and incomprehensible truth:that never again would Dumbledore speak to him,never again could he help. ...

The crowd murmured behind Harry. After whatseemed like a long time, he became aware that he waskneeling upon something hard and looked down.

The locket they had managed to steal so many hoursbefore had fallen out of Dumbledore’s pocket. It hadopened, perhaps due to the force with which it hit theground. And although he could not feel more shock orhorror or sadness than he felt already, Harry knew,as he picked it up, that there was something wrong.

He turned the locket over in his hands. This wasneither as large as the locket he remembered seeingin the Pensieve, nor were there any markings upon it,no sign of the ornate S that was supposed to beSlytherin’s mark. Moreover, there was nothing insidebut for a scrap of folded parchment wedged tightlyinto the place where a portrait should have been.

Automatically, without really thinking about what hewas doing, Harry pulled out the fragment ofparchment, opened it, and read by the light of themany wands that had now been lit behind him:

To the Dark Lord

I know I will be dead long before you read this

Page | 684 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

but I want you to know that it was I who discoveredyour secret

I have stolen the real Horcrux and intend to destroy itas soon as I can.

I face death in the hope that when you meet yourmatch,

you will be mortal once more.

R.A.B.

Harry neither knew nor cared what the messagemeant. Only one thing mattered: This was not aHorcrux. Dumbledore had weakened himself bydrinking that terrible potion for nothing. Harrycrumpled the parchment in his hand, and his eyesburned with tears as behind him Fang began to howl.

Page | 685 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

z?



THE PHOENIX LAMENT

“C’mere, Harry ...”

“No.”

“Yeh can’ stay here, Harry. ... Come on, now. ...”

“No.”

He did not want to leave Dumbledore’s side, he didnot want to move anywhere. Hagrid’s hand on hisshoulder was trembling. Then another voice said,“Harry, come on.”

A much smaller and warmer hand had enclosed hisand was pulling him upward. He obeyed its pressurewithout really thinking about it. Only as he walkedblindly back through the crowd did he realize, from atrace of flowery scent on the air, that it was Ginnywho was leading him back into the castle.Incomprehensible voices battered him, sobs andshouts and wails stabbed the night, but Harry andGinny walked on, back up the steps into the entrancePage | 686 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

hall. Faces swam on the edges of Harry’s vision,people were peering at him, whispering, wondering,and Gryffindor rubies glistened on the floor like dropsof blood as they made their way toward the marblestaircase.

“We’re going to the hospital wing,” said Ginny.

“I’m not hurt,” said Harry.

“It’s McGonagall’s orders,” said Ginny. “Everyone’s upthere, Ron and Hermione and Lupin and everyone —”

Fear stirred in Harry’s chest again: He had forgottenthe inert figures he had left behind.

“Ginny, who else is dead?”

“Don’t worry, none of us.”

“But the Dark Mark — Malfoy said he stepped over abody —”

“He stepped over Bill, but it’s all right, he’s alive.”

There was something in her voice, however, thatHarry knew boded ill.

“Are you sure?”

“Of course I’m sure ... he’s a — a bit of a mess, that’sall. Greyback attacked him. Madam Pomfrey says hewon’t — won’t look the same anymore. ...”

Ginny’s voice trembled a little.

“We don’t really know what the aftereffects will be — Imean, Greyback being a werewolf, but nottransformed at the time.”

Page | 687 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But the others ... There were other bodies on theground. ...”

“Neville and Professor Flitwick are both hurt, butMadam Pomfrey says they’ll be all right. And a DeathEater’s dead, he got hit by a Killing Curse that hugeblond one was firing off everywhere — Harry, if wehadn’t had your Felix potion, I think we’d all havebeen killed, but everything seemed to just miss us —”

They had reached the hospital wing. Pushing openthe doors, Harry saw Neville lying, apparently asleep,in a bed near the door. Ron, Hermione, Luna, Tonks,and Lupin were gathered around another bed nearthe far end of the ward. At the sound of the doorsopening, they all looked up. Hermione ran to Harryand hugged him; Lupin moved forward too, lookinganxious.

“Are you all right, Harry?”

“I’m fine. ... How’s Bill?”

Nobody answered. Harry looked over Hermione’sshoulder and saw an unrecognizable face lying onBill’s pillow, so badly slashed and ripped that helooked grotesque. Madam Pomfrey was dabbing at hiswounds with some harsh-smelling green ointment.Harry remembered how Snape had mended Malfoy’sSectumsempra wounds so easily with his wand.

“Can’t you fix them with a charm or something?” heasked the matron.

“No charm will work on these,” said Madam Pomfrey.“I’ve tried everything I know, but there is no cure forwerewolf bites.”

Page | 688 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“But he wasn’t bitten at the full moon,” said Ron, whowas gazing down into his brother’s face as though hecould somehow force him to mend just by staring.“Greyback hadn’t transformed, so surely Bill won’t bea — a real — ?”

He looked uncertainly at Lupin.

“No, I don’t think that Bill will be a true werewolf,”said Lupin, “but that does not mean that there won’tbe some contamination. Those are cursed wounds.They are unlikely ever to heal fully, and — and Billmight have some wolfish characteristics from nowon.”

“Dumbledore might know something that’d work,though,” Ron said. “Where is he? Bill fought thosemaniacs on Dumbledore’s orders, Dumbledore oweshim, he can’t leave him in this state —”

“Ron — Dumbledore’s dead,” said Ginny.

“No!” Lupin looked wildly from Ginny to Harry, asthough hoping the latter might contradict her, butwhen Harry did not, Lupin collapsed into a chairbeside Bill’s bed, his hands over his face. Harry hadnever seen Lupin lose control before; he felt as thoughhe was intruding upon something private, indecent.

He turned away and caught Ron’s eye instead,exchanging in silence a look that confirmed whatGinny had said.

“How did he die?” whispered Tonks. “How did ithappen?”

“Snape killed him,” said Harry. “I was there, I saw it.We arrived back on the Astronomy Tower becausethat’s where the Mark was. ... Dumbledore was ill, hewas weak, but I think he realized it was a trap when

Page | 689 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

we heard footsteps running up the stairs. Heimmobilized me, I couldn’t do anything, I was underthe Invisibility Cloak — and then Malfoy camethrough the door and disarmed him —”

Hermione clapped her hands to her mouth and Rongroaned. Luna’s mouth trembled.

“— more Death Eaters arrived — and then Snape —and Snape did it. The Avada Kedavra.” Harry couldn’tgo on.

Madam Pomfrey burst into tears. Nobody paid herany attention except Ginny, who whispered, “Shh!Listen!”

Gulping, Madam Pomfrey pressed her fingers to hermouth, her eyes wide. Somewhere out in thedarkness, a phoenix was singing in a way Harry hadnever heard before: a stricken lament of terriblebeauty. And Harry felt, as he had felt about phoenixsong before, that the music was inside him, notwithout: It was his own grief turned magically to songthat echoed across the grounds and through thecastle windows.

How long they all stood there, listening, he did notknow, nor why it seemed to ease their pain a little tolisten to the sound of their mourning, but it felt like along time later that the hospital door opened againand Professor McGonagall entered the ward. Like allthe rest, she bore marks of the recent battle: Therewere grazes on her face and her robes were ripped.

“Molly and Arthur are on their way,” she said, and thespell of the music was broken: Everyone rousedthemselves as though coming out of trances, turningagain to look at Bill, or else to rub their own eyes,shake their heads. “Harry, what happened? AccordingPage | 690 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

to Hagrid you were with Professor Dumbledore whenhe — when it happened. He says Professor Snape wasinvolved in some —”

“Snape killed Dumbledore,” said Harry.

She stared at him for a moment, then swayedalarmingly; Madam Pomfrey, who seemed to havepulled herself together, ran forward, conjuring a chairfrom thin air, which she pushed under McGonagall.

“Snape,” repeated McGonagall faintly, falling into thechair. “We all wondered ... but he trusted ... always ...Snape ... I can’t believe it. ...”

“Snape was a highly accomplished Occlumens,” saidLupin, his voice uncharacteristically harsh. “Wealways knew that.”

“But Dumbledore swore he was on our side!”whispered Tonks. “I always thought Dumbledoremust know something about Snape that we didn’t. ...”

“He always hinted that he had an ironclad reason fortrusting Snape,” muttered Professor McGonagall, nowdabbing at the corners of her leaking eyes with atartan-edged handkerchief. “I mean ... with Snape’shistory ... of course people were bound to wonder ...but Dumbledore told me explicitly that Snape’srepentance was absolutely genuine. ... Wouldn’t heara word against him!”

“I’d love to know what Snape told him to convincehim,” said Tonks.

“I know,” said Harry, and they all turned to look athim. “Snape passed Voldemort the information thatmade Voldemort hunt down my mum and dad. ThenSnape told Dumbledore he hadn’t realized what he

Page | 691 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

was doing, he was really sorry he’d done it, sorry thatthey were dead.”

They all stared at him.

“And Dumbledore believed that?” said Lupinincredulously. “Dumbledore believed Snape was sorryJames was dead? Snape hated James. ...”

“And he didn’t think my mother was worth a damneither,” said Harry, “because she was Muggle-born. ...‘Mudblood,’ he called her. ...”

Nobody asked how Harry knew this. All of themseemed to be lost in horrified shock, trying to digestthe monstrous truth of what had happened.

“This is all my fault,” said Professor McGonagallsuddenly. She looked disoriented, twisting her wethandkerchief in her hands. “My fault. I sent Filius tofetch Snape tonight, I actually sent for him to comeand help us! If I hadn’t alerted Snape to what wasgoing on, he might never have joined forces with theDeath Eaters. I don’t think he knew they were therebefore Filius told him, I don’t think he knew they werecoming.”

“It isn’t your fault, Minerva,” said Lupin firmly. “Weall wanted more help, we were glad to think Snapewas on his way. ...”

“So when he arrived at the fight, he joined in on theDeath Eaters’ side?” asked Harry, who wanted everydetail of Snape’s duplicity and infamy, feverishlycollecting more reasons to hate him, to swearvengeance.

“I don’t know exactly how it happened,” said ProfessorMcGonagall distractedly. “It’s all so confusing. ...

Page | 692 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore had told us that he would be leaving theschool for a few hours and that we were to patrol thecorridors just in case ... Remus, Bill, andNymphadora were to join us ... and so we patrolled.

All seemed quiet. Every secret passageway out of theschool was covered. We knew nobody could fly in.There were powerful enchantments on every entranceinto the castle. I still don’t know how the DeathEaters can possibly have entered. ...”

“I do,” said Harry, and he explained, briefly, about thepair of Vanishing Cabinets and the magical pathwaythey formed. “So they got in through the Room ofRequirement.”

Almost against his will he glanced from Ron toHermione, both of whom looked devastated.

“I messed up, Harry,” said Ron bleakly. “We did likeyou told us: We checked the Marauder’s Map and wecouldn’t see Malfoy on it, so we thought he must be inthe Room of Requirement, so me, Ginny, and Nevillewent to keep watch on it ... but Malfoy got past us.”

“He came out of the room about an hour after westarted keeping watch,” said Ginny. “He was on hisown, clutching that awful shriveled arm —”

“His Hand of Glory,” said Ron. “Gives light only to theholder, remember?”

“Anyway,” Ginny went on, “he must have beenchecking whether the coast was clear to let the DeathEaters out, because the moment he saw us he threwsomething into the air and it all went pitch-black —”

“— Peruvian Instant Darkness Powder,” said Ronbitterly. “Fred and George’s. I’m going to be having a

Page | 693 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

word with them about who they let buy theirproducts.”

“We tried everything, Lumos, Incendio,” said Ginny.“Nothing would penetrate the darkness; all we coulddo was grope our way out of the corridor again, andmeanwhile we could hear people rushing past us.Obviously Malfoy could see because of that handthing and was guiding them, but we didn’t dare useany curses or anything in case we hit each other, andby the time we’d reached a corridor that was light,they’d gone.”

“Luckily,” said Lupin hoarsely, “Ron, Ginny, andNeville ran into us almost immediately and told uswhat had happened. We found the Death Eatersminutes later, heading in the direction of theAstronomy Tower. Malfoy obviously hadn’t expectedmore people to be on the watch; he seemed to haveexhausted his supply of Darkness Powder, at anyrate. A fight broke out, they scattered and we gavechase. One of them, Gibbon, broke away and headedup the tower stairs —”

“To set off the Mark?” asked Harry.

“He must have done, yes, they must have arrangedthat before they left the Room of Requirement,” saidLupin. “But I don’t think Gibbon liked the idea ofwaiting up there alone for Dumbledore, because hecame running back downstairs to rejoin the fight andwas hit by a Killing Curse that just missed me.”

“So if Ron was watching the Room of Requirementwith Ginny and Neville,” said Harry, turning toHermione, “were you — ?”

“Outside Snape’s office, yes,” whispered Hermione,her eyes sparkling with tears, “with Luna. We hung

Page | 694 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

around for ages outside it and nothing happened. ...We didn’t know what was going on upstairs, Ron hadtaken the map. ... It was nearly midnight whenProfessor Flitwick came sprinting down into thedungeons. He was shouting about Death Eaters inthe castle, I don’t think he really registered that Lunaand I were there at all, he just burst his way intoSnape’s office and we heard him saying that Snapehad to go back with him and help and then we hearda loud thump and Snape came hurtling out of hisroom and he saw us and — and —”

“What?” Harry urged her.

“I was so stupid, Harry!” said Hermione in a high-pitched whisper. “He said Professor Flitwick hadcollapsed and that we should go and take care of himwhile he — while he went to help fight the DeathEaters —” She covered her face in shame andcontinued to talk into her fingers, so that her voicewas muffled. “We went into his office to see if wecould help Professor Flitwick and found himunconscious on the floor ... and oh, it’s so obviousnow, Snape must have Stupefied Flitwick, but wedidn’t realize, Harry, we didn’t realize, we just letSnape go!”

“It’s not your fault,” said Lupin firmly. “Hermione,had you not obeyed Snape and got out of the way, heprobably would have killed you and Luna.”

“So then he came upstairs,” said Harry, who waswatching Snape running up the marble staircase inhis mind’s eye, his black robes billowing behind himas ever, pulling his wand from under his cloak as heascended, “and he found the place where you were allfighting. ...”

Page | 695 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“We were in trouble, we were losing,” said Tonks in alow voice. “Gibbon was down, but the rest of theDeath Eaters seemed ready to fight to the death.Neville had been hurt, Bill had been savaged byGreyback ... It was all dark ... curses flyingeverywhere ... The Malfoy boy had vanished, he musthave slipped past, up the stairs ... then more of themran after him, but one of them blocked the stairbehind them with some kind of curse. ... Neville ranat it and got thrown up into the air —”

“None of us could break through,” said Ron, “and thatmassive Death Eater was still firing off jinxes all overthe place, they were bouncing off the walls and barelymissing us. ...”

“And then Snape was there,” said Tonks, “and thenhe wasn’t —”

“I saw him running toward us, but that huge DeathEater’s jinx just missed me right afterward and Iducked and lost track of things,” said Ginny.

“I saw him run straight through the cursed barrier asthough it wasn’t there,” said Lupin. “I tried to followhim, but was thrown back just like Neville. ...”

“He must have known a spell we didn’t,” whisperedMcGonagall. “After all — he was the Defense Againstthe Dark Arts teacher. ... I just assumed that he wasin a hurry to chase after the Death Eaters who’descaped up to the tower. ...”

“He was,” said Harry savagely, “but to help them, notto stop them ... and I’ll bet you had to have a DarkMark to get through that barrier — so what happenedwhen he came back down?”

Page | 696 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Well, the big Death Eater had just fired off a hex thatcaused half the ceiling to fall in, and also broke thecurse blocking the stairs,” said Lupin. “We all ranforward — those of us who were still standing anyway— and then Snape and the boy emerged out of thedust — obviously, none of us attacked them —”

“We just let them pass,” said Tonks in a hollow voice.“We thought they were being chased by the DeathEaters — and next thing, the other Death Eaters andGreyback were back and we were fighting again — Ithought I heard Snape shout something, but I don’tknow what —”

“He shouted, ‘It’s over,’ ” said Harry. “He’d done whathe’d meant to do.”

They all fell silent. Fawkes’s lament was still echoingover the dark grounds outside. As the musicreverberated upon the air, unbidden, unwelcomethoughts slunk into Harry’s mind. ... Had they takenDumbledore’s body from the foot of the tower yet?What would happen to it next? Where would it rest?He clenched his fists tightly in his pockets. He couldfeel the small cold lump of the fake Horcrux againstthe knuckles of his right hand.

The doors of the hospital wing burst open, makingthem all jump: Mr. and Mrs. Weasley were striding upthe ward, Fleur just behind them, her beautiful faceterrified.

“Molly — Arthur —” said Professor McGonagall,jumping up and hurrying to greet them. “I am sosorry —”

“Bill,” whispered Mrs. Weasley, darting past ProfessorMcGonagall as she caught sight of Bill’s mangled face.“Oh, Bill'.”

Page | 697 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Lupin and Tonks had got up hastily and retreated sothat Mr. and Mrs. Weasley could get nearer to thebed. Mrs. Weasley bent over her son and pressed herlips to his bloody forehead.

“You said Greyback attacked him?” Mr. Weasleyasked Professor McGonagall distractedly. “But hehadn’t transformed? So what does that mean? Whatwill happen to Bill?”

“We don’t yet know,” said Professor McGonagall,looking helplessly at Lupin.

“There will probably be some contamination, Arthur,”said Lupin. “It is an odd case, possibly unique. ... Wedon’t know what his behavior might be like when heawakens. ...”

Mrs. Weasley took the nasty-smelling ointment fromMadam Pomfrey and began dabbing at Bill’s wounds.

“And Dumbledore ...” said Mr. Weasley. “Minerva, is ittrue ... Is he really ... ?”

As Professor McGonagall nodded, Harry felt Ginnymove beside him and looked at her. Her slightlynarrowed eyes were fixed upon Fleur, who was gazingdown at Bill with a frozen expression on her face.

“Dumbledore gone,” whispered Mr. Weasley, but Mrs.Weasley had eyes only for her eldest son; she beganto sob, tears falling onto Bill’s mutilated face.

“Of course, it doesn’t matter how he looks. ... It’s notr-really important ... but he was a very handsomelittle b-boy ... always very handsome ... and he was g-going to be married!”

Page | 698 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“And what do you mean by zat?” said Fleur suddenlyand loudly. “What do you mean, ‘’e was going to bemarried?’ ”

Mrs. Weasley raised her tear-stained face, lookingstartled. “Well — only that —”

“You theenk Bill will not wish to marry me anymore?”demanded Fleur. “You theenk, because of these bites,he will not love me?”

“No, that’s not what I —”

“Because ’e will!” said Fleur, drawing herself up to herfull height and throwing back her long mane of silverhair. “It would take more zan a werewolf to stop Billloving me!”

“Well, yes, I’m sure,” said Mrs. Weasley, “but Ithought perhaps — given how — how he —”

“You thought I would not weesh to marry him? Orper’aps, you hoped?” said Fleur, her nostrils flaring.“What do I care how he looks? I am good-lookingenough for both of us, I theenk! All these scars showis zat my husband is brave! And I shall do zat!” sheadded fiercely, pushing Mrs. Weasley aside andsnatching the ointment from her.

Mrs. Weasley fell back against her husband andwatched Fleur mopping up Bill’s wounds with a mostcurious expression upon her face. Nobody saidanything; Harry did not dare move. Like everybodyelse, he was waiting for the explosion.

“Our Great-Auntie Muriel,” said Mrs. Weasley after along pause, “has a very beautiful tiara — goblin-made— which I am sure I could persuade her to lend you

Page | 699 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

for the wedding. She is very fond of Bill, you know,and it would look lovely with your hair.”

“Thank you,” said Fleur stiffly. “I am sure zat will belovely.”

And then, Harry did not quite see how it happened,both women were crying and hugging each other.Completely bewildered, wondering whether the worldhad gone mad, he turned around: Ron looked asstunned as he felt and Ginny and Hermione wereexchanging startled looks.

“You see!” said a strained voice. Tonks was glaring atLupin. “She still wants to marry him, even thoughhe’s been bitten! She doesn’t care!”

“It’s different,” said Lupin, barely moving his lips andlooking suddenly tense. “Bill will not be a fullwerewolf. The cases are completely —”

“But I don’t care either, I don’t care!” said Tonks,seizing the front of Lupin’s robes and shaking them.“I’ve told you a million times. ...”

And the meaning of Tonks’s Patronus and her mouse-colored hair, and the reason she had come running tofind Dumbledore when she had heard a rumorsomeone had been attacked by Greyback, allsuddenly became clear to Harry; it had not beenSirius that Tonks had fallen in love with after all.

“And I’ve told you a million times,” said Lupin,refusing to meet her eyes, staring at the floor, “that Iam too old for you, too poor ... too dangerous. ...”

“I’ve said all along you’re taking a ridiculous line onthis, Remus,” said Mrs. Weasley over Fleur’s shoulderas she patted her on the back.

Page | 700 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I am not being ridiculous,” said Lupin steadily.“Tonks deserves somebody young and whole.”

“But she wants you,” said Mr. Weasley, with a smallsmile. “And after all, Remus, young and whole men donot necessarily remain so.”

He gestured sadly at his son, lying between them.

“This is ... not the moment to discuss it,” said Lupin,avoiding everybody’s eyes as he looked arounddistractedly. “Dumbledore is dead. ...”

“Dumbledore would have been happier than anybodyto think that there was a little more love in the world,”said Professor McGonagall curtly, just as the hospitaldoors opened again and Hagrid walked in.

The little of his face that was not obscured by hair orbeard was soaking and swollen; he was shaking withtears, a vast, spotted handkerchief in his hand.

“I’ve ... I’ve done it, Professor,” he choked. “M-movedhim. Professor Sprout’s got the kids back in bed.Professor Flitwick’s lyin’ down, but he says he’ll be allrigh’ in a jiffy, an’ Professor Slughorn says theMinistry’s bin informed.”

“Thank you, Hagrid,” said Professor McGonagall,standing up at once and turning to look at the grouparound Bill’s bed. “I shall have to see the Ministrywhen they get here. Hagrid, please tell the Heads ofHouses — Slughorn can represent Slytherin — that Iwant to see them in my office forthwith. I would likeyou to join us too.”

As Hagrid nodded, turned, and shuffled out of theroom again, she looked down at Harry. “Before I meet

Page | 701 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

them I would like a quick word with you, Harry. Ifyou’ll come with me. ...”

Harry stood up, murmured “See you in a bit” to Ron,Hermione, and Ginny, and followed ProfessorMcGonagall back down the ward. The corridorsoutside were deserted and the only sound was thedistant phoenix song. It was several minutes beforeHarry became aware that they were not heading forProfessor McGonagall’s office, but for Dumbledore’s,and another few seconds before he realized that ofcourse, she had been deputy headmistress. ...Apparently she was now headmistress ... so the roombehind the gargoyle was now hers.

In silence they ascended the moving spiral staircaseand entered the circular office. He did not know whathe had expected: that the room would be draped inblack, perhaps, or even that Dumbledore’s bodymight be lying there. In fact, it looked almost exactlyas it had done when he and Dumbledore had left itmere hours previously: the silver instrumentswhirring and puffing on their spindle-legged tables,Gryffindor’s sword in its glass case gleaming in themoonlight, the Sorting Hat on a shelf behind thedesk. But Fawkes’s perch stood empty, he was stillcrying his lament to the grounds. And a new portraithad joined the ranks of the dead headmasters andheadmistresses of Hogwarts: Dumbledore wasslumbering in a golden frame over the desk, his half-moon spectacles perched upon his crooked nose,looking peaceful and untroubled.

After glancing once at this portrait, ProfessorMcGonagall made an odd movement as thoughsteeling herself, then rounded the desk to look atHarry, her face taut and lined.

Page | 702 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Harry,” she said, “I would like to know what you andProfessor Dumbledore were doing this evening whenyou left the school.”

“I can’t tell you that, Professor,” said Harry. He hadexpected the question and had his answer ready. Ithad been here, in this very room, that Dumbledorehad told him that he was to confide the contents oftheir lessons to nobody but Ron and Hermione.

“Harry, it might be important,” said ProfessorMcGonagall.

“It is,” said Harry, “very, but he didn’t want me to tellanyone.”

Professor McGonagall glared at him. “Potter” — Harryregistered the renewed use of his surname — “in thelight of Professor Dumbledore’s death, I think youmust see that the situation has changed somewhat —

“I don’t think so,” said Harry, shrugging. “ProfessorDumbledore never told me to stop following his ordersif he died.”

“But —”

“There’s one thing you should know before theMinistry gets here, though. Madam Rosmerta’s underthe Imperius Curse, she was helping Malfoy and theDeath Eaters, that’s how the necklace and thepoisoned mead —”

“Rosmerta?” said Professor McGonagall incredulously,but before she could go on, there was a knock on thedoor behind them and Professors Sprout, Flitwick,and Slughorn traipsed into the room, followed by

Page | 703 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid, who was still weeping copiously, his hugeframe trembling with grief.

“Snape!” ejaculated Slughorn, who looked the mostshaken, pale and sweating. “Snape! I taught him! Ithought I knew him!”

But before any of them could respond to this, a sharpvoice spoke from high on the wall: A sallow-facedwizard with a short black fringe had just walked backinto his empty canvas.

“Minerva, the Minister will be here within seconds, hehas just Disapparated from the Ministry.”

“Thank you, Everard,” said Professor McGonagall,and she turned quickly to her teachers.

“I want to talk about what happens to Hogwartsbefore he gets here,” she said quickly. “Personally, Iam not convinced that the school should reopen nextyear. The death of the headmaster at the hands of oneof our colleagues is a terrible stain upon Hogwarts’shistory. It is horrible.”

“I am sure Dumbledore would have wanted the schoolto remain open,” said Professor Sprout. “I feel that if asingle pupil wants to come, then the school ought toremain open for that pupil.”

“But will we have a single pupil after this?” saidSlughorn, now dabbing his sweating brow with asilken handkerchief. “Parents will want to keep theirchildren at home and I can’t say I blame them.Personally, I don’t think we’re in more danger atHogwarts than we are anywhere else, but you can’texpect mothers to think like that. They’ll want to keeptheir families together, it’s only natural.”

Page | 704 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I agree,” said Professor McGonagall. “And in anycase, it is not true to say that Dumbledore neverenvisaged a situation in which Hogwarts might close.When the Chamber of Secrets reopened he consideredthe closure of the school — and I must say thatProfessor Dumbledore’s murder is more disturbing tome than the idea of Slytherin’s monster livingundetected in the bowels of the castle. ...”

“We must consult the governors,” said ProfessorFlitwick in his squeaky little voice; he had a largebruise on his forehead but seemed otherwiseunscathed by his collapse in Snape’s office. “We mustfollow the established procedures. A decision shouldnot be made hastily.”

“Hagrid, you haven’t said anything,” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “What are your views, ought Hogwarts toremain open?”

Hagrid, who had been weeping silently into his large,spotted handkerchief throughout this conversation,now raised puffy red eyes and croaked, “I dunno,Professor ... that’s fer the Heads of House an’ theheadmistress ter decide ...”

“Professor Dumbledore always valued your views,”said Professor McGonagall kindly, “and so do I.”

“Well, I’m stayin’,” said Hagrid, fat tears still leakingout of the corners of his eyes and trickling down intohis tangled beard. “It’s me home, it’s bin me homesince I was thirteen. An’ if there’s kids who wan’ meter teach ’em, I’ll do it. But ... I dunno ... Hogwartswithout Dumbledore ...” He gulped and disappearedbehind his handkerchief once more, and there wassilence.

Page | 705 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“Very well,” said Professor McGonagall, glancing outof the window at the grounds, checking to seewhether the Minister was yet approaching, “then Imust agree with Filius that the right thing to do is toconsult the governors, who will make the finaldecision.

“Now, as to getting students home ... there is anargument for doing it sooner rather than later. Wecould arrange for the Hogwarts Express to cometomorrow if necessary —”

“What about Dumbledore’s funeral?” said Harry,speaking at last.

“Well ...” said Professor McGonagall, losing a little ofher briskness as her voice shook. “I — I know that itwas Dumbledore’s wish to be laid to rest here, atHogwarts —”

“Then that’s what’ll happen, isn’t it?” said Harryfiercely.

“If the Ministry thinks it appropriate,” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “No other headmaster or headmistresshas ever been —”

“No other headmaster or headmistress ever gave moreto this school,” growled Hagrid.

“Hogwarts should be Dumbledore’s final restingplace,” said Professor Flitwick.

“Absolutely,” said Professor Sprout.

“And in that case,” said Harry, “you shouldn’t sendthe students home until the funeral’s over. They’llwant to say —”

Page | 706 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

The last word caught in his throat, but ProfessorSprout completed the sentence for him.

“Good-bye.”

“Well said,” squeaked Professor Flitwick. “Well saidindeed! Our students should pay tribute, it is fitting.We can arrange transport home afterward.”

“Seconded,” barked Professor Sprout.

“I suppose ... yes ...” said Slughorn in a ratheragitated voice, while Hagrid let out a strangled sob ofassent.

“He’s coming,” said Professor McGonagall suddenly,gazing down into the grounds. “The Minister ... andby the looks of it, he’s brought a delegation ...”

“Can I leave, Professor?” said Harry at once.

He had no desire at all to see, or be interrogated by,Rufus Scrimgeour tonight.

“You may,” said Professor McGonagall. “And quickly.”

She strode toward the door and held it open for him.He sped down the spiral staircase and off along thedeserted corridor; he had left his Invisibility Cloak atthe top of the Astronomy Tower, but it did not matter;there was nobody in the corridors to see him pass,not even Filch, Mrs. Norris, or Peeves. He did notmeet another soul until he turned into the passageleading to the Gryffindor common room.

“Is it true?” whispered the Fat Lady as he approachedher. “It is really true? Dumbledore — dead?”

“Yes,” said Harry.

Page | 707 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She let out a wail and, without waiting for thepassword, swung forward to admit him.

As Harry had suspected it would be, the commonroom was jam-packed. The room fell silent as heclimbed through the portrait hole. He saw Dean andSeamus sitting in a group nearby: This meant thatthe dormitory must be empty, or nearly so. Withoutspeaking to anybody, without making eye contact atall, Harry walked straight across the room andthrough the door to the boys’ dormitories.

As he had hoped, Ron was waiting for him, still fullydressed, sitting on his bed. Harry sat down on hisown four-poster and for a moment, they simply staredat each other.

“They’re talking about closing the school,” said Harry.“Lupin said they would,” said Ron.

There was a pause.

“So?” said Ron in a very low voice, as though hethought the furniture might be listening in. “Did youfind one? Did you get it? A — a Horcrux?”

Harry shook his head. All that had taken placearound that black lake seemed like an old nightmarenow; had it really happened, and only hours ago?

“You didn’t get it?” said Ron, looking crestfallen. “Itwasn’t there?”

“No,” said Harry. “Someone had already taken it andleft a fake in its place.”

“Already taken — ?”

Page | 708 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Wordlessly, Harry pulled the fake locket from hispocket, opened it, and passed it to Ron. The full storycould wait. ... It did not matter tonight ... nothingmattered except the end, the end of their pointlessadventure, the end of Dumbledore’s life. ...

“R.A.B.,” whispered Ron, “but who was that?”

“Dunno,” said Harry, lying back on his bed fullyclothed and staring blankly upwards. He felt nocuriosity at all about R.A.B.: He doubted that hewould ever feel curious again. As he lay there, hebecame aware suddenly that the grounds were silent.Fawkes had stopped singing.

And he knew, without knowing how he knew it, thatthe phoenix had gone, had left Hogwarts for good, justas Dumbledore had left the school, had left the world... had left Harry.

Page | 709 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





THE WHITE TOMB

All lessons were suspended, all examinationspostponed. Some students were hurried away fromHogwarts by their parents over the next couple ofdays — the Patil twins were gone before breakfast onthe morning following Dumbledore’s death, andZacharias Smith was escorted from the castle by hishaughty-looking father. Seamus Finnigan, on theother hand, refused point-blank to accompany hismother home; they had a shouting match in theentrance hall that was resolved when she agreed thathe could remain behind for the funeral. She haddifficulty in finding a bed in Hogsmeade, Seamus toldHarry and Ron, for wizards and witches were pouringinto the village, preparing to pay their last respects toDumbledore.

Some excitement was caused among the youngerstudents, who had never seen it before, when apowder-blue carriage the size of a house, pulled by adozen giant winged palominos, came soaring out ofthe sky in the late afternoon before the funeral and

Page | 710 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

landed on the edge of the forest. Harry watched froma window as a gigantic and handsome olive-skinned,black-haired woman descended the carriage stepsand threw herself into the waiting Hagrid’s arms.Meanwhile a delegation of Ministry officials, includingthe Minister of Magic himself, was beingaccommodated within the castle. Harry was diligentlyavoiding contact with any of them; he was sure that,sooner or later, he would be asked again to accountfor Dumbledore’s last excursion from Hogwarts.

Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny were spending allof their time together. The beautiful weather seemedto mock them; Harry could imagine how it would havebeen if Dumbledore had not died, and they had hadthis time together at the very end of the year, Ginny’sexaminations finished, the pressure of homeworklifted ... and hour by hour, he put off saying the thingthat he knew he must say, doing what he knew wasright to do, because it was too hard to forgo his bestsource of comfort.

They visited the hospital wing twice a day: Neville hadbeen discharged, but Bill remained under MadamPomfrey’s care. His scars were as bad as ever — intruth, he now bore a distinct resemblance to Mad-EyeMoody, though thankfully with both eyes and legs —but in personality he seemed just the same as ever.

All that appeared to have changed was that he nowhad a great liking for very rare steaks.

"... so eet ees lucky ’e is marrying me,” said Fleurhappily, plumping up Bill’s pillows, “because zeBritish overcook their meat, I ’ave always said this.”

“I suppose I’m just going to have to accept that hereally is going to marry her,” sighed Ginny later thatevening, as she, Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat beside

Page | 711 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

the open window of the Gryffindor common room,looking out over the twilit grounds.

“She’s not that bad,” said Harry. “Ugly, though,” headded hastily, as Ginny raised her eyebrows, and shelet out a reluctant giggle.

“Well, I suppose if Mum can stand it, I can.”

“Anyone else we know died?” Ron asked Hermione,who was perusing the Evening Prophet.

Hermione winced at the forced toughness in his voice.“No,” she said reprovingly, folding up the newspaper.“They’re still looking for Snape but no sign ...”

“Of course there isn’t,” said Harry, who became angryevery time this subject cropped up. “They won’t findSnape till they find Voldemort, and seeing as they’venever managed to do that in all this time ...”

“I’m going to go to bed,” yawned Ginny. “I haven’tbeen sleeping that well since ... well ... I could do withsome sleep.”

She kissed Harry (Ron looked away pointedly), wavedat the other two, and departed for the girls’dormitories. The moment the door had closed behindher, Hermione leaned forward toward Harry with amost Hermione-ish look on her face.

“Harry, I found something out this morning, in thelibrary.”

“R.A.B.?” said Harry, sitting up straight.

He did not feel the way he had so often felt before,excited, curious, burning to get to the bottom of amystery; he simply knew that the task of discovering

Page | 712 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

the truth about the real Horcrux had to be completedbefore he could move a little farther along the darkand winding path stretching ahead of him, the paththat he and Dumbledore had set out upon together,and which he now knew he would have to journeyalone. There might still be as many as four Horcruxesout there somewhere, and each would need to befound and eliminated before there was even apossibility that Voldemort could be killed. He keptreciting their names to himself, as though by listingthem he could bring them within reach: the locket...the cup ... the snake ... something of Gryffindor’s orRavenclaw’s ... the locket... the cup ... the snake ...something of Gryffindor’s or Ravenclaw’s ...

This mantra seemed to pulse through Harry’s mind ashe fell asleep at night, and his dreams were thick withcups, lockets, and mysterious objects that he couldnot quite reach, though Dumbledore helpfully offeredHarry a rope ladder that turned to snakes themoment he began to climb. ...

He had shown Hermione the note inside the locketthe morning after Dumbledore’s death, and althoughshe had not immediately recognized the initials asbelonging to some obscure wizard about whom shehad been reading, she had since been rushing off tothe library a little more often than was strictlynecessary for somebody who had no homework to do.

“No,” she said sadly, “I’ve been trying, Harry, but Ihaven’t found anything. ... There are a couple ofreasonably well-known wizards with those initials —Rosalind Antigone Bungs ... Rupert ‘Axebanger’Brookstanton ... but they don’t seem to fit at all.Judging by that note, the person who stole theHorcrux knew Voldemort, and I can’t find a shred ofevidence that Bungs or Axebanger ever had anything

Page | 713 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

to do with him. ... No, actually, it’s about ... well,Snape.”

She looked nervous even saying the name again.

“What about him?” asked Harry heavily, slumpingback in his chair.

“Well, it’s just that I was sort of right about the Half-Blood Prince business,” she said tentatively.

“D’you have to rub it in, Hermione? How d’you think Ifeel about that now?”

“No — no — Harry, I didn’t mean that!” she saidhastily, looking around to check that they were notbeing overheard. “It’s just that I was right aboutEileen Prince once owning the book. You see ... shewas Snape’s mother!”

“I thought she wasn’t much of a looker,” said Ron.Hermione ignored him.

“I was going through the rest of the old Prophets andthere was a tiny announcement about Eileen Princemarrying a man called Tobias Snape, and then lateran announcement saying that she’d given birth to a

“— murderer,” spat Harry.

“Well ... yes,” said Hermione. “So ... I was sort ofright. Snape must have been proud of being ‘half aPrince,’you see? Tobias Snape was a Muggle fromwhat it said in the Prophet”

“Yeah, that fits,” said Harry. “He’d play up the pure-blood side so he could get in with Lucius Malfoy andthe rest of them. ... He’s just like Voldemort. Pure-

Page | 714 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

blood mother, Muggle father ... ashamed of hisparentage, trying to make himself feared using theDark Arts, gave himself an impressive new name —Lord Voldemort — the Half-Blood Prince — how couldDumbledore have missed — ?”

He broke off, looking out the window. He could notstop himself dwelling upon Dumbledore’s inexcusabletrust in Snape ... but as Hermione had justinadvertently reminded him, he, Harry, had beentaken in just the same. ... In spite of the increasingnastiness of those scribbled spells, he had refused tobelieve ill of the boy who had been so clever, who hadhelped him so much. ...

Helped him ... it was an almost unendurable thoughtnow.

“I still don’t get why he didn’t turn you in for usingthat book,” said Ron. “He must’ve known where youwere getting it all from.”

“He knew,” said Harry bitterly. “He knew when I usedSectumsempra. He didn’t really need Legilimency. ...He might even have known before then, withSlughorn talking about how brilliant I was at Potions.... Shouldn’t have left his old book in the bottom ofthat cupboard, should he?”

“But why didn’t he turn you in?”

“I don’t think he wanted to associate himself with thatbook,” said Hermione. “I don’t think Dumbledorewould have liked it very much if he’d known. Andeven if Snape pretended it hadn’t been his, Slughornwould have recognized his writing at once. Anyway,the book was left in Snape’s old classroom, and I’ll betDumbledore knew his mother was called ‘Prince.’ ”

Page | 715 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“I should’ve shown the book to Dumbledore,” saidHarry. “All that time he was showing me howVoldemort was evil even when he was at school, and Ihad proof Snape was too —”

“ ‘Evil’ is a strong word,” said Hermione quietly.

“You were the one who kept telling me the book wasdangerous!”

“I’m trying to say, Harry, that you’re putting too muchblame on yourself. I thought the Prince seemed tohave a nasty sense of humor, but I would never haveguessed he was a potential killer. ...”

“None of us could’ve guessed Snape would ... youknow,” said Ron.

Silence fell between them, each of them lost in theirown thoughts, but Harry was sure that they, like him,were thinking about the following morning, whenDumbledore’s body would be laid to rest. He hadnever attended a funeral before; there had been nobody to bury when Sirius had died. He did not knowwhat to expect and was a little worried about what hemight see, about how he would feel. He wonderedwhether Dumbledore’s death would be more real tohim once it was over. Though he had moments whenthe horrible fact of it threatened to overwhelm him,there were blank stretches of numbness where,despite the fact that nobody was talking aboutanything else in the whole castle, he still found itdifficult to believe that Dumbledore had really gone.Admittedly he had not, as he had with Sirius, lookeddesperately for some kind of loophole, some way thatDumbledore would come back. ... He felt in his pocketfor the cold chain of the fake Horcrux, which he nowcarried with him everywhere, not as a talisman, but

Page | 716 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

as a reminder of what it had cost and what remainedstill to do.

Harry rose early to pack the next day; the HogwartsExpress would be leaving an hour after the funeral.Downstairs, he found the mood in the Great Hallsubdued. Everybody was wearing their dress robesand no one seemed very hungry. ProfessorMcGonagall had left the thronelike chair in the middleof the staff table empty. Hagrid’s chair was desertedtoo; Harry thought that perhaps he had not been ableto face breakfast, but Snape’s place had beenunceremoniously filled by Rufus Scrimgeour. Harryavoided his yellowish eyes as they scanned the Hall;Harry had the uncomfortable feeling that Scrimgeourwas looking for him. Among Scrimgeour’s entourageHarry spotted the red hair and horn-rimmed glassesof Percy Weasley. Ron gave no sign that he was awareof Percy, apart from stabbing pieces of kipper withunwonted venom.

Over at the Slytherin table Crabbe and Goyle weremuttering together. Hulking boys though they were,they looked oddly lonely without the tall, pale figure ofMalfoy between them, bossing them around. Harryhad not spared Malfoy much thought. His animositywas all for Snape, but he had not forgotten the fear inMalfoy’s voice on that tower top, nor the fact that hehad lowered his wand before the other Death Eatersarrived. Harry did not believe that Malfoy would havekilled Dumbledore. He despised Malfoy still for hisinfatuation with the Dark Arts, but now the tiniestdrop of pity mingled with his dislike. Where, Harrywondered, was Malfoy now, and what was Voldemortmaking him do under threat of killing him and hisparents?

Harry’s thoughts were interrupted by a nudge in theribs from Ginny. Professor McGonagall had risen to

Page | 717 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

her feet, and the mournful hum in the Hall died awayat once.

“It is nearly time,” she said. “Please follow your Headsof Houses out into the grounds. Gryffindors, afterme.”

They filed out from behind their benches in nearsilence. Harry glimpsed Slughorn at the head of theSlytherin column, wearing magnificent, long, emeraldgreen robes embroidered with silver. He had neverseen Professor Sprout, Head of the Hufflepuffs,looking so clean; there was not a single patch on herhat, and when they reached the entrance hall, theyfound Madam Pince standing beside Filch, she in athick black veil that fell to her knees, he in an ancientblack suit and tie reeking of mothballs.

They were heading, as Harry saw when he steppedout onto the stone steps from the front doors, towardthe lake. The warmth of the sun caressed his face asthey followed Professor McGonagall in silence to theplace where hundreds of chairs had been set out inrows. An aisle ran down the center of them: Therewas a marble table standing at the front, all chairsfacing it. It was the most beautiful summer’s day.

An extraordinary assortment of people had alreadysettled into half of the chairs; shabby and smart, oldand young. Most Harry did not recognize, but a fewhe did, including members of the Order of thePhoenix: Kingsley Shacklebolt; Mad-Eye Moody;Tonks, her hair miraculously returned to vividestpink; Remus Lupin, with whom she seemed to beholding hands; Mr. and Mrs. Weasley; Bill supportedby Fleur and followed by Fred and George, who werewearing jackets of black dragon skin. Then there wasMadame Maxime, who took up two and a half chairson her own; Tom, the landlord of the Leaky CauldronPage | 718 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

in London; Arabella Figg, Harry’s Squib neighbor; thehairy bass player from the Wizarding group the WeirdSisters; Ernie Prang, driver of the Knight Bus; MadamMalkin, of the robe shop in Diagon Alley; and somepeople whom Harry merely knew by sight, such as thebarman of the Hog’s Head and the witch who pushedthe trolley on the Hogwarts Express. The castle ghostswere there too, barely visible in the bright sunlight,discernible only when they moved, shimmeringinsubstantially on the gleaming air.

Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny filed into seats atthe end of a row beside the lake. People werewhispering to each other; it sounded like a breeze inthe grass, but the birdsong was louder by far. Thecrowd continued to swell; with a great rush ofaffection for both of them, Harry saw Neville beinghelped into a seat by Luna. Neville and Luna alone ofthe D.A. had responded to Hermione’s summons thenight that Dumbledore had died, and Harry knewwhy: They were the ones who had missed the D.A.most ... probably the ones who had checked theircoins regularly in the hope that there would beanother meeting.

Cornelius Fudge walked past toward the front rows,his expression miserable, twirling his green bowlerhat as usual; Harry next recognized Rita Skeeter,who, he was infuriated to see, had a notebookclutched in her red-taloned hand, and then, with aworse jolt of fury, Dolores Umbridge, an unconvincingexpression of grief upon her toadlike face, a blackvelvet bow set atop her iron-colored curls. At the sightof the centaur Firenze, who was standing like asentinel near the water’s edge, she gave a start andscurried hastily into a seat a good distance away.

The staff was seated at last. Harry could seeScrimgeour looking grave and dignified in the front

Page | 719 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

row with Professor McGonagall. He wondered whetherScrimgeour or any of these important people werereally sorry that Dumbledore was dead. But then heheard music, strange, otherworldly music, and heforgot his dislike of the Ministry in looking around forthe source of it. He was not the only one: Many headswere turning, searching, a little alarmed.

“In there,” whispered Ginny in Harry’s ear.

And he saw them in the clear green sunlit water,inches below the surface, reminding him horribly ofthe Inferi: a chorus of merpeople singing in a strangelanguage he did not understand, their pallid facesrippling, their purplish hair flowing all around them.The music made the hair on Harry’s neck stand up,and yet it was not unpleasant. It spoke very clearly ofloss and of despair. As he looked down into the wildfaces of the singers, he had the feeling that they, atleast, were sorry for Dumbledore’s passing. ThenGinny nudged him again and he looked around.

Hagrid was walking slowly up the aisle between thechairs. He was crying quite silently, his face gleamingwith tears, and in his arms, wrapped in purple velvetspangled with golden stars, was what Harry knew tobe Dumbledore’s body. A sharp pain rose in Harry’sthroat at this sight: For a moment, the strange musicand the knowledge that Dumbledore’s body was soclose seemed to take all warmth from the day. Ronlooked white and shocked. Tears were falling thickand fast into both Ginny’s and Hermione’s laps.

They could not see clearly what was happening at thefront. Hagrid seemed to have placed the bodycarefully upon the table. Now he retreated down theaisle, blowing his nose with loud trumpeting noisesthat drew scandalized looks from some, including,Harry saw, Dolores Umbridge ... but Harry knew thatPage | 720 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore would not have cared. He tried to make afriendly gesture to Hagrid as he passed, but Hagrid’seyes were so swollen it was a wonder he could seewhere he was going. Harry glanced at the back row towhich Hagrid was heading and realized what wasguiding him, for there, dressed in a jacket andtrousers each the size of a small marquee, was thegiant Grawp, his great ugly boulderlike head bowed,docile, almost human. Hagrid sat down next to hishalf-brother, and Grawp patted Hagrid hard on thehead, so that his chair legs sank into the ground.Harry had a wonderful momentary urge to laugh. Butthen the music stopped, and he turned to face thefront again.

A little tufty-haired man in plain black robes had gotto his feet and stood now in front of Dumbledore’sbody. Harry could not hear what he was saying. Oddwords floated back to them over the hundreds ofheads. “Nobility of spirit” ... “intellectual contribution”... “greatness of heart” ... It did not mean very much.

It had little to do with Dumbledore as Harry hadknown him. He suddenly remembered Dumbledore’sidea of a few words, “nitwit,” “oddment,” “blubber,”and “tweak,” and again had to suppress a grin. ...What was the matter with him?

There was a soft splashing noise to his left and hesaw that the merpeople had broken the surface tolisten too. He remembered Dumbledore crouching atthe water’s edge two years ago, very close to whereHarry now sat, and conversing in Mermish with theMerchieftainess. Harry wondered where Dumbledorehad learned Mermish. There was so much he hadnever asked him, so much he should have said. ...

And then, without warning, it swept over him, thedreadful truth, more completely and undeniably thanit had until now. Dumbledore was dead, gone. ... He

Page | 721 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

clutched the cold locket in his hand so tightly that ithurt, but he could not prevent hot tears spilling fromhis eyes: He looked away from Ginny and the othersand stared out over the lake, toward the forest, as thelittle man in black droned on. ... There was movementamong the trees. The centaurs had come to pay theirrespects too. They did not move into the open butHarry saw them standing quite still, half hidden inshadow, watching the wizards, their bows hanging attheir sides. And Harry remembered his firstnightmarish trip into the forest, the first time he hadever encountered the thing that was then Voldemort,and how he had faced him, and how he andDumbledore had discussed fighting a losing battle notlong thereafter. It was important, Dumbledore said, tofight, and fight again, and keep fighting, for only thencould evil be kept at bay, though never quiteeradicated. ...

And Harry saw very clearly as he sat there under thehot sun how people who cared about him had stoodin front of him one by one, his mother, his father, hisgodfather, and finally Dumbledore, all determined toprotect him; but now that was over. He could not letanybody else stand between him and Voldemort; hemust abandon forever the illusion he ought to havelost at the age of one, that the shelter of a parent’sarms meant that nothing could hurt him. There wasno waking from his nightmare, no comforting whisperin the dark that he was safe really, that it was all inhis imagination; the last and greatest of his protectorshad died, and he was more alone than he had everbeen before.

The little man in black had stopped speaking at lastand resumed his seat. Harry waited for somebody elseto get to their feet; he expected speeches, probablyfrom the Minister, but nobody moved.

Page | 722 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Then several people screamed. Bright, white flameshad erupted around Dumbledore’s body and the tableupon which it lay: Higher and higher they rose,obscuring the body. White smoke spiraled into the airand made strange shapes: Harry thought, for oneheart-stopping moment, that he saw a phoenix flyjoyfully into the blue, but next second the fire hadvanished. In its place was a white marble tomb,encasing Dumbledore’s body and the table on whichhe had rested.

There were a few more cries of shock as a shower ofarrows soared through the air, but they fell far shortof the crowd. It was, Harry knew, the centaurs’tribute: He saw them turn tail and disappear backinto the cool trees. Likewise, the merpeople sankslowly back into the green water and were lost fromview.

Harry looked at Ginny, Ron, and Hermione: Ron’sface was screwed up as though the sunlight wereblinding him. Hermione’s face was glazed with tears,but Ginny was no longer crying. She met Harry’s gazewith the same hard, blazing look that he had seenwhen she had hugged him after winning theQuidditch Cup in his absence, and he knew that atthat moment they understood each other perfectly,and that when he told her what he was going to donow, she would not say, “Be careful,” or “Don’t do it,”but accept his decision, because she would not haveexpected anything less of him. And so he steeledhimself to say what he had known he must say eversince Dumbledore had died.

“Ginny, listen ...” he said very quietly, as the buzz ofconversation grew louder around them and peoplebegan to get to their feet, “I can’t be involved with youanymore. We’ve got to stop seeing each other. Wecan’t be together.”

Page | 723 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

She said, with an oddly twisted smile, “It’s for somestupid, noble reason, isn’t it?”

“It’s been like ... like something out of someone else’slife, these last few weeks with you,” said Harry. “But Ican’t ... we can’t ... I’ve got things to do alone now.”

She did not cry, she simply looked at him.

“Voldemort uses people his enemies are close to. He’salready used you as bait once, and that was justbecause you’re my best friend’s sister. Think howmuch danger you’ll be in if we keep this up. He’llknow, hell find out. He’ll try and get to me throughyou.”

“What if I don’t care?” said Ginny fiercely.

“I care,” said Harry. “How do you think I’d feel if thiswas your funeral ... and it was my fault. ...”

She looked away from him, over the lake.

“I never really gave up on you,” she said. “Not really. Ialways hoped. ... Hermione told me to get on with life,maybe go out with some other people, relax a bitaround you, because I never used to be able to talk ifyou were in the room, remember? And she thoughtyou might take a bit more notice if I was a bit more —myself.”

“Smart girl, that Hermione,” said Harry, trying tosmile. “I just wish I’d asked you sooner. We could’vehad ages ... months ... years maybe. ...”

“But you’ve been too busy saving the Wizardingworld,” said Ginny, half laughing. “Well ... I can’t sayI’m surprised. I knew this would happen in the end. I

Page | 724 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

knew you wouldn’t be happy unless you were huntingVoldemort. Maybe that’s why I like you so much.”

Harry could not bear to hear these things, nor did hethink his resolution would hold if he remained sittingbeside her. Ron, he saw, was now holding Hermioneand stroking her hair while she sobbed into hisshoulder, tears dripping from the end of his own longnose. With a miserable gesture, Harry got up, turnedhis back on Ginny and on Dumbledore’s tomb, andwalked away around the lake. Moving felt much morebearable than sitting still, just as setting out as soonas possible to track down the Horcruxes and killVoldemort would feel better than waiting to do it. ...

“Harry!”

He turned. Rufus Scrimgeour was limping rapidlytoward him around the bank, leaning on his walkingstick.

“I’ve been hoping to have a word ... do you mind if Iwalk a little way with you?”

“No,” said Harry indifferently, and set off again.

“Harry, this was a dreadful tragedy,” said Scrimgeourquietly. “I cannot tell you how appalled I was to hearof it. Dumbledore was a very great wizard. We had ourdisagreements, as you know, but no one knows betterthan I —”

“What do you want?” asked Harry flatly.

Scrimgeour looked annoyed, but as before, hastilymodified his expression to one of sorrowfulunderstanding.

Page | 725 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“You are, of course, devastated,” he said. “I know thatyou were very close to Dumbledore. I think you mayhave been his favorite pupil ever. The bond betweenthe two of you —”

“What do you want?” Harry repeated, coming to ahalt.

Scrimgeour stopped too, leaned on his stick, andstared at Harry, his expression shrewd now.

“The word is that you were with him when he left theschool the night that he died.”

“Whose word?” said Harry.

“Somebody Stupefied a Death Eater on top of thetower after Dumbledore died. There were also twobroomsticks up there. The Ministry can add two andtwo, Harry.”

“Glad to hear it,” said Harry. “Well, where I went withDumbledore and what we did is my business. Hedidn’t want people to know.”

“Such loyalty is admirable, of course,” saidScrimgeour, who seemed to be restraining hisirritation with difficulty, “but Dumbledore is gone,Harry. He’s gone.”

“He will only be gone from the school when none hereare loyal to him,” said Harry, smiling in spite ofhimself.

“My dear boy ... even Dumbledore cannot return fromthe —”

“I am not saying he can. You wouldn’t understand.

But I’ve got nothing to tell you.”

Page | 726 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

Scrimgeour hesitated, then said, in what wasevidently supposed to be a tone of delicacy, “TheMinistry can offer you all sorts of protection, youknow, Harry. I would be delighted to place a couple ofmy Aurors at your service —”

Harry laughed. “Voldemort wants to kill me himself,and Aurors won’t stop him. So thanks for the offer,but no thanks.”

“So,” said Scrimgeour, his voice cold now, “therequest I made of you at Christmas —”

“What request? Oh yeah ... the one where I tell theworld what a great job you’re doing in exchange for—”

“— for raising everyone’s morale!” snappedScrimgeour.

Harry considered him for a moment.

“Released Stan Shunpike yet?”

Scrimgeour turned a nasty purple color highlyreminiscent of Uncle Vernon.

“I see you are —”

“Dumbledore’s man through and through,” saidHarry. “That’s right.”

Scrimgeour glared at him for another moment, thenturned and limped away without another word. Harrycould see Percy and the rest of the Ministry delegationwaiting for him, casting nervous glances at thesobbing Hagrid and Grawp, who were still in theirseats. Ron and Hermione were hurrying towardHarry, passing Scrimgeour going in the oppositedirection. Harry turned and walked slowly on, waitingPage | 727 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

for them to catch up, which they finally did in theshade of a beech tree under which they had sat inhappier times.

“What did Scrimgeour want?” Hermione whispered.

“Same as he wanted at Christmas,” shrugged Harry.“Wanted me to give him inside information onDumbledore and be the Ministry’s new poster boy.”

Ron seemed to struggle with himself for a moment,then he said loudly to Hermione, “Look, let me goback and hit Percy!”

“No,” she said firmly, grabbing his arm.

“It’ll make me feel better!”

Harry laughed. Even Hermione grinned a little,though her smile faded as she looked up at the castle.

“I can’t bear the idea that we might never come back,”she said softly. “How can Hogwarts close?”

“Maybe it won’t,” said Ron. “We’re not in any moredanger here than we are at home, are we?Everywhere’s the same now. I’d even say Hogwarts issafer, there are more wizards inside to defend theplace. What d’you reckon, Harry?”

“I’m not coming back even if it does reopen,” saidHarry.

Ron gaped at him, but Hermione said sadly, “I knewyou were going to say that. But then what will youdo?”

Page | 728 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm going back to the Dursleys’ once more, becauseDumbledore wanted me to,” said Harry. “But it’ll be ashort visit, and then I’ll be gone for good.”

“But where will you go if you don’t come back toschool?”

“I thought I might go back to Godric’s Hollow,” Harrymuttered. He had had the idea in his head ever sincethe night of Dumbledore’s death. “For me, it startedthere, all of it. I’ve just got a feeling I need to go there.And I can visit my parents’ graves, I’d like that.”

“And then what?” said Ron.

“Then I’ve got to track down the rest of the Horcruxes,haven’t I?” said Harry, his eyes upon Dumbledore’swhite tomb, reflected in the water on the other side ofthe lake. “That’s what he wanted me to do, that’s whyhe told me all about them. If Dumbledore was right —and I’m sure he was — there are still four of them outthere. I’ve got to find them and destroy them, andthen I’ve got to go after the seventh bit of Voldemort’ssoul, the bit that’s still in his body, and I’m the onewho’s going to kill him. And if I meet Severus Snapealong the way,” he added, “so much the better for me,so much the worse for him.”

There was a long silence. The crowd had almostdispersed now, the stragglers giving the monumentalfigure of Grawp a wide berth as he cuddled Hagrid,whose howls of grief were still echoing across thewater.

“Well be there, Harry,” said Ron.

“What?”

Page | 729 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling

“At your aunt and uncle’s house,” said Ron. “Andthen well go with you wherever you’re going.”

“No —” said Harry quickly; he had not counted onthis, he had meant them to understand that he wasundertaking this most dangerous journey alone.

“You said to us once before,” said Hermione quietly,“that there was time to turn back if we wanted to.We’ve had time, haven’t we?

“We’re with you whatever happens,” said Ron. “Butmate, you’re going to have to come round my mumand dad’s house before we do anything else, evenGodric’s Hollow.”

“Why?”

“Bill and Fleur’s wedding, remember?”

Harry looked at him, startled; the idea that anythingas normal as a wedding could still exist seemedincredible and yet wonderful.

“Yeah, we shouldn’t miss that,” he said finally.

His hand closed automatically around the fakeHorcrux, but in spite of everything, in spite of thedark and twisting path he saw stretching ahead forhimself, in spite of the final meeting with Voldemorthe knew must come, whether in a month, in a year,or in ten, he felt his heart lift at the thought thatthere was still one last golden day of peace left toenjoy with Ron and Hermione.

Page | 730 Harry Potter and the Half Blood Prince - J.K. Rowling





