Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


Harry Potter Series (PDFs)





Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


J.K. Rowling

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.5)



I



DUDLEY DEMENTED

The hottest day of the summer so far was drawing toa close and a drowsy silence lay over the large, squarehouses of Privet Drive. Cars that were usuallygleaming stood dusty in their drives and lawns thatwere once emerald green lay parched and yellowing;the use of hosepipes had been banned due todrought. Deprived of their usual car-washing andlawn-mowing pursuits, the inhabitants of Privet Drivehad retreated into the shade of their cool houses,windows thrown wide in the hope of tempting in anonexistent breeze. The only person left outdoors wasa teenage boy who was lying flat on his back in aflower bed outside number four.

He was a skinny, black-haired, bespectacled boy whohad the pinched, slightly unhealthy look of someonewho has grown a lot in a short space of time. Hisjeans were torn and dirty, his T-shirt baggy andfaded, and the soles of his trainers were peeling awayfrom the uppers. Harry Potter’s appearance did notendear him to the neighbors, who were the sort ofpeople who thought scruffiness ought to bePage | 2 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

punishable by law, but as he had hidden himselfbehind a large hydrangea bush this evening he wasquite invisible to passersby. In fact, the only way hewould be spotted was if his Uncle Vernon or AuntPetunia stuck their heads out of the living roomwindow and looked straight down into the flower bedbelow.

On the whole, Harry thought he was to becongratulated on his idea of hiding here. He was not,perhaps, very comfortable lying on the hot, hardearth, but on the other hand, nobody was glaring athim, grinding their teeth so loudly that he could nothear the news, or shooting nasty questions at him, ashad happened every time he had tried sitting down inthe living room and watching television with his auntand uncle.

Almost as though this thought had fluttered throughthe open window, Vernon Dursley, Harry’s uncle,suddenly spoke. “Glad to see the boy’s stopped tryingto butt in. Where is he anyway?”

“I don’t know,” said Aunt Petunia unconcernedly. “Notin the house.”

Uncle Vernon grunted.

“Watching the news ...” he said scathingly. “I’d like toknow what he’s really up to. As if a normal boy careswhat’s on the news — Dudley hasn’t got a clue what’sgoing on, doubt he knows who the Prime Minister is!Anyway, it’s not as if there’d be anything about his loton our news —”

“Vernon, shh\” said Aunt Petunia. “The window’sopen!”

“Oh — yes — sorry, dear ...”

Page | 3 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

The Dursleys fell silent. Harry listened to a jingleabout Fruit ’N Bran breakfast cereal while he watchedMrs. Figg, a batty, cat-loving old lady from nearbyWisteria Walk, amble slowly past. She was frowningand muttering to herself. Harry was very pleased thathe was concealed behind the bush; Mrs. Figg hadrecently taken to asking him around for tea whenevershe met him in the street. She had rounded thecorner and vanished from view before Uncle Vernon’svoice floated out of the window again.

“Dudders out for tea?”

“At the Polkisses’,” said Aunt Petunia fondly. “He’s gotso many little friends, he’s so popular ...”

Harry repressed a snort with difficulty. The Dursleysreally were astonishingly stupid about their son,Dudley; they had swallowed all his dim-witted liesabout having tea with a different member of his gangevery night of the summer holidays. Harry knewperfectly well that Dudley had not been to teaanywhere; he and his gang spent every eveningvandalizing the play park, smoking on street corners,and throwing stones at passing cars and children.Harry had seen them at it during his evening walksaround Little Whinging; he had spent most of theholidays wandering the streets, scavengingnewspapers from bins along the way.

The opening notes of the music that heralded theseven o’clock news reached Harry’s ears and hisstomach turned over. Perhaps tonight — after amonth of waiting — would be the night —

“Record numbers of stranded holidaymakers fillairports as the Spanish baggage-handlers’ strikereaches its second week —”

Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“Give ’em a lifelong siesta, I would,” snarled UncleVernon over the end of the newsreader’s sentence,but no matter: Outside in the flower bed, Harry’sstomach seemed to unclench. If anything hadhappened, it would surely have been the first item onthe news; death and destruction were more importantthan stranded holidaymakers...

He let out a long, slow breath and stared up at thebrilliant blue sky. Every day this summer had beenthe same: the tension, the expectation, the temporaryrelief, and then mounting tension again ... andalways, growing more insistent all the time, thequestion of why nothing had happened yet...

He kept listening, just in case there was some smallclue, not recognized for what it really was by theMuggles — an unexplained disappearance,perhaps, or some strange accident ... but thebaggage-handlers’ strike was followed by news on thedrought in the Southeast (“I hope he’s listening nextdoor!” bellowed Uncle Vernon, “with his sprinklers onat three in the morning!”); then a helicopter that hadalmost crashed in a field in Surrey, then a famousactress’s divorce from her famous husband (“as ifwe’re interested in their sordid affairs,” sniffed AuntPetunia, who had followed the case obsessively inevery magazine she could lay her bony hands on).

Harry closed his eyes against the now blazing eveningsky as the newsreader said, “And finally, Bungy thebudgie has found a novel way of keeping cool thissummer. Bungy, who lives at the Five Feathers inBarnsley, has learned to water-ski! Mary Dorkinswent to find out more...”

Harry opened his eyes again. If they had reachedwater-skiing budgerigars, there was nothing elseworth hearing. He rolled cautiously onto his front and

Page | 5 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

raised himself onto his knees and elbows, preparingto crawl out from under the window.

He had moved about two inches when several thingshappened in very quick succession.

A loud, echoing crack broke the sleepy silence like agunshot; a cat streaked out from under a parked carand flew out of sight; a shriek, a bellowed oath, andthe sound of breaking china came from the Dursleys’living room, and as though Harry had been waitingfor this signal, he jumped to his feet, at the same timepulling from the waistband of his jeans a thin woodenwand as if he were unsheathing a sword. But beforehe could draw himself up to full height, the top of hishead collided with the Dursleys’ open window, andthe resultant crash made Aunt Petunia scream evenlouder.

Harry felt as if his head had been split in two; eyesstreaming, he swayed, trying to focus on the streetand spot the source of the noise, but he had barelystaggered upright again when two large purple handsreached through the open window and closed tightlyaround his throat.

“Put— it— away\” Uncle Vernon snarled into Harry’sear. “Now\ Before — anyone — sees!”

“Get — off— me!” Harry gasped; for a few secondsthey struggled, Harry pulling at his uncle’s sausage-like fingers with his left hand, his right maintaining afirm grip on his raised wand. Then, as the pain in thetop of Harry’s head gave a particularly nasty throb,Uncle Vernon yelped and released Harry as though hehad received an electric shock — some invisible forceseemed to have surged through his nephew, makinghim impossible to hold.

Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Panting, Harry fell forward over the hydrangea bush,straightened up, and stared around. There was nosign of what had caused the loud cracking noise, butthere were several faces peering through variousnearby windows. Harry stuffed his wand hastily backinto his jeans and tried to look innocent.

“Lovely evening!” shouted Uncle Vernon, waving atMrs. Number Seven, who was glaring from behind hernet curtains. “Did you hear that car backfire justnow? Gave Petunia and me quite a turn!”

He continued to grin in a horrible, manic way until allthe curious neighbors had disappeared from theirvarious windows, then the grin became a grimace ofrage as he beckoned Harry back toward him.

Harry moved a few steps closer, taking care to stopjust short of the point at which Uncle Vernon’soutstretched hands could resume their strangling.

“What the devil do you mean by it, boy?” asked UncleVernon in a croaky voice that trembled with fury.

“What do I mean by what?” said Harry coldly. He keptlooking left and right up the street, still hoping to seethe person who had made the cracking noise.

“Making a racket like a starting pistol right outsideour —”

“I didn’t make that noise,” said Harry firmly.

Aunt Petunia’s thin, horsey face now appeared besideUncle Vernon’s wide, purple one. She looked livid.

“Why were you lurking under our window?”

Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes — yes, good point, Petunia! What were you doingunder our window, boy?”

“Listening to the news,” said Harry in a resignedvoice.

His aunt and uncle exchanged looks of outrage.

“Listening to the news! Again?”

“Well, it changes every day, you see,” said Harry.

“Don’t you be clever with me, boy! I want to knowwhat you’re really up to — and don’t give me anymore of this listening to the news tosh! You knowperfectly well that your lot...”

“Careful, Vernon!” breathed Aunt Petunia, and UncleVernon lowered his voice so that Harry could barelyhear him, "... that your lot don’t get on our news!”

“That’s all you know,” said Harry.

The Dursleys goggled at him for a few seconds, thenAunt Petunia said, “You’re a nasty little liar. What areall those —” she too lowered her voice so that Harryhad to lip-read the next word, “— owls — doing ifthey’re not bringing you news?”

“Aha!” said Uncle Vernon in a triumphant whisper.“Get out of that one, boy! As if we didn’t know you getall your news from those pestilential birds!”

Harry hesitated for a moment. It cost him somethingto tell the truth this time, even though his aunt anduncle could not possibly know how bad Harry felt atadmitting it.

Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“The owls ... aren’t bringing me news,” said Harrytonelessly.

“I don’t believe it,” said Aunt Petunia at once.

“No more do I,” said Uncle Vernon forcefully.

“We know you’re up to something funny,” said AuntPetunia.

“We’re not stupid, you know,” said Uncle Vernon.

“Well, that’s news to me,” said Harry, his temperrising, and before the Dursleys could call him back,he had wheeled about, crossed the front lawn,stepped over the low garden wall, and was striding offup the street.

He was in trouble now and he knew it. He would haveto face his aunt and uncle later and pay the price forhis rudeness, but he did not care very much just atthe moment; he had much more pressing matters onhis mind.

Harry was sure that the cracking noise had beenmade by someone Apparating or Disapparating. Itwas exactly the sound Dobby the house-elf madewhen he vanished into thin air. Was it possible thatDobby was here in Privet Drive? Could Dobby befollowing him right at this very moment? As thisthought occurred he wheeled around and stared backdown Privet Drive, but it appeared to be completelydeserted again and Harry was sure that Dobby didnot know how to become invisible...

He walked on, hardly aware of the route he wastaking, for he had pounded these streets so oftenlately that his feet carried him to his favorite hauntsautomatically. Every few steps he glanced back over

Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

his shoulder. Someone magical had been near him ashe lay among Aunt Petunias dying begonias, he wassure of it. Why hadn’t they spoken to him, why hadn’tthey made contact, why were they hiding now?

And then, as his feeling of frustration peaked, hiscertainty leaked away.

Perhaps it hadn’t been a magical sound after all.Perhaps he was so desperate for the tiniest sign ofcontact from the world to which he belonged that hewas simply overreacting to perfectly ordinary noises.Could he be sure it hadn’t been the sound ofsomething breaking inside a neighbor’s house?

Harry felt a dull, sinking sensation in his stomachand, before he knew it, the feeling of hopelessnessthat had plagued him all summer rolled over himonce again...

Tomorrow morning he would be awoken by the alarmat five o’clock so that he could pay the owl thatdelivered the Daily Prophet — but was there any pointin continuing to take it? Harry merely glanced at thefront page before throwing it aside these days; whenthe idiots who ran the paper finally realized thatVoldemort was back it would be headline news, andthat was the only kind Harry cared about.

If he was lucky, there would also be owls carryingletters from his best friends, Ron and Hermione,though any expectation he had had that their letterswould bring him news had long since been dashed.

“We can’t say much about you-know-what,obviously...” “We’ve been told not to say anythingimportant in case our letters go astray...” “We’re quitebusy but I can’t give you details here...” “There’s a fair

Page | 10 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

amount going on, we’ll tell you everything when we seeyou...”

But when were they going to see him? Nobody seemedtoo bothered with a precise date. Hermione hadscribbled, “I expect we’ll be seeing you quite soon”inside his birthday card, but how soon was soon? Asfar as Harry could tell from the vague hints in theirletters, Hermione and Ron were in the same place,presumably at Ron’s parents’ house. He could hardlybear to think of the pair of them having fun at theBurrow when he was stuck in Privet Drive. In fact, hewas so angry at them that he had thrown both theirbirthday presents of Honeydukes chocolates awayunopened, though he had regretted this after eatingthe wilting salad Aunt Petunia had provided fordinner that night.

And what were Ron and Hermione busy with? Whywasn’t he, Harry, busy? Hadn’t he proved himselfcapable of handling much more than they? Had theyall forgotten what he had done? Hadn’t it been he whohad entered that graveyard and watched Cedric beingmurdered and been tied to that tombstone and nearlykilled ... ?

Don’t think about that, Harry told himself sternly forthe hundredth time that summer. It was bad enoughthat he kept revisiting the graveyard in hisnightmares, without dwelling on it in his wakingmoments too.

He turned a corner into Magnolia Crescent; halfwayalong he passed the narrow alleyway down the side ofa garage where he had first clapped eyes on hisgodfather. Sirius, at least, seemed to understand howHarry was feeling; admittedly his letters were just asempty of proper news as Ron and Hermione’s, but at

Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

least they contained words of caution and consolationinstead of tantalizing hints:

“I know this must be frustrating for you...” “Keep yournose clean and everything will be okay...” “Be carefuland don’t do anything rash...”

Well, thought Harry, as he crossed MagnoliaCrescent, turned into Magnolia Road, and headedtoward the darkening play park, he had (by and large)done as Sirius advised; he had at least resisted thetemptation to tie his trunk to his broomstick and setoff for the Burrow by himself. In fact Harry thoughthis behavior had been very good considering howfrustrated and angry he felt at being stuck in PrivetDrive this long, reduced to hiding in flower beds inthe hope of hearing something that might point towhat Lord Voldemort was doing. Nevertheless, it wasquite galling to be told not to be rash by a man whohad served twelve years in the wizard prison,

Azkaban, escaped, attempted to commit the murderhe had been convicted for in the first place, then goneon the run with a stolen hippogriff...

Harry vaulted over the locked park gate and set offacross the parched grass. The park was as empty asthe surrounding streets. When he reached the swingshe sank onto the only one that Dudley and his friendshad not yet managed to break, coiled one arm aroundthe chain, and stared moodily at the ground. Hewould not be able to hide in the Dursleys’ flower bedagain. Tomorrow he would have to think of somefresh way of listening to the news. In the meantime,he had nothing to look forward to but anotherrestless, disturbed night, because even when heescaped nightmares about Cedric he had unsettlingdreams about long dark corridors, all finishing indead ends and locked doors, which he supposed hadsomething to do with the trapped feeling he had whenPage | 12 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

he was awake. Often the old scar on his foreheadprickled uncomfortably, but he did not fool himselfthat Ron or Hermione or Sirius would find that veryinteresting anymore... In the past his scar hurtinghad warned that Voldemort was getting strongeragain, but now that Voldemort was back they wouldprobably remind him that its regular irritation wasonly to be expected... Nothing to worry about ... oldnews ...

The injustice of it all welled up inside him so that hewanted to yell with fury. If it hadn’t been for him,nobody would even have known Voldemort was back!And his reward was to be stuck in Little Whinging forfour solid weeks, completely cut off from the magicalworld, reduced to squatting among dying begonias sothat he could hear about water-skiing budgerigars!How could Dumbledore have forgotten him so easily?Why had Ron and Hermione got together withoutinviting him along too? How much longer was hesupposed to endure Sirius telling him to sit tight andbe a good boy; or resist the temptation to write to thestupid Daily Prophet and point out that Voldemorthad returned? These furious thoughts whirled aroundin Harry’s head, and his insides writhed with anger asa sultry, velvety night fell around him, the air full ofthe smell of warm, dry grass and the only sound thatof the low grumble of traffic on the road beyond thepark railings.

He did not know how long he had sat on the swingbefore the sound of voices interrupted his musingsand he looked up. The street-lamps from thesurrounding roads were casting a misty glow strongenough to silhouette a group of people making theirway across the park. One of them was singing a loud,crude song. The others were laughing. A soft tickingnoise came from several expensive racing bikes thatthey were wheeling along.

Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry knew who those people were. The figure in frontwas unmistakably his cousin, Dudley Dursley,wending his way home, accompanied by his faithfulgang.

Dudley was as vast as ever, but a year’s hard dietingand the discovery of a new talent had wrought quite achange in his physique. As Uncle Vernon delightedlytold anyone who would listen, Dudley had recentlybecome the Junior Heavyweight Inter-School BoxingChampion of the Southeast. “The noble sport,” asUncle Vernon called it, had made Dudley even moreformidable than he had seemed to Harry in theprimary school days when he had served as Dudley’sfirst punching bag. Harry was not remotely afraid ofhis cousin anymore but he still didn’t think thatDudley learning to punch harder and more accuratelywas cause for celebration. Neighborhood children allaround were terrified of him — even more terrifiedthan they were of “that Potter boy,” who, they hadbeen warned, was a hardened hooligan who attendedSt. Brutus’s Secure Center for Incurably CriminalBoys.

Harry watched the dark figures crossing the grassand wondered whom they had been beating uptonight. Look round, Harry found himself thinking ashe watched them. Come on ... look round ... I’m sittinghere all alone... Come and have ago...

If Dudley’s friends saw him sitting here, they wouldbe sure to make a beeline for him, and what wouldDudley do then? He wouldn’t want to lose face infront of the gang, but he’d be terrified of provokingHarry... It would be really fun to watch Dudley’sdilemma; to taunt him, watch him, with himpowerless to respond ... and if any of the others triedhitting Harry, Harry was ready — he had his wand ...let them try ... He’d love to vent some of hisPage | 14 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

frustration on the boys who had once made his lifehell —

But they did not turn around, they did not see him,they were almost at the railings. Harry mastered theimpulse to call after them... Seeking a fight was not asmart move... He must not use magic... He would berisking expulsion again...

Dudley’s gang’s voices died; they were out of sight,heading along Magnolia Road.

There you go, Sirius, Harry thought dully. Nothingrash. Kept my nose clean. Exactly the opposite of whatyou’d have done ...

He got to his feet and stretched. Aunt Petunia andUncle Vernon seemed to feel that whenever Dudleyturned up was the right time to be home, and anytimeafter that was much too late. Uncle Vernon hadthreatened to lock Harry in the shed if he came homeafter Dudley again, so, stifling a yawn, still scowling,Harry set off toward the park gate.

Magnolia Road, like Privet Drive, was full of large,square houses with perfectly manicured lawns, allowned by large, square owners who drove very cleancars similar to Uncle Vernon’s. Harry preferred LittleWhinging by night, when the curtained windowsmade patches of jewel-bright colors in the darknessand he ran no danger of hearing disapprovingmutters about his “delinquent” appearance when hepassed the householders. He walked quickly, so thathalfway along Magnolia Road Dudley’s gang came intoview again; they were saying their farewells at theentrance to Magnolia Crescent. Harry stepped intothe shadow of a large lilac tree and waited.

Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

"... squealed like a pig, didn’t he?” Malcolm wassaying, to guffaws from the others.

“Nice right hook, Big D,” said Piers.

“Same time tomorrow?” said Dudley.

“Round at my place, my parents are out,” saidGordon.

“See you then,” said Dudley.

“Bye Dud!”

“See ya, Big D!”

Harry waited for the rest of the gang to move onbefore setting off again. When their voices had fadedonce more he headed around the corner into MagnoliaCrescent and by walking very quickly he soon camewithin hailing distance of Dudley, who was strollingalong at his ease, humming tunelessly.

“Hey, Big D!”

Dudley turned.

“Oh,” he grunted. “It’s you.”

“How long have you been ‘Big D’ then?” said Harry.

“Shut it,” snarled Dudley, turning away again.

“Cool name,” said Harry, grinning and falling intostep beside his cousin. “But you’ll always be IckleDiddykins to me.”

“I said, SHUT IT!” said Dudley, whose ham-like handshad curled into fists.

Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t the boys know that’s what your mum callsyou?”

“Shut your face.”

“You don’t tell her to shut her face. What about‘popkin’ and ‘Dinky Diddydums,’ can I use themthen?”

Dudley said nothing. The effort of keeping himselffrom hitting Harry seemed to be demanding all hisself-control.

“So who’ve you been beating up tonight?” Harryasked, his grin fading. “Another ten-year-old? I knowyou did Mark Evans two nights ago —”

“He was asking for it,” snarled Dudley.

“Oh yeah?”

“He cheeked me.”

“Yeah? Did he say you look like a pig that’s beentaught to walk on its hind legs? ’Cause that’s notcheek, Dud, that’s true ...”

A muscle was twitching in Dudley’s jaw. It gave Harryenormous satisfaction to know how furious he wasmaking Dudley; he felt as though he was siphoningoff his own frustration into his cousin, the only outlethe had.

They turned right down the narrow alleyway whereHarry had first seen Sirius and which formed ashortcut between Magnolia Crescent and WisteriaWalk. It was empty and much darker than the streetsit linked because there were no streetlamps. Their

Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

footsteps were muffled between garage walls on oneside and a high fence on the other.

“Think you’re a big man carrying that thing, don’tyou?” Dudley said after a few seconds.

“What thing?”

“That — that thing you’re hiding.”

Harry grinned again.

“Not as stupid as you look, are you, Dud? But I s’poseif you were, you wouldn’t be able to walk and talk atthe same time...”

Harry pulled out his wand. He saw Dudley looksideways at it.

“You’re not allowed,” Dudley said at once. “I knowyou’re not. You’d get expelled from that freak schoolyou go to.”

“How d’you know they haven’t changed the rules, BigD?”

“They haven’t,” said Dudley, though he didn’t soundcompletely convinced. Harry laughed softly.

“You haven’t got the guts to take me on without thatthing, have you?” Dudley snarled.

“Whereas you just need four mates behind you beforeyou can beat up a ten-year-old. You know that boxingtitle you keep banging on about? How old was youropponent? Seven? Eight?”

“He was sixteen for your information,” snarledDudley, “and he was out cold for twenty minutes after

Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

I’d finished with him and he was twice as heavy asyou. You just wait till I tell Dad you had that thingout —”

“Running to Daddy now, are you? Is his ickle boxingchamp frightened of nasty Harry’s wand?”

“Not this brave at night, are you?” sneered Dudley.

“This is night, Diddykins. That’s what we call it whenit goes all dark like this.”

“I mean when you’re in bed!” Dudley snarled.

He had stopped walking. Harry stopped too, staring athis cousin. From the little he could see of Dudley’slarge face, he was wearing a strangely triumphantlook.

“What d’you mean, I’m not brave in bed?” said Harry,completely nonplussed. “What — am I supposed to befrightened of pillows or something?”

“I heard you last night,” said Dudley breathlessly.“Talking in your sleep. Moaning.”

“What d’you mean?” Harry said again, but there wasa cold, plunging sensation in his stomach. He hadrevisited the graveyard last night in his dreams.

Dudley gave a harsh bark of laughter then adopted ahigh-pitched, whimpering voice. “ ‘Don’t kill Cedric!Don’t kill Cedric!’ Who’s Cedric — your boyfriend?”

“I — you’re lying —” said Harry automatically. But hismouth had gone dry. He knew Dudley wasn’t lying —how else would he know about Cedric?

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“ T)ad! Help me, Dad! He’s going to kill me, Dad! Boo-hoo!”’

“Shut up,” said Harry quietly. “Shut up, Dudley, I’mwarning you!”

“ ‘Come and help me, Dad! Mum, come and help me!He’s killed Cedric! Dad, help me! He’s going to —’Don’t you point that thing at me\”

Dudley backed into the alley wall. Harry was pointingthe wand directly at Dudley’s heart. Harry could feelfourteen years’ hatred of Dudley pounding in hisveins — what wouldn’t he give to strike now, to jinxDudley so thoroughly he’d have to crawl home like aninsect, struck dumb, sprouting feelers —

“Don’t ever talk about that again,” Harry snarled.“D’you understand me?”

“Point that thing somewhere else!”

“I said, do you understand me?”

“Point it somewhere else\”

“DO YOU UNDERSTAND ME?”

“GET THAT THING AWAY FROM —”

Dudley gave an odd, shuddering gasp, as though hehad been doused in icy water.

Something had happened to the night. The star-strewn indigo sky was suddenly pitch-black andlightless — the stars, the moon, the misty streetlampsat either end of the alley had vanished. The distantgrumble of cars and the whisper of trees had gone.

The balmy evening was suddenly piercingly, bitinglyPage | 20 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

cold. They were surrounded by total, impenetrable,silent darkness, as though some giant hand haddropped a thick, icy mantle over the entire alleyway,blinding them.

For a split second Harry thought he had done magicwithout meaning to, despite the fact that he’d beenresisting as hard as he could — then his reasoncaught up with his senses — he didn’t have the powerto turn off the stars. He turned his head this way andthat, trying to see something, but the darknesspressed on his eyes like a weightless veil.

Dudley’s terrified voice broke in Harry’s ear.

“W-what are you d-doing? St-stop it!”

“I’m not doing anything! Shut up and don’t move!”

“I c-can’t see! I’ve g-gone blind! I —”

“I said shut up!”

Harry stood stock-still, turning his sightless eyes leftand right. The cold was so intense that he wasshivering all over; goose bumps had erupted up hisarms, and the hairs on the back of his neck werestanding up — he opened his eyes to their fullestextent, staring blankly around, unseeing ...

It was impossible... They couldn’t be here... Not inLittle Whinging ... He strained his ears... He wouldhear them before he saw them...

“I’ll t-tell Dad!” Dudley whimpered. “W-where are you?What are you d-do — ?”

“Will you shut up?” Harry hissed, “I’m trying to lis —”

Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But he fell silent. He had heard just the thing he hadbeen dreading.

There was something in the alleyway apart fromthemselves, something that was drawing long, hoarse,rattling breaths. Harry felt a horrible jolt of dread ashe stood trembling in the freezing air.

“C-cut it out! Stop doing it! Ill h-hit you, I swear Iwill!”

“Dudley, shut —”

WHAM

A fist made contact with the side of Harry’s head,lifting Harry off his feet. Small white lights popped infront of Harry’s eyes; for the second time in an hourhe felt as though his head had been cleaved in two;next moment he had landed hard on the ground, andhis wand had flown out of his hand.

“You moron, Dudley!” Harry yelled, his eyes wateringwith pain, as he scrambled to his hands and knees,now feeling around frantically in the blackness. Heheard Dudley blundering away, hitting the alley fence,stumbling.

“DUDLEY, COME BACK! YOU’RE RUNNING RIGHTAT IT!”

There was a horrible squealing yell, and Dudley’sfootsteps stopped. At the same moment, Harry felt acreeping chill behind him that could mean only onething. There was more than one.

“DUDLEY, KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT! WHATEVERYOU DO, KEEP YOUR MOUTH SHUT! Wand!” Harry

Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

muttered frantically, his hands flying over the groundlike spiders. “Where’s — wand — come on — Lumosl”

He said the spell automatically, desperate for light tohelp him in his search — and to his disbelievingrelief, light flared inches from his right hand — thewand tip had ignited. Harry snatched it up,scrambled to his feet, and turned around.

His stomach turned over.

A towering, hooded figure was gliding smoothlytoward him, hovering over the ground, no feet or facevisible beneath its robes, sucking on the night as itcame.

Stumbling backward, Harry raised his wand.

“Expecto Patronurrd”

A silvery wisp of vapor shot from the tip of the wandand the dementor slowed, but the spell hadn’t workedproperly; tripping over his feet, Harry retreatedfarther as the dementor bore down upon him, panicfogging his brain — concentrate —

A pair of gray, slimy, scabbed hands slid from insidethe dementor’s robes, reaching for him. A rushingnoise filled Harry’s ears.

“Expecto PatronumV’

His voice sounded dim and distant... Another wisp ofsilver smoke, feebler than the last, drifted from thewand — he couldn’t do it anymore, he couldn’t workthe spell —

There was laughter inside his own head, shrill, high-pitched laughter... He could smell the dementor’s

Page | 23 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

putrid, death-cold breath, filling his own lungs,drowning him — Think ... something happy...

But there was no happiness in him... The dementor’sicy fingers were closing on his throat — the high-pitched laughter was growing louder and louder, anda voice spoke inside his head — “Bow to death,

Harry... It might even be painless... I would notknow... I have never died...”

He was never going to see Ron and Hermione again —

And their faces burst clearly into his mind as hefought for breath —

“EXPECTO PATRONUM”

An enormous silver stag erupted from the tip ofHarry’s wand; its antlers caught the dementor in theplace where the heart should have been; it wasthrown backward, weightless as darkness, and as thestag charged, the dementor swooped away, batlikeand defeated.

“THIS WAY!” Harry shouted at the stag. Wheelingaround, he sprinted down the alleyway, holding the litwand aloft. “DUDLEY? DUDLEY!”

He had run barely a dozen steps when he reachedthem: Dudley was curled on the ground, his armsclamped over his face; a second dementor wascrouching low over him, gripping his wrists in itsslimy hands, prizing them slowly, almost lovinglyapart, lowering its hooded head toward Dudley’s faceas though about to kiss him...

“GET IT!” Harry bellowed, and with a rushing, roaringsound, the silver stag he had conjured came gallopingback past him. The dementor’s eyeless face was

Page | 24 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

barely an inch from Dudley’s when the silver antlerscaught it; the thing was thrown up into the air and,like its fellow, it soared away and was absorbed intothe darkness. The stag cantered to the end of thealleyway and dissolved into silver mist.

Moon, stars, and streetlamps burst back into life. Awarm breeze swept the alleyway. Trees rustled inneighboring gardens and the mundane rumble of carsin Magnolia Crescent filled the air again. Harry stoodquite still, all his senses vibrating, taking in theabrupt return to normality. After a moment hebecame aware that his T-shirt was sticking to him; hewas drenched in sweat.

He could not believe what had just happened.Dementors here, in Little Whinging ...

Dudley lay curled up on the ground, whimpering andshaking. Harry bent down to see whether he was in afit state to stand up, but then heard loud, runningfootsteps behind him; instinctively raising his wandagain, he spun on his heel to face the newcomer.

Mrs. Figg, their batty old neighbor, came panting intosight. Her grizzled gray hair was escaping from itshairnet, a clanking string shopping bag was swingingfrom her wrist, and her feet were halfway out of hertartan carpet slippers. Harry made to stow his wandhurriedly out of sight, but —

“Don’t put it away, idiot boy!” she shrieked. “What ifthere are more of them around? Oh, I’m going to killMundungus Fletcher!”

Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



A PECK OF OWLS

“What?” said Harry blankly.

“He left!” said Mrs. Figg, wringing her hands. “Left tosee someone about a batch of cauldrons that fell offthe back of a broom! I told him I’d flay him alive if hewent, and now look! Dementors! It’s just lucky I putMr. Tibbies on the case! But we haven’t got time tostand around! Hurry, now, we’ve got to get you back!Oh, the trouble this is going to cause! I will kill him!”

“But —”

The revelation that his batty old cat-obsessedneighbor knew what dementors were was almost asbig a shock to Harry as meeting two of them down thealleyway. “You’re — you’re a witch?”

“I’m a Squib, as Mundungus knows full well, so howon earth was I supposed to help you fight offdementors? He left you completely without coverwhen I warned him —”

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“This bloke Mundungus has been following me? Hangon — it was him). He Disapparated from the front ofmy house!”

“Yes, yes, yes, but luckily I’d stationed Mr. Tibbiesunder a car just in case, and Mr. Tibbies came andwarned me, but by the time I got to your house you’dgone — and now — oh, what’s Dumbledore going tosay? You!” she shrieked at Dudley, still supine on thealley floor. “Get your fat bottom off the ground,quick!”

“You know Dumbledore?” said Harry, staring at her.

“Of course I know Dumbledore, who doesn’t knowDumbledore? But come on — I’ll be no help if theycome back, I’ve never so much as Transfigured ateabag —”

She stooped down, seized one of Dudley’s massivearms in her wizened hands, and tugged.

“Get up, you useless lump, get up!”

But Dudley either could not or would not move. Hewas still on the ground, trembling and ashen-faced,his mouth shut very tight.

“I’ll do it.” Harry took hold of Dudley’s arm andheaved: With an enormous effort he managed to hoistDudley to his feet. Dudley seemed to be on the pointof fainting: His small eyes were rolling in their socketsand sweat was beading his face; the moment Harry letgo of him he swayed dangerously.

“Hurry up!” said Mrs. Figg hysterically.

Harry pulled one of Dudley’s massive arms aroundhis own shoulders and dragged him toward the road,

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

sagging slightly under his weight. Mrs. Figg totteredalong in front of them, peering anxiously around thecorner.

“Keep your wand out,” she told Harry, as they enteredWisteria Walk. “Never mind the Statute of Secrecynow, there’s going to be hell to pay anyway, we mightas well be hanged for a dragon as an egg. Talk aboutthe Reasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery ...This was exactly what Dumbledore was afraid of —what’s that at the end of the street? Oh, it’s just Mr.Prentice... Don’t put your wand away, boy, don’t Ikeep telling you I’m no use?”

It was not easy to hold a wand steady and carryDudley along at the same time. Harry gave his cousinan impatient dig in the ribs, but Dudley seemed tohave lost all desire for independent movement. Hewas slumped on Harry’s shoulder, his large feetdragging along the ground.

“Why didn’t you tell me you’re a Squib?” Harry askedMrs. Figg, panting with the effort to keep walking. “Allthose times I came round your house — why didn’tyou say anything?”

“Dumbledore’s orders. I was to keep an eye on youbut not say anything, you were too young. I’m sorry Igave you such a miserable time, but the Dursleyswould never have let you come if they’d thought youenjoyed it. It wasn’t easy, you know... But oh myword,” she said tragically, wringing her hands oncemore, “when Dumbledore hears about this — howcould Mundungus have left, he was supposed to beon duty until midnight — where is he? How am Igoing to tell Dumbledore what’s happened, I can’tApparate —”

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I’ve got an owl, you can borrow her,” Harry groaned,wondering whether his spine was going to snap underDudley’s weight.

“Harry, you don’t understand! Dumbledore will needto act as quickly as possible, the Ministry have theirown ways of detecting underage magic, they’ll knowalready, you mark my words —”

“But I was getting rid of dementors, I had to usemagic — they’re going to be more worried whatdementors were doing floating around Wisteria Walk,surely?”

“Oh my dear, I wish it were so but I’m afraid —MUNDUNGUS FLETCHER, I AM GOING TO KILLYOU!”

There was a loud crack and a strong smell of mingleddrink and stale tobacco filled the air as a squat,unshaven man in a tattered overcoat materializedright in front of them. He had short bandy legs, longstraggly ginger hair, and bloodshot baggy eyes thatgave him the doleful look of a basset hound; he wasalso clutching a silvery bundle that Harry recognizedat once as an Invisibility Cloak.

“ ’S’ up, Figgy?” he said, staring from Mrs. Figg toHarry and Dudley. “What ’appened to stayingundercover?”

“I’ll give you undercover!” cried Mrs. Figg. “Dementors,you useless, skiving sneak thief!”

“Dementors?” repeated Mundungus, aghast.“Dementors here?”

Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, here, you worthless pile of bat droppings, here!”shrieked Mrs. Figg. “Dementors attacking the boy onyour watch!”

“Blimey,” said Mundungus weakly, looking from Mrs.Figg to Harry and back again. “Blimey, I ...”

“And you off buying stolen cauldrons! Didn’t I tell younot to go? Didn’t i?”

“I — well, I —” Mundungus looked deeplyuncomfortable. “It ... it was a very good businessopportunity, see ...”

Mrs. Figg raised the arm from which her string bagdangled and whacked Mundungus around the faceand neck with it; judging by the clanking noise itmade it was full of cat food.

“Ouch — gerroff — gerroff, you mad old bat!

Someone’s gotta tell Dumbledore!”

“Yes — they — have!” yelled Mrs. Figg, still swingingthe bag of cat food at every bit of Mundungus shecould reach. “And — it — had — better — be — you —and — you — can — tell — him — why — you —weren’t — there — to — help!”

“Keep your ’airnet on!” said Mundungus, his armsover his head, cowering. “I’m going, I’m going!”

And with another loud crack, he vanished.

“I hope Dumbledore murders him!” said Mrs. Figgfuriously. “Now come on, Harry, what are you waitingfor?”

Harry decided not to waste his remaining breath onpointing out that he could barely walk under Dudley’s

Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

bulk. He gave the semiconscious Dudley a heave andstaggered onward.

“I’ll take you to the door,” said Mrs. Figg, as theyturned into Privet Drive. “Just in case there are moreof them around... Oh my word, what a catastrophe ...and you had to fight them off yourself ... andDumbledore said we were to keep you from doingmagic at all costs... Well, it’s no good crying overspilled potion, I suppose ... but the cat’s among thepixies now ...”

“So,” Harry panted, “Dumbledore’s ... been having ...me followed?”

“Of course he has,” said Mrs. Figg impatiently. “Didyou expect him to let you wander around on your ownafter what happened in June? Good Lord, boy, theytold me you were intelligent... Right ... get inside andstay there,” she said as they reached number four. “Iexpect someone will be in touch with you soonenough.”

“What are you going to do?” asked Harry quickly.

“I’m going straight home,” said Mrs. Figg, staringaround the dark street and shuddering. “I’ll need towait for more instructions. Just stay in the house.Good night.”

“Hang on, don’t go yet! I want to know —”

But Mrs. Figg had already set off at a trot, carpetslippers flopping, string bag clanking.

“Wait!” Harry shouted after her; he had a millionquestions to ask anyone who was in contact withDumbledore; but within seconds Mrs. Figg wasswallowed by the darkness. Scowling, Harry

Page | 31 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

readjusted Dudley on his shoulder and made hisslow, painful way up number four’s garden path.

The hall light was on. Harry stuck his wand backinside the waistband of his jeans, rang the bell, andwatched Aunt Petunia’s outline grow larger andlarger, oddly distorted by the rippling glass in thefront door.

“Diddy! About time too, I was getting quite — quite —Diddy, what’s the matter?”

Harry looked sideways at Dudley and ducked outfrom under his arm just in time. Dudley swayed for amoment on the spot, his face pale green, then heopened his mouth at last and vomited all over thedoormat.

“DIDDY! Diddy, what’s the matter with you? Vernon?VERNON!”

Harry’s uncle came galumphing out of the livingroom, walrus mustache blowing hither and thither asit always did when he was agitated. He hurriedforward to help Aunt Petunia negotiate a weak-kneedDudley over the threshold while avoiding stepping inthe pool of sick.

“He’s ill, Vernon!”

“What is it, son? What’s happened? Did Mrs. Polkissgive you something foreign for tea?”

“Why are you all covered in dirt, darling? Have youbeen lying on the ground?”

“Hang on — you haven’t been mugged, have you,son?”

Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Aunt Petunia screamed.

“Phone the police, Vernon! Phone the police! Diddy,darling, speak to Mummy! What did they do to you?”

In all the kerfuffle, nobody seemed to have noticedHarry, which suited him perfectly. He managed to slipinside just before Uncle Vernon slammed the doorand while the Dursleys made their noisy progressdown the hall toward the kitchen, Harry movedcarefully and quietly toward the stairs.

“Who did it, son? Give us names. Well get them, don’tworry.”

“Shh! He’s trying to say something, Vernon! What isit, Diddy? Tell Mummy!”

Harry’s foot was on the bottommost stair whenDudley found his voice.

“Him”

Harry froze, foot on the stair, face screwed up, bracedfor the explosion.

“BOY! COME HERE!”

With a feeling of mingled dread and anger, Harryremoved his foot slowly from the stair and turned tofollow the Dursleys.

The scrupulously clean kitchen had an oddly unrealglitter after the darkness outside. Aunt Petunia wasushering Dudley into a chair; he was still very greenand clammy looking. Uncle Vernon was standing infront of the draining board, glaring at Harry throughtiny, narrowed eyes.

Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What have you done to my son?” he said in amenacing growl.

“Nothing,” said Harry, knowing perfectly well thatUncle Vernon wouldn’t believe him.

“What did he do to you, Diddy?” Aunt Petunia said ina quavering voice, now sponging sick from the front ofDudley’s leather jacket. “Was it — was it you-know-what, darling? Did he use — his thing?”

Slowly, tremulously, Dudley nodded.

“I didn’t!” Harry said sharply, as Aunt Petunia let outa wail and Uncle Vernon raised his fists. “I didn’t doanything to him, it wasn’t me, it was —”

But at that precise moment a screech owl swooped inthrough the kitchen window. Narrowly missing thetop of Uncle Vernon’s head, it soared across thekitchen, dropped the large parchment envelope it wascarrying in its beak at Harry’s feet, and turnedgracefully, the tips of its wings just brushing the topof the fridge, then zoomed outside again and offacross the garden.

“OWLS!” bellowed Uncle Vernon, the well-worn vein inhis temple pulsing angrily as he slammed the kitchenwindow shut. “OWLS AGAIN! I WILL NOT HAVE ANYMORE OWLS IN MY HOUSE!”

But Harry was already ripping open the envelope andpulling out the letter inside, his heart poundingsomewhere in the region of his Adam’s apple.

Dear Mr. Potter,

We have received intelligence that you performed thePatronus Charm at twenty-three minutes past nine this

Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

evening in a Muggle-inhabited area and in thepresence of a Muggle.

The severity of this breach of the Decree for theReasonable Restriction of Underage Sorcery hasresulted in your expulsion from Hog warts School ofWitchcraft and Wizardry. Ministry representatives willbe calling at your place of residence shortly to destroyyour wand.

As you have already received an official warning for aprevious offense under section 13 of the InternationalConfederation of Wizards’ Statute of Secrecy, we regretto inform you that your presence is required at adisciplinary hearing at the Ministry of Magic at 9 a. m.on August 12th.

Hoping you are well,

Yours sincerely,

Mafalda Hopkirk

IMPROPER USE OF MAGIC OFFICEMinistry of Magic

Harry read the letter through twice. He was onlyvaguely aware of Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petuniatalking in the vicinity. Inside his head, all was icy andnumb. One fact had penetrated his consciousnesslike a paralyzing dart. He was expelled fromHogwarts. It was all over. He was never going back.

He looked up at the Dursleys. Uncle Vernon waspurple-faced, shouting, his fists still raised; AuntPetunia had her arms around Dudley, who wasretching again.

Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s temporarily stupefied brain seemed toreawaken. Ministry representatives will be calling atyour place of residence shortly to destroy your wand.There was only one thing for it. He would have to run— now. Where he was going to go, Harry didn’t know,but he was certain of one thing: At Hogwarts oroutside it, he needed his wand. In an almostdreamlike state, he pulled his wand out and turned toleave the kitchen.

“Where d’you think you’re going?” yelled UncleVernon. When Harry didn’t reply, he pounded acrossthe kitchen to block the doorway into the hall. “Ihaven’t finished with you, boy!”

“Get out of the way,” said Harry quietly.

“You’re going to stay here and explain how my son —”

“If you don’t get out of the way I’m going to jinx you,”said Harry, raising the wand.

“You can’t pull that one on me!” snarled UncleVernon. “I know you’re not allowed to use it outsidethat madhouse you call a school!”

“The madhouse has chucked me out,” said Harry. “SoI can do whatever I like. You’ve got three seconds.

One — two —”

A resounding CRACK filled the kitchen; Aunt Petuniascreamed, Uncle Vernon yelled and ducked, but forthe third time that night Harry was staring for thesource of a disturbance he had not made. He spottedit at once: A dazed and ruffled-looking barn owl wassitting outside on the kitchen sill, having just collidedwith the closed window.

Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Ignoring Uncle Vernon’s anguished yell of “OWLS!”Harry crossed the room at a run and wrenched thewindow open again. The owl stuck out its leg, towhich a small roll of parchment was tied, shook itsfeathers, and took off the moment Harry had pulledoff the letter. Hands shaking, Harry unfurled thesecond message, which was written very hastily andblotchily in black ink.

Harry —

Dumbledore’s just arrived at the Ministry, and he’strying to sort it all out. DO NOT LEAVE YOUR AUNTAND UNCLE’S HOUSE. DO NOT DO ANYMOREMAGIC. DO NOT SURRENDER YOUR WAND.

Arthur Weasley

Dumbledore was trying to sort it all out... What didthat mean? How much power did Dumbledore have tooverride the Ministry of Magic? Was there a chancethat he might be allowed back to Hogwarts, then? Asmall shoot of hope burgeoned in Harry’s chest,almost immediately strangled by panic — how was hesupposed to refuse to surrender his wand withoutdoing magic? He’d have to duel with the Ministryrepresentatives, and if he did that, he’d be lucky toescape Azkaban, let alone expulsion.

His mind was racing... He could run for it and riskbeing captured by the Ministry, or stay put and waitfor them to find him here. He was much moretempted by the former course, but he knew that Mr.Weasley had his best interests at heart ... and, afterall, Dumbledore had sorted out much worse than thisbefore...

“Right,” Harry said, “I’ve changed my mind, I’mstaying.”

Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

He flung himself down at the kitchen table and facedDudley and Aunt Petunia. The Dursleys appearedtaken aback at his abrupt change of mind. AuntPetunia glanced despairingly at Uncle Vernon. Thevein in Uncle Vernon’s purple temple was throbbingworse than ever.

“Who are all these ruddy owls from?” he growled.

“The first one was from the Ministry of Magic,expelling me,” said Harry calmly; he was straining hisears to catch noises outside in case the Ministryrepresentatives were approaching, and it was easierand quieter to answer Uncle Vernon’s questions thanto have him start raging and bellowing. “The secondone was from my friend Ron’s dad, he works at theMinistry.”

“Ministry of Magic?” bellowed Uncle Vernon. “Peoplelike you in government? Oh this explains everything,everything, no wonder the country’s going to thedogs...”

When Harry did not respond, Uncle Vernon glared athim, then spat, “And why have you been expelled?”

“Because I did magic.”

“AHA!” roared Uncle Vernon, slamming his fist downon the top of the fridge, which sprang open; several ofDudley’s low-fat snacks toppled out and burst on thefloor. “So you admit it! What did you do to Dudley?”

“Nothing,” said Harry, slightly less calmly. “Thatwasn’t me —”

“Was,” muttered Dudley unexpectedly, and UncleVernon and Aunt Petunia instantly made flapping

Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

gestures at Harry to quiet him while they both bentlow over Dudley.

“Go on, son,” said Uncle Vernon, “what did he do?”

“Tell us, darling,” whispered Aunt Petunia.

“Pointed his wand at me,” Dudley mumbled.

“Yeah, I did, but I didn’t use —” Harry began angrily,but ...

“SHUT UP!” roared Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia inunison. “Go on, son,” repeated Uncle Vernon,mustache blowing about furiously.

“All dark,” Dudley said hoarsely, shuddering.“Everything dark. And then I h-heard ... things. Insidem-my head ...”

Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia exchanged looks ofutter horror. If their least favorite thing in the worldwas magic, closely followed by neighbors who cheatedmore than they did on the hosepipe ban, people whoheard voices were definitely in the bottom ten. Theyobviously thought Dudley was losing his mind.

“What sort of things did you hear, popkin?” breathedAunt Petunia, very white-faced and with tears in hereyes.

But Dudley seemed incapable of saying. Heshuddered again and shook his large blond head, anddespite the sense of numb dread that had settled onHarry since the arrival of the first owl, he felt acertain curiosity. Dementors caused a person to relivethe worst moments of their life... What would spoiled,pampered, bullying Dudley have been forced to hear?

Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“How come you fell over, son?” said Uncle Vernon inan unnaturally quiet voice, the kind of voice he wouldadopt at the bedside of a very ill person.

“T-tripped,” said Dudley shakily. “And then —”

He gestured at his massive chest. Harry understood:Dudley was remembering the clammy cold that filledthe lungs as hope and happiness were sucked out ofyou.

“Horrible,” croaked Dudley. “Cold. Really cold.”

“Okay,” said Uncle Vernon in a voice of forced calm,while Aunt Petunia laid an anxious hand on Dudley’sforehead to feel his temperature. “What happenedthen, Dudders?”

“Felt ... felt ... felt ... as if... as if ...”

“As if you’d never be happy again,” Harry suppliedtonelessly.

“Yes,” Dudley whispered, still trembling.

“So,” said Uncle Vernon, voice restored to full andconsiderable volume as he straightened up. “So youput some crackpot spell on my son so he’d hearvoices and believe he was — was doomed to misery,or something, did you?”

“How many times do I have to tell you?” said Harry,temper and voice rising together. “It wasn’t me\ It wasa couple of dementors!”

“A couple of— what’s this codswallop?”

“De — men — tors,” said Harry slowly and clearly.“Two of them.”

Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“And what the ruddy hell are dementors?”

“They guard the wizard prison, Azkaban,” said AuntPetunia.

Two seconds’ ringing silence followed these words andthen Aunt Petunia clapped her hand over her mouthas though she had let slip a disgusting swear word.Uncle Vernon was goggling at her. Harry’s brainreeled. Mrs. Figg was one thing — but Aunt Petunia?

“How d’you know that?” he asked her, astonished.

Aunt Petunia looked quite appalled with herself. Sheglanced at Uncle Vernon in fearful apology, thenlowered her hand slightly to reveal her horsey teeth.

“I heard — that awful boy — telling her about them —years ago,” she said jerkily.

“If you mean my mum and dad, why don’t you usetheir names?” said Harry loudly, but Aunt Petuniaignored him. She seemed horribly flustered.

Harry was stunned. Except for one outburst yearsago, in the course of which Aunt Petunia hadscreamed that Harry’s mother had been a freak, hehad never heard her mention her sister. He wasastounded that she had remembered this scrap ofinformation about the magical world for so long, whenshe usually put all her energies into pretending itdidn’t exist.

Uncle Vernon opened his mouth, closed it again,opened it once more, shut it, then, apparentlystruggling to remember how to talk, opened it for athird time and croaked, “So — so — they — er — they— er — they actually exist, do they — er — dementy-whatsits?”

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

Aunt Petunia nodded.

Uncle Vernon looked from Aunt Petunia to Dudley toHarry as if hoping somebody was going to shout“April Fool!” When nobody did, he opened his mouthyet again, but was spared the struggle to find morewords by the arrival of the third owl of the evening,which zoomed through the still-open window like afeathery cannonball and landed with a clatter on thekitchen table, causing all three of the Dursleys tojump with fright. Harry tore a second official-lookingenvelope from the owl’s beak and ripped it open asthe owl swooped back out into the night.

“Enough — effing — owls ...” muttered Uncle Vernondistractedly, stomping over to the window andslamming it shut again.

Dear Mr. Potter,

Further to our letter of approximately twenty-twominutes ago, the Ministry of Magic has revised itsdecision to destroy your wand forthwith. You mayretain your wand until your disciplinary hearing on12th August, at which time an official decision will betaken.

Following discussions with the Headmaster ofHogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, theMinistry has agreed that the question of your expulsionwill also be decided at that time. You should thereforeconsider yourself suspended from school pendingfurther inquiries.

With best wishes,

Yours sincerely,

Mafalda Hopkirk

Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

IMPROPER USE OF MAGIC OFFICE

Ministry of Magic

Harry read this letter through three times in quicksuccession. The miserable knot in his chest loosenedslightly at the thought that he was not definitelyexpelled, though his fears were by no meansbanished. Everything seemed to hang on this hearingon the twelfth of August.

“Well?” said Uncle Vernon, recalling Harry to hissurroundings. “What now? Have they sentenced youto anything? Do your lot have the death penalty?” headded as a hopeful afterthought.

“I’ve got to go to a hearing,” said Harry.

“And they’ll sentence you there?”

“I suppose so.”

“I won’t give up hope, then,” said Uncle Vernonnastily.

“Well, if that’s all,” said Harry, getting to his feet. Hewas desperate to be alone, to think, perhaps to send aletter to Ron, Hermione, or Sirius.

“NO, IT RUDDY WELL IS NOT ALL!” bellowed UncleVernon. “SIT BACK DOWN!”

“What now?” said Harry impatiently.

“DUDLEY!” roared Uncle Vernon. “I want to knowexactly what happened to my son!”

“FINE!” yelled Harry, and in his temper, red and goldsparks shot out of the end of his wand, still clutched

Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

in his hand. All three Dursleys flinched, lookingterrified.

“Dudley and I were in the alleyway between MagnoliaCrescent and Wisteria Walk,” said Harry, speakingfast, fighting to control his temper. “Dudley thoughthe’d be smart with me, I pulled out my wand butdidn’t use it. Then two dementors turned up —”

“But what ARE dementoids?” asked Uncle Vernonfuriously. “What do they DO?”

“I told you — they suck all the happiness out of you,”said Harry, “and if they get the chance, they kiss you

“Kiss you?” said Uncle Vernon, his eyes poppingslightly. “Kiss you?”

“It’s what they call it when they suck the soul out ofyour mouth.”

Aunt Petunia uttered a soft scream.

“His soul? They didn’t take — he’s still got his —”

She seized Dudley by the shoulders and shook him,as though testing to see whether she could hear hissoul rattling around inside him.

“Of course they didn’t get his soul, you’d know if theyhad,” said Harry, exasperated.

“Fought ’em off, did you, son?” said Uncle Vernonloudly, with the appearance of a man struggling tobring the conversation back onto a plane heunderstood. “Gave ’em the old one-two, did you?”

Page | 44 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“You can’t give a dementor the old one-two,” saidHarry through clenched teeth.

“Why’s he all right, then?” blustered Uncle Vernon.“Why isn’t he all empty, then?”

“Because I used the Patronus —”

WHOOSH. With a clattering, a whirring of wings, anda soft fall of dust, a fourth owl came shooting out ofthe kitchen fireplace.

“FOR GOD’S SAKE!” roared Uncle Vernon, pullinggreat clumps of hair out of his mustache, somethinghe hadn’t been driven to in a long time. “I WILL NOTHAVE OWLS HERE, I WILL NOT TOLERATE THIS, ITELL YOU!”

But Harry was already pulling a roll of parchmentfrom the owl’s leg. He was so convinced that thisletter had to be from Dumbledore, explainingeverything — the dementors, Mrs. Figg, what theMinistry was up to, how he, Dumbledore, intended tosort everything out — that for the first time in his lifehe was disappointed to see Sirius’s handwriting.Ignoring Uncle Vernon’s ongoing rant about owls andnarrowing his eyes against a second cloud of dust asthe most recent owl took off back up the chimney,Harry read Sirius’s message.

Arthur’s just told us what’s happened.

Don’t leave the house again, whatever you do.

Harry found this such an inadequate response toeverything that had happened tonight that he turnedthe piece of parchment over, looking for the rest of theletter, but there was nothing there.

Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

And now his temper was rising again. Wasn’tanybody going to say “well done” for fighting off twodementors single-handedly? Both Mr. Weasley andSirius were acting as though he’d misbehaved andthey were saving their tellings-off until they couldascertain how much damage had been done.

“— a peck, I mean, pack of owls shooting in and outof my house and I won’t have it, boy, I won’t —”

“I can’t stop the owls coming,” Harry snapped,crushing Sirius’s letter in his fist.

“I want the truth about what happened tonight!”barked Uncle Vernon. “If it was demenders who hurtDudley, how come you’ve been expelled? You did you-know-what, you’ve admitted it!”

Harry took a deep, steadying breath. His head wasbeginning to ache again. He wanted more thananything to get out of the kitchen, away from theDursleys.

“I did the Patronus Charm to get rid of thedementors,” he said, forcing himself to remain calm.“It’s the only thing that works against them.”

“But what were dementoids doing in Little Whinging?”said Uncle Vernon in tones of outrage.

“Couldn’t tell you,” said Harry wearily. “No idea.”

His head was pounding in the glare of the striplighting now. His anger was ebbing away. He feltdrained, exhausted. The Dursleys were all staring athim.

“It’s you,” said Uncle Vernon forcefully. “It’s gotsomething to do with you, boy, I know it. Why else

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

would they turn up here? Why else would they bedown that alleyway? You’ve got to be the only — theonly —” Evidently he couldn’t bring himself to say theword “wizard.” “The only you-know-what for miles.”

“I don’t know why they were here...”

But at these words of Uncle Vernon’s, Harry’sexhausted brain ground back into action. Why hadthe dementors come to Little Whinging? How could itbe coincidence that they had arrived in the alleywaywhere Harry was? Had they been sent? Had theMinistry of Magic lost control of the dementors, hadthey deserted Azkaban and joined Voldemort, asDumbledore had predicted they would?

“These demembers guard some weirdos’ prison?” saidUncle Vernon, lumbering in the wake of Harry’s trainof thought.

“Yes,” said Harry.

If only his head would stop hurting, if only he couldjust leave the kitchen and get to his dark bedroomand think...

“Oho! They were coming to arrest you!” said UncleVernon, with the triumphant air of a man reaching anunassailable conclusion. “That’s it, isn’t it, boy?

You’re on the run from the law!”

“Of course I’m not,” said Harry, shaking his head asthough to scare off a fly, his mind racing now.

“Then why — ?”

“He must have sent them,” said Harry quietly, more tohimself than to Uncle Vernon.

Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“What’s that? Who must have sent them?”

“Lord Voldemort,” said Harry.

He registered dimly how strange it was that theDursleys, who flinched, winced, and squawked if theyheard words like “wizard,” “magic,” or “wand,” couldhear the name of the most evil wizard of all timewithout the slightest tremor.

“Lord — hang on,” said Uncle Vernon, his facescrewed up, a look of dawning comprehension in hispiggy eyes. “I’ve heard that name ... that was the onewho ...”

“Murdered my parents, yes,” Harry said.

“But he’s gone,” said Uncle Vernon impatiently,without the slightest sign that the murder of Harry’sparents might be a painful topic to anybody. “Thatgiant bloke said so. He’s gone.”

“He’s back,” said Harry heavily.

It felt very strange to be standing here in AuntPetunia’s surgically clean kitchen, beside the top-of-the-range fridge and the wide-screen television, andtalking calmly of Lord Voldemort to Uncle Vernon.

The arrival of the dementors in Little Whingingseemed to have caused a breach in the great, invisiblewall that divided the relentlessly non-magical world ofPrivet Drive and the world beyond. Harry’s two liveshad somehow become fused and everything had beenturned upside down: The Dursleys were asking fordetails about the magical world and Mrs. Figg knewAlbus Dumbledore; dementors were soaring aroundLittle Whinging and he might never go back toHogwarts. Harry’s head throbbed more painfully.

Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“Back?” whispered Aunt Petunia.

She was looking at Harry as she had never looked athim before. And all of a sudden, for the very first timein his life, Harry fully appreciated that Aunt Petuniawas his mother’s sister. He could not have said whythis hit him so very powerfully at this moment. All heknew was that he was not the only person in theroom who had an inkling of what Lord Voldemortbeing back might mean. Aunt Petunia had never inher life looked at him like that before. Her large, paleeyes (so unlike her sister’s) were not narrowed indislike or anger: They were wide and fearful. Thefurious pretense that Aunt Petunia had maintainedall Harry’s life — that there was no magic and noworld other than the world she inhabited with UncleVernon — seemed to have fallen away.

“Yes,” Harry said, talking directly to Aunt Petunianow. “He came back a month ago. I saw him.”

Her hands found Dudley’s massive leather-cladshoulders and clutched them.

“Hang on,” said Uncle Vernon, looking from his wifeto Harry and back again, apparently dazed andconfused by the unprecedented understanding thatseemed to have sprung up between them. “Hang on.This Lord Voldything’s back, you say.”

“Yes.”

“The one who murdered your parents.”

“Yes.”

“And now he’s sending dismembers after you?”

“Looks like it,” said Harry.

Page | 49 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“I see,” said Uncle Vernon, looking from his white-faced wife to Harry and hitching up his trousers. Heseemed to be swelling, his great purple face stretchingbefore Harry’s eyes. “Well, that settles it,” he said, hisshirt front straining as he inflated himself, “you canget out of this house, boy\”

“What?” said Harry.

“You heard me — OUT!” Uncle Vernon bellowed, andeven Aunt Petunia and Dudley jumped. “OUT! OUT! Ishould’ve done it years ago! Owls treating the placelike a rest home, puddings exploding, half the loungedestroyed, Dudley’s tail, Marge bobbing around onthe ceiling, and that flying Ford Anglia — OUT! OUT!You’ve had it! You’re history! You’re not staying here ifsome loony’s after you, you’re not endangering mywife and son, you’re not bringing trouble down on us,if you’re going the same way as your useless parents,I’ve had it! OUT!”

Harry stood rooted to the spot. The letters from theMinistry, Mr. Weasley, and Sirius were crushed in hisleft hand. Don’t leave the house again, whatever youdo. DO NOT LEA VE YOUR AUNT AND UNCLE’SHOUSE.

“You heard me!” said Uncle Vernon, bending forwardnow, so that his massive purple face came closer toHarry’s, so that Harry actually felt flecks of spit hithis face. “Get going! You were all keen to leave half anhour ago! I’m right behind you! Get out and neverdarken our doorstep again! Why we ever kept you inthe first place I don’t know. Marge was right, it shouldhave been the orphanage, we were too damn soft forour own good, thought we could squash it out of you,thought we could turn you normal, but you’ve beenrotten from the beginning, and I’ve had enough —OWLS!”

Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

The fifth owl zoomed down the chimney so fast itactually hit the floor before zooming into the air againwith a loud screech. Harry raised his hand to seizethe letter, which was in a scarlet envelope, but itsoared straight over his head, flying directly at AuntPetunia, who let out a scream and ducked, her armsover her face. The owl dropped the red envelope onher head, turned, and flew straight up the chimneyagain.

Harry darted forward to pick up the letter, but AuntPetunia beat him to it.

“You can open it if you like,” said Harry, “but I’ll hearwhat it says anyway. That’s a Howler.”

“Let go of it, Petunia!” roared Uncle Vernon. “Don’ttouch it, it could be dangerous!”

“It’s addressed to me,” said Aunt Petunia in a shakingvoice. “It’s addressed to me, Vernon, look! Mrs.

Petunia Dursley, The Kitchen, Number Four, PrivetDrive —”

She caught her breath, horrified. The red envelopehad begun to smoke.

“Open it!” Harry urged her. “Get it over with! It’llhappen anyway —”

“No —”

Aunt Petunia’s hand was trembling. She looked wildlyaround the kitchen as though looking for an escaperoute, but too late — the envelope burst into flames.Aunt Petunia screamed and dropped it.

Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

An awful voice filled the kitchen, echoing in theconfined space, issuing from the burning letter on thetable.

“REMEMBER MY LAST, PETUNIA.”

Aunt Petunia looked as though she might faint. Shesank into the chair beside Dudley, her face in herhands. The remains of the envelope smoldered intoash in the silence.

“What is this?” Uncle Vernon said hoarsely. “What —

I don’t — Petunia?”

Aunt Petunia said nothing. Dudley was staringstupidly at his mother, his mouth hanging open. Thesilence spiraled horribly. Harry was watching hisaunt, utterly bewildered, his head throbbing fit toburst.

“Petunia, dear?” said Uncle Vernon timidly. “P-Petunia?”

She raised her head. She was still trembling. Sheswallowed.

“The boy — the boy will have to stay, Vernon,” shesaid weakly.

“W-what?”

“He stays,” she said. She was not looking at Harry.

She got to her feet again.

“He ... but Petunia ...”

“If we throw him out, the neighbors will talk,” shesaid. She was regaining her usual brisk, snappishmanner rapidly, though she was still very pale.

Page | 52 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“They’ll ask awkward questions, they’ll want to knowwhere he’s gone. We’ll have to keep him.”

Uncle Vernon was deflating like an old tire.

“But Petunia, dear —”

Aunt Petunia ignored him. She turned to Harry.

“You’re to stay in your room,” she said. “You’re not toleave the house. Now get to bed.”

Harry didn’t move.

“Who was that Howler from?”

“Don’t ask questions,” Aunt Petunia snapped.

“Are you in touch with wizards?”

“I told you to get to bed!”

“What did it mean? Remember the last what?”

“Go to bed!”

“How come — ?”

“YOU HEARD YOUR AUNT, NOW GET TO BED!”

Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE ADVANCED GUARD

“Fve just been attacked by dementors and I might beexpelled from Hogwarts. I want to know what’s goingon and when I’m going to get out of here. ”

Harry copied these words onto three separate piecesof parchment the moment he reached the desk in hisdark bedroom. He addressed the first to Sirius, thesecond to Ron, and the third to Hermione. His owl,Hedwig, was off hunting; her cage stood empty on thedesk. Harry paced the bedroom waiting for her tocome back, his head pounding, his brain too busy forsleep even though his eyes stung and itched withtiredness. His back ached from carrying Dudleyhome, and the two lumps on his head where thewindow and Dudley had hit him were throbbingpainfully.

Up and down he paced, consumed with anger andfrustration, grinding his teeth and clenching his fists,casting angry looks out at the empty, star-strewn skyevery time he passed the window. Dementors sent toget him, Mrs. Figg and Mundungus Fletcher tailingPage | 54 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

him in secret, then suspension from Hogwarts and ahearing at the Ministry of Magic — and still no onewas telling him what was going on.

And what, what, had that Howler been about? Whosevoice had echoed so horribly, so menacingly, throughthe kitchen?

Why was he still trapped here without information?Why was everyone treating him like some naughtykid? Don’t do any more magic, stay in the house...

He kicked his school trunk as he passed it, but farfrom relieving his anger he felt worse, as he now hada sharp pain in his toe to deal with in addition to thepain in the rest of his body.

Just as he limped past the window, Hedwig soaredthrough it with a soft rustle of wings like a smallghost.

“About time!” Harry snarled, as she landed lightly ontop of her cage. “You can put that down, IVe got workfor you!”

Hedwig’s large round amber eyes gazed reproachfullyat him over the dead frog clamped in her beak.

“Come here,” said Harry, picking up the three smallrolls of parchment and a leather thong and tying thescrolls to her scaly leg. “Take these straight to Sirius,Ron, and Hermione and don’t come back here withoutgood long replies. Keep pecking them till they’vewritten decent-length answers if you’ve got to.Understand?”

Hedwig gave a muffled hooting noise, beak still full offrog.

Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Get going, then,” said Harry.

She took off immediately. The moment she’d gone,Harry threw himself down onto his bed withoutundressing and stared at the dark ceiling. In additionto every other miserable feeling, he now felt guiltythat he’d been irritable with Hedwig; she was the onlyfriend he had at number four, Privet Drive. But he’dmake it up to her when she came back with Sirius’s,Ron’s, and Hermione’s answers.

They were bound to write back quickly; they couldn’tpossibly ignore a dementor attack. He’d probablywake up tomorrow to three fat letters full of sympathyand plans for his immediate removal to the Burrow.And with that comforting idea, sleep rolled over him,stifling all further thought.

•k Jc k

But Hedwig didn’t return next morning. Harry spentthe day in his bedroom, leaving it only to go to thebathroom. Three times that day Aunt Petunia shovedfood into his room through the cat flap Uncle Vernonhad installed three summers ago. Every time Harryheard her approaching he tried to question her aboutthe Howler, but he might as well have interrogatedthe doorknob for all the answers he got. Otherwisethe Dursleys kept well clear of his bedroom. Harrycouldn’t see the point of forcing his company onthem; another row would achieve nothing exceptperhaps making him so angry he’d perform moreillegal magic.

So it went on for three whole days. Harry was filledalternately with restless energy that made him unableto settle to anything, during which he paced hisbedroom again, furious at the whole lot of them for

Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

leaving him to stew in this mess, and with a lethargyso complete that he could lie on his bed for an hourat a time, staring dazedly into space, aching withdread at the thought of the Ministry hearing.

What if they ruled against him? What if he wasexpelled and his wand was snapped in half? Whatwould he do, where would he go? He could not returnto living full-time with the Dursleys, not now that heknew the other world, the one to which he reallybelonged... Was it possible that he might be able tomove into Sirius’s house, as Sirius had suggested ayear ago, before he had been forced to flee from theMinistry himself? Would he be allowed to live therealone, given that he was still underage? Or would thematter of where he went next be decided for him; hadhis breach of the International Statute of Secrecybeen severe enough to land him in a cell in Azkaban?Whenever this thought occurred, Harry invariably slidoff his bed and began pacing again.

On the fourth night after Hedwig’s departure Harrywas lying in one of his apathetic phases, staring atthe ceiling, his exhausted mind quite blank, when hisuncle entered his bedroom. Harry looked slowlyaround at him. Uncle Vernon was wearing his bestsuit and an expression of enormous smugness.

“We’re going out,” he said.

“Sorry?”

“We — that is to say, your aunt, Dudley, and I — aregoing out.”

“Fine,” said Harry dully, looking back at the ceiling.

“You are not to leave your bedroom while we areaway.”

Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“Okay.”

“You are not to touch the television, the stereo, or anyof our possessions.”

“Right.”

“You are not to steal food from the fridge.”

“Okay.”

“I am going to lock your door.”

“You do that.”

Uncle Vernon glared at Harry, clearly suspicious ofthis lack of argument, then stomped out of the roomand closed the door behind him. Harry heard the keyturn in the lock and Uncle Vernon’s footsteps walkingheavily down the stairs. A few minutes later he heardthe slamming of car doors, the rumble of an engine,and the unmistakable sound of the car sweeping outof the drive.

Harry had no particular feeling about the Dursleysleaving. It made no difference to him whether theywere in the house or not. He could not even summonthe energy to get up and turn on his bedroom light.The room grew steadily darker around him as he laylistening to the night sounds through the window hekept open all the time, waiting for the blessedmoment when Hedwig returned.

The empty house creaked around him. The pipesgurgled. Harry lay there in a kind of stupor, thinkingof nothing, suspended in misery.

And then, quite distinctly, he heard a crash in thekitchen below.

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

He sat bolt upright, listening intently. The Dursleyscouldn’t be back, it was much too soon, and in anycase he hadn’t heard their car.

There was silence for a few seconds, and then heheard voices.

Burglars, he thought, sliding off the bed onto his feet— but a split second later it occurred to him thatburglars would keep their voices down, and whoeverwas moving around in the kitchen was certainly nottroubling to do so.

He snatched up his wand from his bedside table andstood facing his bedroom door, listening with all hismight. Next moment he jumped as the lock gave aloud click and his door swung open.

Harry stood motionless, staring through the opendoor at the dark upstairs landing, straining his earsfor further sounds, but none came. He hesitated for amoment and then moved swiftly and silently out ofhis room to the head of the stairs.

His heart shot upward into his throat. There werepeople standing in the shadowy hall below,silhouetted against the streetlight glowing throughthe glass door; eight or nine of them, all, as far as hecould see, looking up at him.

“Lower your wand, boy, before you take someone’s eyeout,” said a low, growling voice.

Harry’s heart was thumping uncontrollably. He knewthat voice, but he did not lower his wand.

“Professor Moody?” he said uncertainly.

Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t know so much about ‘Professor,’ ” growled thevoice, “never got round to much teaching, did I? Getdown here, we want to see you properly.”

Harry lowered his wand slightly but did not relax hisgrip on it, nor did he move. He had very good reasonto be suspicious. He had recently spent nine monthsin what he had thought was Mad-Eye Moody’scompany only to find out that it wasn’t Moody at all,but an impostor; an impostor, moreover, who hadtried to kill Harry before being unmasked. But beforehe could make a decision about what to do next, asecond, slightly hoarse voice floated upstairs.

“It’s all right, Harry. We’ve come to take you away.”

Harry’s heart leapt. He knew that voice too, though hehadn’t heard it for more than a year.

“P-Professor Lupin?” he said disbelievingly. “Is thatyou?”

“Why are we all standing in the dark?” said a thirdvoice, this one completely unfamiliar, a woman’s.“Lumos.”

A wand tip flared, illuminating the hall with magicallight. Harry blinked. The people below were crowdedaround the foot of the stairs, gazing intently up athim, some craning their heads for a better look.

Remus Lupin stood nearest to him. Though still quiteyoung, Lupin looked tired and rather ill; he had moregray hair than when Harry had said good-bye to him,and his robes were more patched and shabbier thanever. Nevertheless, he was smiling broadly at Harry,who tried to smile back through his shock.

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oooh, he looks just like I thought he would,” said thewitch who was holding her lit wand aloft. She lookedthe youngest there; she had a pale heart-shaped face,dark twinkling eyes, and short spiky hair that was aviolent shade of violet. “Wotcher, Harry!”

“Yeah, I see what you mean, Remus,” said a baldblack wizard standing farthest back; he had a deep,slow voice and wore a single gold hoop in his ear. “Helooks exactly like James.”

“Except the eyes,” said a wheezy-voiced, silver-hairedwizard at the back. “Lily’s eyes.”

Mad-Eye Moody, who had long grizzled gray hair anda large chunk missing from his nose, was squintingsuspiciously at Harry through his mismatched eyes.One of the eyes was small, dark, and beady, the otherlarge, round, and electric blue — the magical eye thatcould see through walls, doors, and the back ofMoody’s own head.

“Are you quite sure it’s him, Lupin?” he growled. “It’dbe a nice lookout if we bring back some Death Eaterimpersonating him. We ought to ask him somethingonly the real Potter would know. Unless anyonebrought any Veritaserum?”

“Harry, what form does your Patronus take?” saidLupin.

“A stag,” said Harry nervously.

“That’s him, Mad-Eye,” said Lupin.

Harry descended the stairs, very conscious ofeverybody still staring at him, stowing his wand intothe back pocket of his jeans as he came.

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t put your wand there, boy!” roared Moody.“What if it ignited? Better wizards than you have lostbuttocks, you know!”

“Who d’you know who’s lost a buttock?” the violet-haired woman asked Mad-Eye interestedly.

“Never you mind, you just keep your wand out of yourback pocket!” growled Mad-Eye. “Elementary wandsafety, nobody bothers about it anymore...” Hestumped off toward the kitchen. “And I saw that,” headded irritably, as the woman rolled her eyes at theceiling.

Lupin held out his hand and shook Harry’s.

“How are you?” he asked, looking at Harry closely.“F-fine ...”

Harry could hardly believe this was real. Four weekswith nothing, not the tiniest hint of a plan to removehim from Privet Drive, and suddenly a whole bunch ofwizards was standing matter-of-factly in the house asthough this were a long-standing arrangement. Heglanced at the people surrounding Lupin; they werestill gazing avidly at him. He felt very conscious of thefact that he had not combed his hair for four days.

“I’m — you’re really lucky the Dursleys are out ...” hemumbled.

“Lucky, ha!” said the violet-haired woman. “It was methat lured them out of the way. Sent a letter byMuggle post telling them they’d been short-listed forthe All-England Best-Kept Suburban LawnCompetition. They’re heading off to the prize-givingright now... Or they think they are.”

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry had a fleeting vision of Uncle Vernon’s facewhen he realized there was no All-England Best-KeptSuburban Lawn Competition.

“We are leaving, aren’t we?” he asked. “Soon?”

“Almost at once,” said Lupin, “we’re just waiting forthe all-clear.”

“Where are we going? The Burrow?” Harry askedhopefully.

“Not the Burrow, no,” said Lupin, motioning Harrytoward the kitchen; the little knot of wizards followed,all still eyeing Harry curiously. “Too risky. We’ve setup headquarters somewhere undetectable. It’s takena while...”

Mad-Eye Moody was now sitting at the kitchen tableswigging from a hip flask, his magical eye spinning inall directions, taking in the Dursleys’ many labor-saving appliances.

“This is Alastor Moody, Harry,” Lupin continued,pointing toward Moody.

“Yeah, I know,” said Harry uncomfortably; it felt oddto be introduced to somebody he’d thought he’dknown for a year.

“And this is Nymphadora —”

“Don’t call me Nymphadora, Remus,” said the youngwitch with a shudder. “It’s Tonks.”

“— Nymphadora Tonks, who prefers to be known byher surname only,” finished Lupin.

Page | 63 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“So would you if your fool of a mother had called you‘Nymphadora, ’ ” muttered Tonks.

“And this is Kingsley Shacklebolt” — he indicated thetall black wizard, who bowed — “Elphias Doge” — thewheezy-voiced wizard nodded — “Dedalus Diggle —”

“We’ve met before,” squeaked the excitable Diggle,dropping his top hat.

“— Emmeline Vance” — a stately looking witch in anemerald-green shawl inclined her head — “SturgisPodmore” — a square-jawed wizard with thick, straw-colored hair winked — “and Hestia Jones.” A pink-cheeked, black-haired witch waved from next to thetoaster.

Harry inclined his head awkwardly at each of them asthey were introduced. He wished they would look atsomething other than him; it was as though he hadsuddenly been ushered onstage. He also wonderedwhy so many of them were there.

“A surprising number of people volunteered to comeand get you,” said Lupin, as though he had readHarry’s mind; the corners of his mouth twitchedslightly.

“Yeah, well, the more the better,” said Moody darkly.“We’re your guard, Potter.”

“We’re just waiting for the signal to tell us it’s safe toset off,” said Lupin, glancing out of the kitchenwindow. “We’ve got about fifteen minutes.”

“Very clean, aren’t they, these Muggles?” said thewitch called Tonks, who was looking around thekitchen with great interest. “My dad’s Muggle-born

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and he’s a right old slob. I suppose it varies, just likewith wizards?”

“Er — yeah,” said Harry. “Look” — he turned back toLupin — “what’s going on, I haven’t heard anythingfrom anyone, what’s Vol — ?”

Several of the witches and wizards made odd hissingnoises; Dedalus Diggle dropped his hat again, andMoody growled, “Shut up\”

“What?” said Harry.

“We’re not discussing anything here, it’s too risky,”said Moody, turning his normal eye on Harry; hismagical eye remained pointing up at the ceiling.“Damn it,” he added angrily, putting a hand up to themagical eye, “it keeps sticking — ever since that scumwore it —”

And with a nasty squelching sound much like aplunger being pulled from a sink, he popped out hiseye.

“Mad-Eye, you do know that’s disgusting, don’t you?”said Tonks conversationally.

“Get me a glass of water, would you, Harry?” askedMoody.

Harry crossed to the dishwasher, took out a cleanglass, and filled it with water at the sink, still watchedeagerly by the band of wizards. Their relentlessstaring was starting to annoy him.

“Cheers,” said Moody, when Harry handed him theglass. He dropped the magical eyeball into the waterand prodded it up and down; the eye whizzed around,

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

staring at them all in turn. “I want three-hundred-and-sixty degrees visibility on the return journey.”

“How’re we getting — wherever we’re going?” Harryasked.

“Brooms,” said Lupin. “Only way. You’re too young toApparate, they’ll be watching the Floo Network, andit’s more than our life’s worth to set up anunauthorized Portkey.”

“Remus says you’re a good flier,” said KingsleyShacklebolt in his deep voice.

“He’s excellent,” said Lupin, who was checking hiswatch. “Anyway, you’d better go and get packed,Harry, we want to be ready to go when the signalcomes.”

“I’ll come and help you,” said Tonks brightly.

She followed Harry back into the hall and up thestairs, looking around with much curiosity andinterest.

“Funny place,” she said, “it’s a bit too clean, d’youknow what I mean? Bit unnatural. Oh, this is better,”she added, as they entered Harry’s bedroom and heturned on the light.

His room was certainly much messier than the rest ofthe house. Confined to it for four days in a very badmood, Harry had not bothered tidying up afterhimself. Most of the books he owned were strewn overthe floor where he’d tried to distract himself with eachin turn and thrown it aside. Hedwig’s cage neededcleaning out and was starting to smell, and his trunklay open, revealing a jumbled mixture of Muggle

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

clothes and wizard’s robes that had spilled onto thefloor around it.

Harry started picking up books and throwing themhastily into his trunk. Tonks paused at his openwardrobe to look critically at her reflection in themirror on the inside of the door.

“You know, I don’t think purple’s really my color,” shesaid pensively, tugging at a lock of spiky hair. “D’youthink it makes me look a bit peaky?”

“Er —” said Harry, looking up at her over the top ofQuidditch Teams of Britain and Ireland.

“Yeah, it does,” said Tonks decisively. She screwed upher eyes in a strained expression as though she werestruggling to remember something. A second later,her hair had turned bubble-gum pink.

“How did you do that?” said Harry, gaping at her asshe opened her eyes again.

“I’m a Metamorphmagus,” she said, looking back ather reflection and turning her head so that she couldsee her hair from all directions. “It means I canchange my appearance at will,” she added, spottingHarry’s puzzled expression in the mirror behind her.

“I was born one. I got top marks in Concealment andDisguise during Auror training without any study atall, it was great.”

“You’re an Auror?” said Harry, impressed. Being aDark wizard catcher was the only career he’d everconsidered after Hogwarts.

“Yeah,” said Tonks, looking proud. “Kingsley is aswell; he’s a bit higher up than I am, though. I onlyqualified a year ago. Nearly failed on Stealth and

Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

Tracking, I’m dead clumsy, did you hear me breakthat plate when we arrived downstairs?”

“Can you learn how to be a Metamorphmagus?” Harryasked her, straightening up, completely forgettingabout packing.

Tonks chuckled.

“Bet you wouldn’t mind hiding that scar sometimes,eh?”

Her eyes found the lightning-shaped scar on Harry’sforehead.

“No, I wouldn’t mind,” Harry mumbled, turning away.He did not like people staring at his scar.

“Well, you 11 have to learn the hard way, I’m afraid,”said Tonks. “Metamorphmagi are really rare, they’reborn, not made. Most wizards need to use a wand orpotions to change their appearance... But we’ve got toget going, Harry, we’re supposed to be packing,” sheadded guiltily, looking around at all the mess on thefloor.

“Oh — yeah,” said Harry, grabbing up a few morebooks.

“Don’t be stupid, it’ll be much quicker if I —pack).”cried Tonks, waving her wand in a long, sweepingmovement over the floor.

Books, clothes, telescope, and scales all soared intothe air and flew pell-mell into the trunk.

“It’s not very neat,” said Tonks, walking over to thetrunk and looking down at the jumble inside. “Mymum’s got this knack of getting stuff to fit itself in

Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

neatly — she even gets the socks to fold themselves —but I’ve never mastered how she does it — it’s a kindof flick —”

She flicked her wand hopefully; one of Harry’s socksgave a feeble sort of wiggle and flopped back on top ofthe mess within.

“Ah, well,” said Tonks, slamming the trunk’s lid shut,“at least it’s all in. That could do with a bit ofcleaning, too — Scourgify —” She pointed her wand atHedwig’s cage; a few feathers and droppingsvanished. “Well, that’s a bit better — I’ve never quitegot the hang of these sort of householdy spells. Right— got everything? Cauldron? Broom? Wow! AFirebolt?”

Her eyes widened as they fell on the broomstick inHarry’s right hand. It was his pride and joy, a giftfrom Sirius, an international standard broomstick.

“And I’m still riding a Comet Two Sixty,” said Tonksenviously. “Ah well ... wand still in your jeans? Bothbuttocks still on? Okay, let’s go. Locomotor Trunk.”

Harry’s trunk rose a few inches into the air. Holdingher wand like a conductor’s baton, Tonks made ithover across the room and out of the door ahead ofthem, Hedwig’s cage in her left hand. Harry followedher down the stairs carrying his broomstick.

Back in the kitchen, Moody had replaced his eye,which was spinning so fast after its cleaning it madeHarry feel sick. Kingsley Shacklebolt and SturgisPodmore were examining the microwave and HestiaJones was laughing at a potato peeler she had comeacross while rummaging in the drawers. Lupin wassealing a letter addressed to the Dursleys.

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Excellent,” said Lupin, looking up as Tonks andHarry entered. “We’ve got about a minute, I think. Weshould probably get out into the garden so we’reready. Harry, I’ve left a letter telling your aunt anduncle not to worry —”

“They won’t,” said Harry.

“That you’re safe —”

“That’ll just depress them.”

“— and you’ll see them next summer.”

“Do I have to?”

Lupin smiled but made no answer.

“Come here, boy,” said Moody gruffly, beckoningHarry toward him with his wand. “I need toDisillusion you.”

“You need to what?” said Harry nervously.

“Disillusionment Charm,” said Moody, raising hiswand. “Lupin says you’ve got an Invisibility Cloak,but it won’t stay on while we’re flying; this’ll disguiseyou better. Here you go —”

He rapped Harry hard on the top of the head andHarry felt a curious sensation as though Moody hadjust smashed an egg there; cold trickles seemed to berunning down his body from the point the wand hadstruck.

“Nice one, Mad-Eye,” said Tonks appreciatively,staring at Harry’s midriff.

Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked down at his body, or rather, what hadbeen his body, for it didn’t look anything like hisanymore. It was not invisible; it had simply taken onthe exact color and texture of the kitchen unit behindhim. He seemed to have become a human chameleon.

“Come on,” said Moody, unlocking the back door withhis wand.

They all stepped outside onto Uncle Vernon’sbeautifully kept lawn.

“Clear night,” grunted Moody, his magical eyescanning the heavens. “Could’ve done with a bit morecloud cover. Right, you,” he barked at Harry, “we’regoing to be flying in close formation. Tonks’ll be rightin front of you, keep close on her tail. Lupin’ll becovering you from below. I’m going to be behind you.The rest’ll be circling us. We don’t break ranks foranything, got me? If one of us is killed —”

“Is that likely?” Harry asked apprehensively, butMoody ignored him.

“— the others keep flying, don’t stop, don’t breakranks. If they take out all of us and you survive,

Harry, the rear guard are standing by to take over;keep flying east and they’ll join you.”

“Stop being so cheerful, Mad-Eye, he’ll think we’re nottaking this seriously,” said Tonks, as she strappedHarry’s trunk and Hedwig’s cage into a harnesshanging from her broom.

“I’m just telling the boy the plan,” growled Moody.“Our job’s to deliver him safely to headquarters and ifwe die in the attempt —”

Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No one’s going to die,” said Kingsley Shacklebolt inhis deep, calming voice.

“Mount your brooms, that’s the first signal!” saidLupin sharply, pointing into the sky.

Far, far above them, a shower of bright red sparkshad flared among the stars. Harry recognized them atonce as wand sparks. He swung his right leg over hisFirebolt, gripped its handle tightly, and felt itvibrating very slightly, as though it was as keen as hewas to be up in the air once more.

“Second signal, let’s go!” said Lupin loudly, as moresparks, green this time, exploded high above them.

Harry kicked off hard from the ground. The cool nightair rushed through his hair as the neat squaregardens of Privet Drive fell away, shrinking rapidlyinto a patchwork of dark greens and blacks, andevery thought of the Ministry hearing was swept fromhis mind as though the rush of air had blown it out ofhis head. He felt as though his heart was going toexplode with pleasure; he was flying again, flyingaway from Privet Drive as he’d been fantasizing aboutall summer, he was going home... For a few gloriousmoments, all his problems seemed to recede intonothing, insignificant in the vast, starry sky.

“Hard left, hard left, there’s a Muggle looking up!”shouted Moody from behind him. Tonks swerved andHarry followed her, watching his trunk swingingwildly beneath her broom. “We need more height...Give it another quarter of a mile!”

Harry’s eyes watered in the chill as they soaredupward; he could see nothing below now but tinypinpricks of light that were car headlights andstreetlamps. Two of those tiny lights might belong to

Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

Uncle Vernon’s car... The Dursleys would be headingback to their empty house right now, full of rageabout the nonexistent lawn competition ... and Harrylaughed aloud at the thought, though his voice wasdrowned by the flapping of the others’ robes, thecreaking of the harness holding his trunk and thecage, the whoosh of the wind in their ears as theysped through the air. He had not felt this alive in amonth, or this happy...

“Bearing south!” shouted Mad-Eye. “Town ahead!”

They soared right, so that they did not pass directlyover the glittering spiderweb of lights below.

“Bear southeast and keep climbing, there’s some lowcloud ahead we can lose ourselves in!” called Moody.

“We’re not going through clouds!” shouted Tonksangrily. “We’ll get soaked, Mad-Eye!”

Harry was relieved to hear her say this; his handswere growing numb on the Firebolt’s handle. Hewished he had thought to put on a coat; he wasstarting to shiver.

They altered their course every now and thenaccording to Mad-Eye’s instructions. Harry’s eyeswere screwed up against the rush of icy wind thatwas starting to make his ears ache. He couldremember being this cold on a broom only oncebefore, during the Quidditch match against Hufflepuffin his third year, which had taken place in a storm.The guard around him was circling continuously likegiant birds of prey. Harry lost track of time. Hewondered how long they had been flying; it felt like anhour at least.

Page | 73 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Turning southwest!” yelled Moody. “We want to avoidthe motorway!”

Harry was now so chilled that he thought longinglyfor a moment of the snug, dry interiors of the carsstreaming along below, then, even more longingly, oftraveling by Floo powder; it might be uncomfortable tospin around in fireplaces but it was at least warm inthe flames... Kingsley Shacklebolt swooped aroundhim, bald pate and earring gleaming slightly in themoonlight... Now Emmeline Vance was on his right,her wand out, her head turning left and right ... thenshe too swooped over him, to be replaced by SturgisPodmore...

“We ought to double back for a bit, just to make surewe’re not being followed!” Moody shouted.

“ARE YOU MAD, MAD-EYE?” Tonks screamed fromthe front. “We’re all frozen to our brooms! If we keepgoing off course we’re not going to get there until nextweek! We’re nearly there now!”

“Time to start the descent!” came Lupin’s voice.“Follow Tonks, Harry!”

Harry followed Tonks into a dive. They were headingfor the largest collection of lights he had yet seen, ahuge, sprawling, crisscrossing mass, glittering in linesand grids, interspersed with patches of deepest black.Lower and lower they flew, until Harry could seeindividual headlights and streetlamps, chimneys, andtelevision aerials. He wanted to reach the ground verymuch, though he felt sure that someone would haveto unfreeze him from his broom.

“Here we go!” called Tonks, and a few seconds latershe had landed.

Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry touched down right behind her anddismounted on a patch of unkempt grass in themiddle of a small square. Tonks was alreadyunbuckling Harry’s trunk. Shivering, Harry lookedaround. The grimy fronts of the surrounding houseswere not welcoming; some of them had brokenwindows, glimmering dully in the light from thestreet-lamps, paint was peeling from many of thedoors, and heaps of rubbish lay outside several setsof front steps.

“Where are we?” Harry asked, but Lupin said quietly,“In a minute.”

Moody was rummaging in his cloak, his gnarledhands clumsy with cold.

“Got it,” he muttered, raising what looked like a silvercigarette lighter into the air and clicking it.

The nearest streetlamp went out with a pop. Heclicked the un-lighter again; the next lamp went out.He kept clicking until every lamp in the square wasextinguished and the only light in the square camefrom curtained windows and the sickle moonoverhead.

“Borrowed it from Dumbledore,” growled Moody,pocketing the Put-Outer. “That’ll take care of anyMuggles looking out of the window, see? Now, comeon, quick.”

He took Harry by the arm and led him from the patchof grass, across the road, and onto the pavement.Lupin and Tonks followed, carrying Harry’s trunkbetween them, the rest of the guard, all with theirwands out, flanking them.

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The muffled pounding of a stereo was coming from anupper window in the nearest house. A pungent smellof rotting rubbish came from the pile of bulging bin-bags just inside the broken gate.

“Here,” Moody muttered, thrusting a piece ofparchment toward Harry’s Disillusioned hand andholding his lit wand close to it, so as to illuminate thewriting. “Read quickly and memorize.”

Harry looked down at the piece of paper. The narrowhandwriting was vaguely familiar. It said:

The headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix may hefound at number twelve, Grimmauld Place, London.

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





NUMBER TWELVE, GRIMMAULDPLACE

“What’s the Order of the — ?” Harry began.

“Not here, boy!” snarled Moody. “Wait till we’reinside!”

He pulled the piece of parchment out of Harry’s handand set fire to it with his wand tip. As the messagecurled into flames and floated to the ground, Harrylooked around at the houses again. They werestanding outside number eleven; he looked to the leftand saw number ten; to the right, however, wasnumber thirteen.

“But where’s — ?”

“Think about what you’ve just memorized,” said Lupinquietly.

Harry thought, and no sooner had he reached thepart about number twelve, Grimmauld Place, than a

Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

battered door emerged out of nowhere betweennumbers eleven and thirteen, followed swiftly by dirtywalls and grimy windows. It was as though an extrahouse had inflated, pushing those on either side outof its way. Harry gaped at it. The stereo in numbereleven thudded on. Apparently the Muggles insidehadn’t even felt anything.

“Come on, hurry,” growled Moody, prodding Harry inthe back.

Harry walked up the worn stone steps, staring at thenewly materialized door. Its black paint was shabbyand scratched. The silver door knocker was in theform of a twisted serpent. There was no keyhole orletterbox.

Lupin pulled out his wand and tapped the door once.Harry heard many loud, metallic clicks and whatsounded like the clatter of a chain. The door creakedopen.

“Get in quick, Harry,” Lupin whispered. “But don’t gofar inside and don’t touch anything.”

Harry stepped over the threshold into the almost totaldarkness of the hall. He could smell damp, dust, anda sweetish, rotting smell; the place had the feeling ofa derelict building. He looked over his shoulder andsaw the others filing in behind him, Lupin and Tonkscarrying his trunk and Hedwig’s cage. Moody wasstanding on the top step and releasing the balls oflight the Put-Outer had stolen from the street-lamps;they flew back to their bulbs and the square beyondglowed momentarily with orange light before Moodylimped inside and closed the front door, so that thedarkness in the hall became complete.

“Here —”

Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

He rapped Harry hard over the head with his wand;Harry felt as though something hot was tricklingdown his back this time and knew that theDisillusionment Charm must have lifted.

“Now stay still, everyone, while I give us a bit of lightin here,” Moody whispered.

The others’ hushed voices were giving Harry an oddfeeling of foreboding; it was as though they had justentered the house of a dying person. He heard a softhissing noise and then old-fashioned gas lampssputtered into life all along the walls, casting aflickering insubstantial light over the peelingwallpaper and threadbare carpet of a long, gloomyhallway, where a cobwebby chandelier glimmeredoverhead and age-blackened portraits hung crookedon the walls. Harry heard something scuttling behindthe baseboard. Both the chandelier and thecandelabra on a rickety table nearby were shaped likeserpents.

There were hurried footsteps and Ron’s mother, Mrs.Weasley, emerged from a door at the far end of thehall. She was beaming in welcome as she hurriedtoward them, though Harry noticed that she wasrather thinner and paler than she had been last timehe had seen her.

“Oh, Harry, it’s lovely to see you!” she whispered,pulling him into a rib-cracking hug before holdinghim at arm’s length and examining him critically.“You’re looking peaky; you need feeding up, but you’llhave to wait a bit for dinner, I’m afraid...”

She turned to the gang of wizards behind him andwhispered urgently, “He’s just arrived, the meeting’sstarted...”

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The wizards behind Harry all made noises of interestand excitement and began filing past Harry towardthe door through which Mrs. Weasley had just come;Harry made to follow Lupin, but Mrs. Weasley heldhim back.

“No, Harry, the meeting’s only for members of theOrder. Ron and Hermione are upstairs, you can waitwith them until the meeting’s over and then we’ll havedinner. And keep your voice down in the hall,” sheadded in an urgent whisper.

“Why?”

“I don’t want to wake anything up.”

“What d’you — ?”

“I’ll explain later, I’ve got to hurry, I’m supposed to beat the meeting — I’ll just show you where you’resleeping.”

Pressing her finger to her lips, she led him on tiptoespast a pair of long, moth-eaten curtains, behindwhich Harry supposed there must be another door,and after skirting a large umbrella stand that lookedas though it had been made from a severed troll’s leg,they started up the dark staircase, passing a row ofshrunken heads mounted on plaques on the wall. Acloser look showed Harry that the heads belonged tohouse-elves. All of them had the same rathersnoutlike nose.

Harry’s bewilderment deepened with every step hetook. What on earth were they doing in a house thatlooked as though it belonged to the Darkest ofwizards?

“Mrs. Weasley, why — ?”

Page | 80 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Ron and Hermione will explain everything, dear, I’vereally got to dash,” Mrs. Weasley whispereddistractedly. “There” — they had reached the secondlanding — “you’re the door on the right. I’ll call youwhen it’s over.”

And she hurried off downstairs again.

Harry crossed the dingy landing, turned the bedroomdoorknob, which was shaped like a serpent’s head,and opened the door.

He caught a brief glimpse of a gloomy high-ceilinged,twin-bedded room, then there was a loud twitteringnoise, followed by an even louder shriek, and hisvision was completely obscured by a large quantity ofvery bushy hair — Hermione had thrown herself ontohim in a hug that nearly knocked him flat, whileRon’s tiny owl, Pigwidgeon, zoomed excitedly roundand round their heads.

“HARRY! Ron, he’s here, Harry’s here! We didn’t hearyou arrive! Oh, how are you? Are you all right? Haveyou been furious with us? I bet you have, I know ourletters were useless — but we couldn’t tell youanything, Dumbledore made us swear we wouldn’t,oh, we’ve got so much to tell you, and you’ve got totell us — the dementors! When we heard — and thatMinistry hearing — it’s just outrageous, I’ve looked itall up, they can’t expel you, they just can’t, there’sprovision in the Decree for the Restriction ofUnderage Sorcery for the use of magic in life-threatening situations —”

“Let him breathe, Hermione,” said Ron, grinning,closing the door behind Harry. He seemed to havegrown several more inches during their month apart,making him taller and more gangly looking than ever,

Page | 81 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

though the long nose, bright red hair, and freckleswere the same.

Hermione, still beaming, let go of Harry, but beforeshe could say another word there was a softwhooshing sound and something white soared fromthe top of a dark wardrobe and landed gently onHarry’s shoulder.

“Hedwig!”

The snowy owl clicked her beak and nibbled his earaffectionately as Harry stroked her feathers.

“She’s been in a right state,” said Ron. “Pecked ushalf to death when she brought your last letters, lookat this —”

He showed Harry the index finger of his right hand,which sported a half-healed but clearly deep cut.

“Oh yeah,” Harry said. “Sorry about that, but Iwanted answers, you know...”

“We wanted to give them to you, mate,” said Ron.“Hermione was going spare, she kept saying you’d dosomething stupid if you were stuck all on your ownwithout news, but Dumbledore made us —”

“— swear not to tell me,” said Harry. “Yeah,Hermione’s already said.”

The warm glow that had flared inside him at the sightof his two best friends was extinguished as somethingicy flooded the pit of his stomach. All of a sudden —after yearning to see them for a solid month — he felthe would rather Ron and Hermione left him alone.

Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

There was a strained silence in which Harry strokedHedwig automatically, not looking at either of theothers.

“He seemed to think it was best,” said Hermionerather breathlessly. “Dumbledore, I mean.”

“Right,” said Harry. He noticed that her hands toobore the marks of Hedwig’s beak and found that hewas not at all sorry.

“I think he thought you were safest with the Muggles—” Ron began.

“Yeah?” said Harry, raising his eyebrows. “Have eitherof you been attacked by dementors this summer?”

“Well, no — but that’s why he’s had people from theOrder of the Phoenix tailing you all the time —”

Harry felt a great jolt in his guts as though he hadjust missed a step going downstairs. So everyone hadknown he was being followed except him.

“Didn’t work that well, though, did it?” said Harry,doing his utmost to keep his voice even. “Had to lookafter myself after all, didn’t I?”

“He was so angry,” said Hermione in an almostawestruck voice. “Dumbledore. We saw him. When hefound out Mundungus had left before his shift hadended. He was scary.”

“Well, I’m glad he left,” Harry said coldly. “If hehadn’t, I wouldn’t have done magic and Dumbledorewould probably have left me at Privet Drive allsummer.”

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Aren’t you ... aren’t you worried about the Ministry ofMagic hearing?” said Hermione quietly.

“No,” Harry lied defiantly. He walked away from them,looking around, with Hedwig nestled contentedly onhis shoulder, but this room was not likely to raise hisspirits. It was dank and dark. A blank stretch ofcanvas in an ornate picture frame was all thatrelieved the bareness of the peeling walls and asHarry passed it he thought he heard someone lurkingout of sight snigger.

“So why’s Dumbledore been so keen to keep me in thedark?” Harry asked, still trying hard to keep his voicecasual. “Did you — er — bother to ask him at all?”

He glanced up just in time to see them exchanging alook that told him he was behaving just as they hadfeared he would. It did nothing to improve his temper.

“We told Dumbledore we wanted to tell you what wasgoing on,” said Ron. “We did, mate. But he’s reallybusy now, we’ve only seen him twice since we camehere and he didn’t have much time, he just made usswear not to tell you important stuff when we wrote,he said the owls might be intercepted —”

“He could still’ve kept me informed if he’d wanted to,”Harry said shortly. “You’re not telling me he doesn’tknow ways to send messages without owls.”

Hermione glanced at Ron and then said, “I thoughtthat too. But he didn’t want you to know anything.”

“Maybe he thinks I can’t be trusted,” said Harry,watching their expressions.

“Don’t be thick,” said Ron, looking highlydisconcerted.

Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Or that I can’t take care of myself—”

“Of course he doesn’t think that!” said Hermioneanxiously.

“So how come I have to stay at the Dursleys’ whileyou two get to join in everything that’s going onhere?” said Harry, the words tumbling over oneanother in a rush, his voice growing louder with everyword. “How come you two are allowed to knoweverything that’s going on — ?”

“We’re not!” Ron interrupted. “Mum won’t let us nearthe meetings, she says we’re too young —”

But before he knew it, Harry was shouting.

“SO YOU HAVEN’T BEEN IN THE MEETINGS, BIGDEAL! YOUVE STILL BEEN HERE, HAVENT YOU?YOUVE STILL BEEN TOGETHER! ME, IVE BEENSTUCK AT THE DURSLEYS’ FOR A MONTH! AND IVEHANDLED MORE THAN YOU TWOVE EVERMANAGED AND DUMBLEDORE KNOWS IT — WHOSAVED THE SORCERER’S STONE? WHO GOT RIDOF RIDDLE? WHO SAVED BOTH YOUR SKINS FROMTHE DEMENTORS?”

Every bitter and resentful thought that Harry had hadin the past month was pouring out of him; hisfrustration at the lack of news, the hurt that they hadall been together without him, his fury at beingfollowed and not told about it: All the feelings he washalf-ashamed of finally burst their boundaries.

Hedwig took fright at the noise and soared off on topof the wardrobe again; Pigwidgeon twittered in alarmand zoomed even faster around their heads.

“WHO HAD TO GET PAST DRAGONS AND SPHINXESAND EVERY OTHER FOUL THING LAST YEAR? WHO

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

SAW HIM COME BACK? WHO HAD TO ESCAPEFROM HIM? ME!”

Ron was standing there with his mouth half-open,clearly stunned and at a loss for anything to say,while Hermione looked on the verge of tears.

“BUT WHY SHOULD I KNOW WHAT’S GOING ON?WHY SHOULD ANYONE BOTHER TO TELL MEWHAT’S BEEN HAPPENING?”

“Harry, we wanted to tell you, we really did —”Hermione began.

“CANTVE WANTED TO THAT MUCH, CAN YOU, ORYOU’D HAVE SENT ME AN OWL, BUT DUMBLEDOREMADE YOU SWEAR —”

“Well, he did —”

“FOUR WEEKS IVE BEEN STUCK IN PRIVET DRIVE,NICKING PAPERS OUT OF BINS TO TRY AND FINDOUT WHAT’S BEEN GOING ON —”

“We wanted to —”

“I SUPPOSE YOUVE BEEN HAVING A REAL LAUGH,HAVENT YOU, ALL HOLED UP HERE TOGETHER —”

“No, honest —”

“Harry, we’re really sorry!” said Hermione desperately,her eyes now sparkling with tears. “You’re absolutelyright, Harry — I’d be furious if it was me!”

Harry glared at her, still breathing deeply, thenturned away from them again, pacing up and down.Hedwig hooted glumly from the top of the wardrobe.

Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

There was a long pause, broken only by the mournfulcreak of the floorboards below Harry’s feet.

“What is this place anyway?” he shot at Ron andHermione.

“Headquarters of the Order of the Phoenix,” said Ronat once.

“Is anyone going to bother telling me what the Orderof the Phoenix — ?”

“It’s a secret society,” said Hermione quickly.“Dumbledore’s in charge, he founded it. It’s the peoplewho fought against You-Know-Who last time.”

“Who’s in it?” said Harry, coming to a halt with hishands in his pockets.

“Quite a few people —”

“— we’ve met about twenty of them,” said Ron, “butwe think there are more...”

Harry glared at them.

“ Well?” he demanded, looking from one to the other.“Er,” said Ron. “Well what?”

“Voldemorti” said Harry furiously, and both Ron andHermione winced. “What’s happening? What’s he upto? Where is he? What are we doing to stop him?”

“We’ve told you, the Order don’t let us in on theirmeetings,” said Hermione nervously. “So we don’tknow the details — but we’ve got a general idea —”she added hastily, seeing the look on Harry’s face.

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Fred and George have invented Extendable Ears,see,” said Ron. “They’re really useful.”

“Extendable — ?”

“Ears, yeah. Only we’ve had to stop using them latelybecause Mum found out and went berserk. Fred andGeorge had to hide them all to stop Mum binningthem. But we got a good bit of use out of them beforeMum realized what was going on. We know some ofthe Order are following known Death Eaters, keepingtabs on them, you know —”

“— some of them are working on recruiting morepeople to the Order —” said Hermione.

“— and some of them are standing guard oversomething,” said Ron. “They’re always talking aboutguard duty.”

“Couldn’t have been me, could it?” said Harrysarcastically.

“Oh yeah,” said Ron, with a look of dawningcomprehension.

Harry snorted. He walked around the room again,looking anywhere but at Ron and Hermione. “So whathave you two been doing, if you’re not allowed inmeetings?” he demanded. “You said you’d been busy.”

“We have,” said Hermione quickly. “We’ve beendecontaminating this house, it’s been empty for agesand stuff’s been breeding in here. We’ve managed toclean out the kitchen, most of the bedrooms, and Ithink we’re doing the drawing room tomo — AARGH!”

With two loud cracks, Fred and George, Ron’s eldertwin brothers, had materialized out of thin air in the

Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

middle of the room. Pigwidgeon twittered more wildlythan ever and zoomed off to join Hedwig on top of thewardrobe.

“Stop doing that!” Hermione said weakly to the twins,who were as vividly red-haired as Ron, thoughstockier and slightly shorter.

“Hello, Harry,” said George, beaming at him. “Wethought we heard your dulcet tones.”

“You don’t want to bottle up your anger like that,Harry, let it all out,” said Fred, also beaming. “Theremight be a couple of people fifty miles away whodidn’t hear you.”

“You two passed your Apparation tests, then?” askedHarry grumpily.

“With distinction,” said Fred, who was holding whatlooked like a piece of very long, flesh-colored string.

“It would have taken you about thirty seconds longerto walk down the stairs,” said Ron.

“Time is Galleons, little brother,” said Fred. “Anyway,Harry, you’re interfering with reception. ExtendableEars,” he added in response to Harry’s raisedeyebrows, holding up the string, which Harry nowsaw was trailing out onto the landing. “We’re trying tohear what’s going on downstairs.”

“You want to be careful,” said Ron, staring at the ear.“If Mum sees one of them again ...”

“It’s worth the risk, that’s a major meeting they’rehaving,” said Fred.

Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The door opened and a long mane of red hairappeared.

“Oh hello, Harry!” said Ron’s younger sister, Ginny,brightly. “I thought I heard your voice.”

Turning to Fred and George she said, “It’s no go withthe Extendable Ears, she’s gone and put anImperturbable Charm on the kitchen door.”

“How d’you know?” said George, looking crestfallen.

“Tonks told me how to find out,” said Ginny. “You justchuck stuff at the door and if it can’t make contactthe door’s been Imperturbed. I’ve been flickingDungbombs at it from the top of the stairs and theyjust soar away from it, so there’s no way theExtendable Ears will be able to get under the gap.”

Fred heaved a deep sigh. “Shame. I really fanciedfinding out what old Snape’s been up to.”

“Snape?” said Harry quickly. “Is he here?”

“Yeah,” said George, carefully closing the door andsitting down on one of the beds; Fred and Ginnyfollowed. “Giving a report. Top secret.”

“Git,” said Fred idly.

“He’s on our side now,” said Hermione reprovingly.

Ron snorted. “Doesn’t stop him being a git. The wayhe looks at us when he sees us...”

“Bill doesn’t like him either,” said Ginny, as thoughthat settled the matter.

Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry was not sure his anger had abated yet; but histhirst for information was now overcoming his urge tokeep shouting. He sank onto the bed opposite theothers.

“Is Bill here?” he asked. “I thought he was working inEgypt.”

“He applied for a desk job so he could come home andwork for the Order,” said Fred. “He says he misses thetombs, but,” he smirked, “there are compensations...”

“What d’you mean?”

“Remember old Fleur Delacour?” said George. “She’sgot a job at Gringotts to eemprove ’er Eeenglish—”

“— and Bill’s been giving her a lot of private lessons,”sniggered Fred.

“Charlie’s in the Order too,” said George, “but he’sstill in Romania, Dumbledore wants as many foreignwizards brought in as possible, so Charlie’s trying tomake contacts on his days off.”

“Couldn’t Percy do that?” Harry asked. The last hehad heard, the third Weasley brother was working inthe Department of International Magical Cooperationat the Ministry of Magic.

At these words all the Weasleys and Hermioneexchanged darkly significant looks.

“Whatever you do, don’t mention Percy in front ofMum and Dad,” Ron told Harry in a tense voice.

“Why not?”

Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“Because every time Percy’s name’s mentioned, Dadbreaks whatever he’s holding and Mum starts crying,”Fred said.

“It’s been awful,” said Ginny sadly.

“I think we’re well shut of him,” said George with anuncharacteristically ugly look on his face.

“What’s happened?” Harry said.

“Percy and Dad had a row,” said Fred. “I’ve never seenDad row with anyone like that. It’s normally Mumwho shouts...”

“It was the first week back after term ended,” saidRon. “We were about to come and join the Order.Percy came home and told us he’d been promoted.”

“You’re kidding?” said Harry.

Though he knew perfectly well that Percy was highlyambitious, Harry’s impression was that Percy had notmade a great success of his first job at the Ministry ofMagic. Percy had committed the fairly large oversightof failing to notice that his boss was being controlledby Lord Voldemort (not that the Ministry had believedthat — they all thought that Mr. Crouch had gonemad).

“Yeah, we were all surprised,” said George, “becausePercy got into a load of trouble about Crouch, therewas an inquiry and everything. They said Percy oughtto have realized Crouch was off his rocker andinformed a superior. But you know Percy, Crouch lefthim in charge, he wasn’t going to complain...”

“So how come they promoted him?”

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“That’s exactly what we wondered,” said Ron, whoseemed very keen to keep normal conversation goingnow that Harry had stopped yelling. “He came homereally pleased with himself — even more pleased thanusual if you can imagine that — and told Dad he’dbeen offered a position in Fudge’s own office. A reallygood one for someone only a year out of Hogwarts —Junior Assistant to the Minister. He expected Dad tobe all impressed, I think.”

“Only Dad wasn’t,” said Fred grimly.

“Why not?” said Harry.

“Well, apparently Fudge has been storming round theMinistry checking that nobody’s having any contactwith Dumbledore,” said George.

“Dumbledore’s name’s mud with the Ministry thesedays, see,” said Fred. “They all think he’s just makingtrouble saying You-Know-Who’s back.”

“Dad says Fudge has made it clear that anyone who’sin league with Dumbledore can clear out their desks,”said George.

“Trouble is, Fudge suspects Dad, he knows he’sfriendly with Dumbledore, and he’s always thoughtDad’s a bit of a weirdo because of his Muggleobsession —”

“But what’s this got to do with Percy?” asked Harry,confused.

“I’m coming to that. Dad reckons Fudge only wantsPercy in his office because he wants to use him to spyon the family — and Dumbledore.”

Harry let out a low whistle.

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“Bet Percy loved that.”

Ron laughed in a hollow sort of way.

“He went completely berserk. He said — well, he saidloads of terrible stuff. He said he’s been having tostruggle against Dad’s lousy reputation ever since hejoined the Ministry and that Dad’s got no ambitionand that’s why we’ve always been — you know — nothad a lot of money, I mean —”

“ What?” said Harry in disbelief, as Ginny made anoise like an angry cat.

“I know,” said Ron in a low voice. “And it got worse.

He said Dad was an idiot to run around withDumbledore, that Dumbledore was heading for bigtrouble and Dad was going to go down with him, andthat he — Percy — knew where his loyalty lay and itwas with the Ministry. And if Mum and Dad weregoing to become traitors to the Ministry he was goingto make sure everyone knew he didn’t belong to ourfamily anymore. And he packed his bags the samenight and left. He’s living here in London now.”

Harry swore under his breath. He had always likedPercy least of Ron’s brothers, but he had neverimagined he would say such things to Mr. Weasley.

“Mum’s been in a right state,” said Ron. “You know —crying and stuff. She came up to London to try andtalk to Percy but he slammed the door in her face. Idunno what he does if he meets Dad at work —ignores him, I s’pose.”

“But Percy must know Voldemort’s back,” said Harryslowly. “He’s not stupid, he must know your mumand dad wouldn’t risk everything without proof —”

Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, well, your name got dragged into the row,” saidRon, shooting Harry a furtive look. “Percy said theonly evidence was your word and ... I dunno ... hedidn’t think it was good enough.”

“Percy takes the Daily Prophet seriously,” saidHermione tartly, and the others all nodded.

“What are you talking about?” Harry asked, lookingaround at them all. They were all regarding himwarily.

“Haven’t — haven’t you been getting the DailyProphet?” Hermione asked nervously.

“Yeah, I have!” said Harry.

“Have you — er — been reading it thoroughly?”Hermione asked still more anxiously.

“Not cover to cover,” said Harry defensively. “If theywere going to report anything about Voldemort itwould be headline news, wouldn’t it!”

The others flinched at the sound of the name.Hermione hurried on, “Well, you’d need to read itcover to cover to pick it up, but they — um — theymention you a couple of times a week.”

“But I’d have seen —”

“Not if you’ve only been reading the front page, youwouldn’t,” said Hermione, shaking her head. “I’m nottalking about big articles. They just slip you in, likeyou’re a standing joke.”

“What d’you — ?”

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“It’s quite nasty, actually,” said Hermione in a voice offorced calm. “They’re just building on Rita’s stuff.”

“But she’s not writing for them anymore, is she?”

“Oh no, she’s kept her promise — not that she’s gotany choice,” Hermione added with satisfaction. “Butshe laid the foundation for what they’re trying to donow.”

“Which is what?” said Harry impatiently.

“Okay, you know she wrote that you were collapsingall over the place and saying your scar was hurtingand all that?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, who was not likely to forget RitaSkeeter’s stories about him in a hurry.

“Well, they’re writing about you as though you’re thisdeluded, attention-seeking person who thinks he’s agreat tragic hero or something,” said Hermione, veryfast, as though it would be less unpleasant for Harryto hear these facts quickly. “They keep slipping insnide comments about you. If some far-fetched storyappears they say something like ‘a tale worthy ofHarry Potter’ and if anyone has a funny accident oranything it’s let’s hope he hasn’t got a scar on hisforehead or we’ll be asked to worship him next —’ ”

“I don’t want anyone to worship —” Harry beganhotly.

“I know you don’t,” said Hermione quickly, lookingfrightened. “I know, Harry. But you see what they’redoing? They want to turn you into someone nobodywill believe. Fudge is behind it, I’ll bet anything. Theywant wizards on the street to think you’re just somestupid boy who’s a bit of a joke, who tells ridiculousPage | 96 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

tall stories because he loves being famous and wantsto keep it going.”

“I didn’t ask — I didn’t want — Voldemort killed myparentsV’ Harry spluttered. “I got famous because hemurdered my family but couldn’t kill me! Who wantsto be famous for that? Don’t they think I’d rather it’dnever —”

“We know, Harry,” said Ginny earnestly.

“And of course, they didn’t report a word about thedementors attacking you,” said Hermione. “Someone’stold them to keep that quiet. That should’ve been areally big story, out-of-control dementors. Theyhaven’t even reported that you broke the InternationalStatute of Secrecy — we thought they would, it wouldtie in so well with this image of you as some stupidshow-off — we think they’re biding their time untilyou’re expelled, then they’re really going to go to town— I mean, if you’re expelled, obviously,” she went onhastily, “you really shouldn’t be, not if they abide bytheir own laws, there’s no case against you.”

They were back on the hearing and Harry did notwant to think about it. He cast around for anotherchange of subject, but was saved the necessity offinding one by the sound of footsteps coming up thestairs.

“Uh-oh.”

Fred gave the Extendable Ear a hearty tug; there wasanother loud crack and he and George vanished.Seconds later, Mrs. Weasley appeared in the bedroomdoorway.

“The meeting’s over, you can come down and havedinner now, everyone’s dying to see you, Harry. And

Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

who’s left all those Dungbombs outside the kitchendoor?”

“Crookshanks,” said Ginny unblushingly. “He lovesplaying with them.”

“Oh,” said Mrs. Weasley, “I thought it might havebeen Kreacher, he keeps doing odd things like that.Now don’t forget to keep your voices down in the hall.Ginny, your hands are filthy, what have you beendoing? Go and wash them before dinner, please...”

Ginny grimaced at the others and followed her motherout of the room, leaving Harry alone with Ron andHermione again. Both of them were watching himapprehensively, as though they feared that he wouldstart shouting again now that everyone else had gone.The sight of them looking so nervous made him feelslightly ashamed.

“Look ...” he muttered, but Ron shook his head, andHermione said quietly, “We knew you’d be angry,Harry, we really don’t blame you, but you’ve got tounderstand, we did try and persuade Dumbledore —”

“Yeah, I know,” said Harry grudgingly.

He cast around for a topic to change the subject fromDumbledore — the very thought of him made Harry’sinsides burn with anger again.

“Who’s Kreacher?” he asked.

“The house-elf who lives here,” said Ron. “Nutter.Never met one like him.”

Hermione frowned at Ron.

“He’s not a nutter, Ron —”

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“His life’s ambition is to have his head cut off andstuck up on a plaque just like his mother,” said Ronirritably. “Is that normal, Hermione?”

“Well — well, if he is a bit strange, it’s not his fault —”

Ron rolled his eyes at Harry.

“Hermione still hasn’t given up on spew —”

“It’s not ‘spew’!” said Hermione heatedly. “It’s theSociety for the Promotion of Elfish Welfare, and it’snot just me, Dumbledore says we should be kind toKreacher too —”

“Yeah, yeah,” said Ron. “C’mon, I’m starving.”

He led the way out of the door and onto the landing,but before they could descend the stairs — “Hold it!”Ron breathed, flinging out an arm to stop Harry andHermione walking any farther. “They’re still in thehall, we might be able to hear something —”

The three of them looked cautiously over thebanisters. The gloomy hallway below was packed withwitches and wizards, including all of Harry’s guard.They were whispering excitedly together. In the verycenter of the group Harry saw the dark, greasy-hairedhead and prominent nose of his least favorite teacherat Hogwarts, Professor Snape. Harry leaned fartherover the banisters. He was very interested in whatSnape was doing for the Order of the Phoenix...

A thin piece of flesh-colored string descended in frontof Harry’s eyes. Looking up he saw Fred and Georgeon the landing above, cautiously lowering theExtendable Ear toward the dark knot of people below.A moment later, however, they began to move towardthe front door and out of sight.

Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix-J.K. Rowling

“Dammit,” Harry heard Fred whisper, as he hoistedthe Extendable Ear back up again.

They heard the front door open and then close.

“Snape never eats here,” Ron told Harry quietly.“Thank God. C’mon.”

“And don’t forget to keep your voice down in the hall,Harry,” Hermione whispered.

As they passed the row of house-elf heads on the wallthey saw Lupin, Mrs. Weasley, and Tonks at the frontdoor, magically sealing its many locks and boltsbehind those who had just left.

“We’re eating down in the kitchen,” Mrs. Weasleywhispered, meeting them at the bottom of the stairs.“Harry, dear, if youll just tiptoe across the hall, it’sthrough this door here —”

CRASH.

“Tonksl” cried Mrs. Weasley exasperatedly, turning tolook behind her.

“I’m sorry!” wailed Tonks, who was lying flat on thefloor. “It’s that stupid umbrella stand, that’s thesecond time I’ve tripped over —”

But the rest of her words were drowned by a horrible,earsplitting, bloodcurdling screech.

The moth-eaten velvet curtains Harry had passedearlier had flown apart, but there was no door behindthem. For a split second, Harry thought he waslooking through a window, a window behind which anold woman in a black cap was screaming andscreaming as though she was being tortured — thenPage | lOOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

he realized it was simply a life-size portrait, but themost realistic, and the most unpleasant, he had everseen in his life.

The old woman was drooling, her eyes were rolling,the yellowing skin of her face stretched taut as shescreamed, and all along the hall behind them, theother portraits awoke and began to yell too, so thatHarry actually screwed up his eyes at the noise andclapped his hands over his ears.

Lupin and Mrs. Weasley darted forward and tried totug the curtains shut over the old woman, but theywould not close and she screeched louder than ever,brandishing clawed hands as though trying to tear attheir faces.

“Filth! Scum! By-products of dirt and vileness! Half-breeds, mutants, freaks, begone from this place! Howdare you befoul the house of my fathers —”

Tonks apologized over and over again, at the sametime dragging the huge, heavy troll’s leg back off thefloor. Mrs. Weasley abandoned the attempt to closethe curtains and hurried up and down the hall,Stunning all the other portraits with her wand. Thena man with long black hair came charging out of adoor facing Harry.

“Shut up, you horrible old hag, shut UP!” he roared,seizing the curtain Mrs. Weasley had abandoned.

The old woman’s face blanched.

“Yooooul” she howled, her eyes popping at the sight ofthe man. “Blood traitor, abomination, shame of myfleshl”

Page | lOlHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I said — shut — UP!” roared the man, and with astupendous effort he and Lupin managed to force thecurtains closed again.

The old woman’s screeches died and an echoingsilence fell.

Panting slightly and sweeping his long dark hair outof his eyes, Harry’s godfather, Sirius, turned to facehim.

“Hello, Harry,” he said grimly, “I see you’ve met mymother.”

Page | 102Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



THE ORDER OF THE PHOENIX

“Your — ?”

“My dear old mum, yeah,” said Sirius. “We’ve beentrying to get her down for a month but we think sheput a Permanent Sticking Charm on the back of thecanvas. Let’s get downstairs, quick, before they allwake up again.”

“But what’s a portrait of your mother doing here?”Harry asked, bewildered, as they went through thedoor from the hall and led the way down a flight ofnarrow stone steps, the others just behind them.

“Hasn’t anyone told you? This was my parents’house,” said Sirius. “But I’m the last Black left, so it’smine now. I offered it to Dumbledore for headquarters— about the only useful thing I’ve been able to do.”

Harry, who had expected a better welcome, noted howhard and bitter Sirius’s voice sounded. He followedhis godfather to the bottom of the stairs and througha door leading into the basement kitchen.

Page | 103Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It was scarcely less gloomy than the hall above, acavernous room with rough stone walls. Most of thelight was coming from a large fire at the far end of theroom. A haze of pipe smoke hung in the air like battlefumes, through which loomed the menacing shapes ofheavy iron pots and pans hanging from the darkceiling. Many chairs had been crammed into the roomfor the meeting and a long wooden table stood in themiddle of the room, littered with rolls of parchment,goblets, empty wine bottles, and a heap of whatappeared to be rags. Mr. Weasley and his eldest son,Bill, were talking quietly with their heads together atthe end of the table.

Mrs. Weasley cleared her throat. Her husband, a thin,balding, red-haired man, who wore horn-rimmedglasses, looked around and jumped to his feet.

“Harry!” Mr. Weasley said, hurrying forward to greethim and shaking his hand vigorously. “Good to seeyou!”

Over his shoulder Harry saw Bill, who still wore hislong hair in a ponytail, hastily rolling up the lengthsof parchment left on the table.

“Journey all right, Harry?” Bill called, trying to gatherup twelve scrolls at once. “Mad-Eye didn’t make youcome via Greenland, then?”

“He tried,” said Tonks, striding over to help Bill andimmediately sending a candle toppling onto the lastpiece of parchment. “Oh no — sorry —”

“Here, dear,” said Mrs. Weasley, soundingexasperated, and she repaired the parchment with awave of her wand: In the flash of light caused by Mrs.Weasley’s charm, Harry caught a glimpse of whatlooked like the plan of a building.

Page | 104Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley had seen him looking. She snatched theplan off the table and stuffed it into Bill’s heavilyladen arms.

“This sort of thing ought to be cleared away promptlyat the end of meetings,” she snapped before sweepingoff toward an ancient dresser from which she startedunloading dinner plates.

Bill took out his wand, muttered “Evanescol” and thescrolls vanished.

“Sit down, Harry,” said Sirius. “You’ve metMundungus, haven’t you?”

The thing Harry had taken to be a pile of rags gave aprolonged, grunting snore and then jerked awake.

“Some’n say m’ name?” Mundungus mumbledsleepily. “I ’gree with Sirius...”

He raised a very grubby hand in the air as thoughvoting, his droopy, bloodshot eyes unfocused. Ginnygiggled.

“The meeting’s over, Dung,” said Sirius, as they all satdown around him at the table. “Harry’s arrived.”

“Eh?” said Mundungus, peering balefully at Harrythrough his matted ginger hair. “Blimey, so ’e ’as.

Yeah ... you all right, ’arry?”

“Yeah,” said Harry.

Mundungus fumbled nervously in his pockets, stillstaring at Harry, and pulled out a grimy black pipe.

He stuck it in his mouth, ignited the end of it with hiswand, and took a deep pull on it. Great billowingclouds of greenish smoke obscured him in seconds.Page | 105Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Owe you a ’pology,” grunted a voice from the middleof the smelly cloud.

“For the last time, Mundungus,” called Mrs. Weasley,“will you please not smoke that thing in the kitchen,especially not when we’re about to eat!”

“Ah,” said Mundungus. “Right. Sorry, Molly.”

The cloud of smoke vanished as Mundungus stowedhis pipe back in his pocket, but an acrid smell ofburning socks lingered.

“And if you want dinner before midnight I’ll need ahand,” Mrs. Weasley said to the room at large. “No,you can stay where you are, Harry dear, you’ve had along journey —”

“What can I do, Molly?” said Tonks enthusiastically,bounding forward.

Mrs. Weasley hesitated, looking apprehensive.

“Er — no, it’s all right, Tonks, you have a rest too,you’ve done enough today —”

“No, no, I want to help!” said Tonks brightly, knockingover a chair as she hurried toward the dresser fromwhich Ginny was collecting cutlery.

Soon a series of heavy knives were chopping meatand vegetables of their own accord, supervised by Mr.Weasley, while Mrs. Weasley stirred a cauldrondangling over the fire and the others took out plates,more goblets, and food from the pantry. Harry wasleft at the table with Sirius and Mundungus, who wasstill blinking mournfully at him.

“Seen old Figgy since?” he asked.

Page | 106Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry, “I haven’t seen anyone.”

“See, I wouldn’t ’ave left,” said Mundungus, leaningforward, a pleading note in his voice, “but I ’ad abusiness opportunity —”

Harry felt something brush against his knees andstarted, but it was only Crookshanks, Hermione’sbandy-legged ginger cat, who wound himself oncearound Harry’s legs, purring, then jumped ontoSirius’s lap and curled up. Sirius scratched himabsentmindedly behind the ears as he turned, stillgrim-faced, to Harry.

“Had a good summer so far?”

“No, it’s been lousy,” said Harry.

For the first time, something like a grin flitted acrossSirius’s face.

“Don’t know what you’re complaining about, myself.”

“ What?” said Harry incredulously.

“Personally, I’d have welcomed a dementor attack. Adeadly struggle for my soul would have broken themonotony nicely. You think you’ve had it bad, at leastyou’ve been able to get out and about, stretch yourlegs, get into a few fights... I’ve been stuck inside for amonth.”

“How come?” asked Harry, frowning.

“Because the Ministry of Magic’s still after me, andVoldemort will know all about me being an Animagusby now, Wormtail will have told him, so my bigdisguise is useless. There’s not much I can do for theOrder of the Phoenix ... or so Dumbledore feels.”

Page | 107Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

There was something about the slightly flattened toneof voice in which Sirius uttered Dumbledore’s namethat told Harry that Sirius was not very happy withthe headmaster either. Harry felt a sudden upsurge ofaffection for his godfather.

“At least you’ve known what’s been going on,” he saidbracingly.

“Oh yeah,” said Sirius sarcastically. “Listening toSnape’s reports, having to take all his snide hints thathe’s out there risking his life while I’m sat on mybackside here having a nice comfortable time ...asking me how the cleaning’s going —”

“What cleaning?” asked Harry.

“Trying to make this place fit for human habitation,”said Sirius, waving a hand around the dismalkitchen. “No one’s lived here for ten years, not sincemy dear mother died, unless you count her oldhouse-elf, and he’s gone round the twist, hasn’tcleaned anything in ages —”

“Sirius?” said Mundungus, who did not appear tohave paid any attention to this conversation, but hadbeen minutely examining an empty goblet. “This solidsilver, mate?”

“Yes,” said Sirius, surveying it with distaste. “Finestfifteenth-century goblin-wrought silver, embossedwith the Black family crest.”

“That’d come off, though,” muttered Mundungus,polishing it with his cuff.

“Fred — George — NO, JUST CARRY THEM!” Mrs.Weasley shrieked.

Page | 108Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry, Sirius, and Mundungus looked around and, asplit second later, dived away from the table. Fredand George had bewitched a large cauldron of stew,an iron flagon of butterbeer, and a heavy woodenbreadboard, complete with knife, to hurtle throughthe air toward them. The stew skidded the length ofthe table and came to a halt just before the end,leaving a long black burn on the wooden surface, theflagon of butterbeer fell with a crash, spilling itscontents everywhere, and the bread knife slipped offthe board and landed, point down and quiveringominously, exactly where Sirius’s right hand hadbeen seconds before.

“FOR HEAVEN’S SAKE!” screamed Mrs. Weasley.“THERE WAS NO NEED — IVE HAD ENOUGH OFTHIS — JUST BECAUSE YOU’RE ALLOWED TO USEMAGIC NOW YOU DONT HAVE TO WHIP YOURWANDS OUT FOR EVERY TINY LITTLE THING!”

“We were just trying to save a bit of time!” said Fred,hurrying forward and wrenching the bread knife outof the table. “Sorry Sirius, mate — didn’t mean to —”

Harry and Sirius were both laughing. Mundungus,who had toppled backward off his chair, was swearingas he got to his feet. Crookshanks had given an angryhiss and shot off under the dresser, from whence hislarge yellow eyes glowed in the darkness.

“Boys,” Mr. Weasley said, lifting the stew back intothe middle of the table, “your mother’s right, you’resupposed to show a sense of responsibility now you’vecome of age —”

“— none of your brothers caused this sort of trouble!”Mrs. Weasley raged at the twins, slamming a freshflagon of butterbeer onto the table and spilling almostas much again. “Bill didn’t feel the need to Apparate

Page | 109Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

every few feet! Charlie didn’t Charm everything hemet! Percy —”

She stopped dead, catching her breath with afrightened look at her husband, whose expressionwas suddenly wooden.

“Let’s eat,” said Bill quickly.

“It looks wonderful, Molly,” said Lupin, ladling stewonto a plate for her and handing it across the table.

For a few minutes there was silence but for the chinkof plates and cutlery and the scraping of chairs aseveryone settled down to their food. Then Mrs.

Weasley turned to Sirius and said, “I’ve been meaningto tell you, there’s something trapped in that writingdesk in the drawing room, it keeps rattling andshaking. Of course, it could just be a boggart, but Ithought we ought to ask Alastor to have a look at itbefore we let it out.”

“Whatever you like,” said Sirius indifferently.

“The curtains in there are full of doxies too,” Mrs.Weasley went on. “I thought we might try and tacklethem tomorrow.”

“I look forward to it,” said Sirius. Harry heard thesarcasm in his voice, but he was not sure that anyoneelse did.

Opposite Harry, Tonks was entertaining Hermioneand Ginny by transforming her nose betweenmouthfuls. Screwing up her eyes each time with thesame pained expression she had worn back in Harry’sbedroom, her nose swelled to a beaklike protuberancelike Snape’s, shrank to something resembling abutton mushroom, and then sprouted a great deal ofPage | llOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

hair from each nostril. Apparently this was a regularmealtime entertainment, because after a whileHermione and Ginny started requesting their favoritenoses.

“Do that one like a pig snout, Tonks ...”

Tonks obliged, and Harry, looking up, had the fleetingimpression that a female Dudley was grinning at himfrom across the table.

Mr. Weasley, Bill, and Lupin were having an intensediscussion about goblins.

“They’re not giving anything away yet,” said Bill. “Istill can’t work out whether they believe he’s back ornot. ’Course, they might prefer not to take sides at all.Keep out of it.”

“I’m sure they’d never go over to You-Know-Who,”said Mr. Weasley, shaking his head. “They’ve sufferedlosses too. Remember that goblin family he murderedlast time, somewhere near Nottingham?”

“I think it depends what they’re offered,” said Lupin.“And I’m not talking about gold; if they’re offeredfreedoms we’ve been denying them for centuriesthey’re going to be tempted. Have you still not hadany luck with Ragnok, Bill?”

“He’s feeling pretty anti-wizard at the moment,” saidBill. “He hasn’t stopped raging about the Bagmanbusiness, he reckons the Ministry did a cover-up,those goblins never got their gold from him, you know

A gale of laughter from the middle of the tabledrowned the rest of Bill’s words. Fred, George, Ron,and Mundungus were rolling around in their seats.

Page | lllHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

"... and then,” choked Mundungus, tears runningdown his face, “and then, if you’ll believe it, ’e says tome, ’e says, ‘’ere, Dung, where didja get all them toadsfrom? ’Cos some son of a Bludger’s gone and nickedall mine!’ And I says, ‘Nicked all your toads, Will,what next? So you’ll be wanting some more, then?’And if you’ll believe me, lads, the gormless gargoylebuys all ’is own toads back orf me for twice what ’epaid in the first place —■”

“I don’t think we need to hear any more of yourbusiness dealings, thank you very much,Mundungus,” said Mrs. Weasley sharply, as Ronslumped forward onto the table, howling withlaughter.

“Beg pardon, Molly,” said Mundungus at once, wipinghis eyes and winking at Harry. “But, you know, Willnicked ’em orf Warty Harris in the first place so Iwasn’t really doing nothing wrong —”

“I don’t know where you learned about right andwrong, Mundungus, but you seem to have missed afew crucial lessons,” said Mrs. Weasley coldly.

Fred and George buried their faces in their goblets ofbutterbeer; George was hiccuping. For some reason,Mrs. Weasley threw a very nasty look at Sirius beforegetting to her feet and going to fetch a large rhubarbcrumble for pudding. Harry looked round at hisgodfather.

“Molly doesn’t approve of Mundungus,” said Sirius inan undertone.

“How come he’s in the Order?” Harry said veryquietly.

Page | 112Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“He’s useful,” Sirius muttered. “Knows all the crooks— well, he would, seeing as he’s one himself. But he’salso very loyal to Dumbledore, who helped him out ofa tight spot once. It pays to have someone like Dungaround, he hears things we don’t. But Molly thinksinviting him to stay for dinner is going too far. Shehasn’t forgiven him for slipping off duty when he wassupposed to be tailing you.”

Three helpings of rhubarb crumble and custard laterand the waistband on Harry’s jeans was feelinguncomfortably tight (which was saying something, asthe jeans had once been Dudley’s). He lay down hisspoon in a lull in the general conversation. Mr.Weasley was leaning back in his chair, looking repleteand relaxed, Tonks was yawning widely, her nose nowback to normal, and Ginny, who had luredCrookshanks out from under the dresser, was sittingcross-legged on the floor, rolling butterbeer corks forhim to chase.

“Nearly time for bed, I think,” said Mrs. Weasley on ayawn.

“Not just yet, Molly,” said Sirius, pushing away hisempty plate and turning to look at Harry. “You know,I’m surprised at you. I thought the first thing you’d dowhen you got here would be to start asking questionsabout Voldemort.”

The atmosphere in the room changed with therapidity Harry associated with the arrival ofdementors. Where seconds before it had been sleepilyrelaxed, it was now alert, even tense. A frisson hadgone around the table at the mention of Voldemort’sname. Lupin, who had been about to take a sip ofwine, lowered his goblet slowly, looking wary.

Page | 113Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I did!” said Harry indignantly. “I asked Ron andHermione but they said we’re not allowed in theOrder, so —”

“And they’re quite right,” said Mrs. Weasley. “You’retoo young.”

She was sitting bolt upright in her chair, her fistsclenched upon its arms, every trace of drowsinessgone.

“Since when did someone have to be in the Order ofthe Phoenix to ask questions?” asked Sirius. “Harry’sbeen trapped in that Muggle house for a month. He’sgot the right to know what’s been happen —”

“Hang on!” interrupted George loudly.

“How come Harry gets his questions answered?” saidFred angrily.

“ We’ve been trying to get stuff out of you for a monthand you haven’t told us a single stinking thing!” saidGeorge.

“ ‘You’re too young, you’re not in the Order,’ ” saidFred, in a high-pitched voice that sounded uncannilylike his mother’s. “Harry’s not even of age!”

“It’s not my fault you haven’t been told what theOrder’s doing,” said Sirius calmly. “That’s yourparents’ decision. Harry, on the other hand —”

“It’s not down to you to decide what’s good for Harry!”said Mrs. Weasley sharply. Her normally kindly facelooked dangerous. “You haven’t forgotten whatDumbledore said, I suppose?”

Page | 114Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Which bit?” Sirius asked politely, but with an air asthough readying himself for a fight.

“The bit about not telling Harry more than he needsto know,” said Mrs. Weasley, placing a heavyemphasis on the last three words.

Ron, Hermione, Fred, and George’s heads turned fromSirius to Mrs. Weasley as though following a tennisrally. Ginny was kneeling amid a pile of abandonedbutterbeer corks, watching the conversation with hermouth slightly open. Lupin’s eyes were fixed onSirius.

“I don’t intend to tell him more than he needs toknow, Molly,” said Sirius. “But as he was the one whosaw Voldemort come back” (again, there was acollective shudder around the table at the name), “hehas more right than most to —”

“He’s not a member of the Order of the Phoenix!” saidMrs. Weasley. “He’s only fifteen and —”

“— and he’s dealt with as much as most in theOrder,” said Sirius, “and more than some —”

“No one’s denying what he’s done!” said Mrs. Weasley,her voice rising, her fists trembling on the arms of herchair. “But he’s still —”

“He’s not a child!” said Sirius impatiently.

“He’s not an adult either!” said Mrs. Weasley, thecolor rising in her cheeks. “He’s not James, Sirius!”

“I’m perfectly clear who he is, thanks, Molly,” saidSirius coldly.

Page | 115Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm not sure you are!” said Mrs. Weasley.

“Sometimes, the way you talk about him, it’s asthough you think you’ve got your best friend back!”

“What’s wrong with that?” said Harry.

“What’s wrong, Harry, is that you are not your father,however much you might look like him!” said Mrs.Weasley, her eyes still boring into Sirius. “You are stillat school and adults responsible for you should notforget it!”

“Meaning I’m an irresponsible godfather?” demandedSirius, his voice rising.

“Meaning you’ve been known to act rashly, Sirius,which is why Dumbledore keeps reminding you tostay at home and —”

“We’ll leave my instructions from Dumbledore out ofthis, if you please!” said Sirius loudly.

“Arthur!” said Mrs. Weasley, rounding on herhusband. “Arthur, back me up!”

Mr. Weasley did not speak at once. He took off hisglasses and cleaned them slowly on his robes, notlooking at his wife. Only when he had replaced themcarefully on his nose did he say, “Dumbledore knowsthe position has changed, Molly. He accepts thatHarry will have to be filled in to a certain extent nowthat he is staying at headquarters —”

“Yes, but there’s a difference between that andinviting him to ask whatever he likes!”

“Personally,” said Lupin quietly, looking away fromSirius at last, as Mrs. Weasley turned quickly to him,hopeful that finally she was about to get an ally, “I

Page | 116Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

think it better that Harry gets the facts — not all thefacts, Molly, but the general picture — from us, ratherthan a garbled version from ... others.”

His expression was mild, but Harry felt sure thatLupin, at least, knew that some Extendable Ears hadsurvived Mrs. Weasley’s purge.

“Well,” said Mrs. Weasley, breathing deeply andlooking around the table for support that did notcome, “well ... I can see I’m going to be overruled. I’lljust say this: Dumbledore must have had his reasonsfor not wanting Harry to know too much, andspeaking as someone who has got Harry’s bestinterests at heart —”

“He’s not your son,” said Sirius quietly.

“He’s as good as,” said Mrs. Weasley fiercely. “Whoelse has he got?”

“He’s got me!”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Weasley, her lip curling. “The thingis, it’s been rather difficult for you to look after himwhile you’ve been locked up in Azkaban, hasn’t it?”

Sirius started to rise from his chair.

“Molly, you’re not the only person at this table whocares about Harry,” said Lupin sharply. “Sirius, sitdown.”

Mrs. Weasley’s lower lip was trembling. Sirius sankslowly back into his chair, his face white.

“I think Harry ought to be allowed a say in this,”

Lupin continued. “He’s old enough to decide forhimself.”

Page | 117Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I want to know what’s been going on,” Harry said atonce.

He did not look at Mrs. Weasley. He had been touchedby what she had said about his being as good as ason, but he was also impatient at her mollycoddling...Sirius was right, he was not a child.

“Very well,” said Mrs. Weasley, her voice cracking.“Ginny — Ron — Hermione — Fred — George — Iwant you out of this kitchen, now.”

There was instant uproar.

“We’re of age!” Fred and George bellowed together.

“If Harry’s allowed, why can’t I?” shouted Ron.

“Mum, I want to!” wailed Ginny.

“NO!” shouted Mrs. Weasley, standing up, her eyesoverbright. “I absolutely forbid —”

“Molly, you can’t stop Fred and George,” said Mr.Weasley wearily. “They are of age —”

“They’re still at school —”

“But they’re legally adults now,” said Mr. Weasley inthe same tired voice.

Mrs. Weasley was now scarlet in the face.

“I — oh, all right then, Fred and George can stay, butRon —”

“Harry’ll tell me and Hermione everything you sayanyway!” said Ron hotly. “Won’t — won’t you?” headded uncertainly, meeting Harry’s eyes.

Page | 118Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

For a split second, Harry considered telling Ron thathe wouldn’t tell him a single word, that he could try ataste of being kept in the dark and see how he likedit. But the nasty impulse vanished as they looked ateach other.

“ ’Course I will,” Harry said. Ron and Hermionebeamed.

“Fine!” shouted Mrs. Weasley. “Fine! Ginny — BED!”

Ginny did not go quietly. They could hear her ragingand storming at her mother all the way up the stairs,and when she reached the hall Mrs. Black’searsplitting shrieks were added to the din. Lupinhurried off to the portrait to restore calm. It was onlyafter he had returned, closing the kitchen doorbehind him and taking his seat at the table again,that Sirius spoke.

“Okay, Harry ... what do you want to know?”

Harry took a deep breath and asked the question thathad been obsessing him for a month.

“Where’s Voldemort? What’s he doing? I’ve been tryingto watch the Muggle news,” he said, ignoring therenewed shudders and winces at the name, “andthere hasn’t been anything that looks like him yet, nofunny deaths or anything —”

“That’s because there haven’t been any suspiciousdeaths yet,” said Sirius, “not as far as we know,anyway... And we know quite a lot.”

“More than he thinks we do anyway,” said Lupin.

Page | 119Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“How come he’s stopped killing people?” Harry asked.He knew that Voldemort had murdered more thanonce in the last year alone.

“Because he doesn’t want to draw attention to himselfat the moment,” said Sirius. “It would be dangerousfor him. His comeback didn’t come off quite the wayhe wanted it to, you see. He messed it up.”

“Or rather, you messed it up for him,” said Lupin witha satisfied smile.

“How?” Harry asked perplexedly.

“You weren’t supposed to survive!” said Sirius.“Nobody apart from his Death Eaters was supposed toknow he’d come back. But you survived to bearwitness.”

“And the very last person he wanted alerted to hisreturn the moment he got back was Dumbledore,”said Lupin. “And you made sure Dumbledore knew atonce.”

“How has that helped?” Harry asked.

“Are you kidding?” said Bill incredulously.“Dumbledore was the only one You-Know-Who wasever scared of!”

“Thanks to you, Dumbledore was able to recall theOrder of the Phoenix about an hour after Voldemortreturned,” said Sirius.

“So what’s the Order been doing?” said Harry, lookingaround at them all.

“Working as hard as we can to make sure Voldemortcan’t carry out his plans,” said Sirius.

Page | 120Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“How d’you know what his plans are?” Harry askedquickly.

“Dumbledore’s got a shrewd idea,” said Lupin, “andDumbledore’s shrewd ideas normally turn out to beaccurate.”

“So what does Dumbledore reckon he’s planning?”

“Well, firstly, he wants to build up his army again,”said Sirius. “In the old days he had huge numbers athis command; witches and wizards he’d bullied orbewitched into following him, his faithful DeathEaters, a great variety of Dark creatures. You heardhim planning to recruit the giants; well, they’ll be justone group he’s after. He’s certainly not going to tryand take on the Ministry of Magic with only a dozenDeath Eaters.”

“So you’re trying to stop him getting more followers?”“We’re doing our best,” said Lupin.

“How?”

“Well, the main thing is to try and convince as manypeople as possible that You-Know-Who really hasreturned, to put them on their guard,” said Bill. “It’sproving tricky, though.”

“Why?”

“Because of the Ministry’s attitude,” said Tonks. “Yousaw Cornelius Fudge after You-Know-Who came back,Harry. Well, he hasn’t shifted his position at all. He’sabsolutely refusing to believe it’s happened.”

“But why?” said Harry desperately. “Why’s he beingso stupid? If Dumbledore —”

Page | 121Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Ah, well, you’ve put your finger on the problem,” saidMr. Weasley with a wry smile. “Dumbledore.”

“Fudge is frightened of him, you see,” said Tonkssadly.

“Frightened of Dumbledore?” said Harryincredulously.

“Frightened of what he’s up to,” said Mr. Weasley.“You see, Fudge thinks Dumbledore’s plotting tooverthrow him. He thinks Dumbledore wants to beMinister of Magic.”

“But Dumbledore doesn’t want —”

“Of course he doesn’t,” said Mr. Weasley. “He’s neverwanted the Minister’s job, even though a lot of peoplewanted him to take it when Millicent Bagnold retired.Fudge came to power instead, but he’s never quiteforgotten how much popular support Dumbledorehad, even though Dumbledore never applied for thejob.”

“Deep down, Fudge knows Dumbledore’s muchcleverer than he is, a much more powerful wizard,and in the early days of his Ministry he was foreverasking Dumbledore for help and advice,” said Lupin.“But it seems that he’s become fond of power now,and much more confident. He loves being Minister ofMagic, and he’s managed to convince himself thathe’s the clever one and Dumbledore’s simply stirringup trouble for the sake of it.”

“How can he think that?” said Harry angrily. “Howcan he think Dumbledore would just make it all up —that I’d make it all up?”

Page | 122Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Because accepting that Voldemort’s back wouldmean trouble like the Ministry hasn’t had to copewith for nearly fourteen years,” said Sirius bitterly.“Fudge just can’t bring himself to face it. It’s so muchmore comfortable to convince himself Dumbledore’slying to destabilize him.”

“You see the problem,” said Lupin. “While theMinistry insists there is nothing to fear fromVoldemort, it’s hard to convince people he’s back,especially as they really don’t want to believe it in thefirst place. What’s more, the Ministry’s leaning heavilyon the Daily Prophet not to report any of what they’recalling Dumbledore’s rumormongering, so most of theWizarding community are completely unawareanything’s happened, and that makes them easytargets for the Death Eaters if they’re using theImperius Curse.”

“But you’re telling people, aren’t you?” said Harry,looking around at Mr. Weasley, Sirius, Bill,Mundungus, Lupin, and Tonks. “You’re letting peopleknow he’s back?”

They all smiled humorlessly.

“Well, as everyone thinks I’m a mad mass murdererand the Ministry’s put a ten-thousand-Galleon priceon my head, I can hardly stroll up the street and starthanding out leaflets, can I?” said Sirius restlessly.

“And I’m not a very popular dinner guest with most ofthe community,” said Lupin. “It’s an occupationalhazard of being a werewolf.”

“Tonks and Arthur would lose their jobs at theMinistry if they started shooting their mouths off,”said Sirius, “and it’s very important for us to have

Page | 123Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

spies inside the Ministry, because you can betVoldemort will have them.”

“We’ve managed to convince a couple of people,though,” said Mr. Weasley. “Tonks here, for one —she’s too young to have been in the Order of thePhoenix last time, and having Aurors on our side is ahuge advantage — Kingsley Shacklebolt’s been a realasset too. He’s in charge of the hunt for Sirius, so he’sbeen feeding the Ministry information that Sirius is inTibet.”

“But if none of you’s putting the news out thatVoldemort’s back —” Harry began.

“Who said none of us was putting the news out?” saidSirius. “Why d’you think Dumbledore’s in suchtrouble?”

“What d’you mean?” Harry asked.

“They’re trying to discredit him,” said Lupin. “Didn’tyou see the Daily Prophet last week? They reportedthat he’d been voted out of the Chairmanship of theInternational Confederation of Wizards because he’sgetting old and losing his grip, but it’s not true, hewas voted out by Ministry wizards after he made aspeech announcing Voldemort’s return. They’vedemoted him from Chief Warlock on the Wizengamot— that’s the Wizard High Court — and they’re talkingabout taking away his Order of Merlin, First Class,too.”

“But Dumbledore says he doesn’t care what they doas long as they don’t take him off the Chocolate Frogcards,” said Bill, grinning.

“It’s no laughing matter,” said Mr. Weasley shortly. “Ifhe carries on defying the Ministry like this, he could

Page | 124Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

end up in Azkaban and the last thing we want isDumbledore locked up. While You-Know-Who knowsDumbledore’s out there and wise to what he’s up to,he’s going to go cautiously for a while. IfDumbledore’s out of the way — well, You-Know-Whowill have a clear field.”

“But if Voldemort’s trying to recruit more DeathEaters, it’s bound to get out that he’s come back, isn’tit?” asked Harry desperately.

“Voldemort doesn’t march up to people’s houses andbang on their front doors, Harry,” said Sirius. “Hetricks, jinxes, and blackmails them. He’s well-practiced at operating in secrecy. In any case,gathering followers is only one thing he’s interestedin, he’s got other plans too, plans he can put intooperation very quietly indeed, and he’s concentratingon them at the moment.”

“What’s he after apart from followers?” Harry askedswiftly.

He thought he saw Sirius and Lupin exchange themost fleeting of looks before Sirius said, “Stuff he canonly get by stealth.”

When Harry continued to look puzzled, Sirius said,“Like a weapon. Something he didn’t have last time.”

“When he was powerful before?”

“Yes.”

“Like what kind of weapon?” said Harry. “Somethingworse than the Avada Kedavra — ?”

“That’s enough.”

Page | 125Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley spoke from the shadows beside thedoor. Harry had not noticed her return from takingGinny upstairs. Her arms were crossed and shelooked furious.

“I want you in bed, now. All of you,” she added,looking around at Fred, George, Ron, and Hermione.

“You can’t boss us —” Fred began.

“Watch me,” snarled Mrs. Weasley. She was tremblingslightly as she looked at Sirius. “You’ve given Harryplenty of information. Any more and you might justas well induct him into the Order straightaway.”

“Why not?” said Harry quickly. “I’ll join, I want to join,I want to fight —”

“No.”

It was not Mrs. Weasley who spoke this time, butLupin.

“The Order is comprised only of overage wizards,” hesaid. “Wizards who have left school,” he added, asFred and George opened their mouths. “There aredangers involved of which you can have no idea, anyof you ... I think Molly’s right, Sirius. We’ve saidenough.”

Sirius half-shrugged but did not argue. Mrs. Weasleybeckoned imperiously to her sons and Hermione. Oneby one they stood up and Harry, recognizing defeat,followed suit.

Page | 126Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE NOBLE AND MOST ANCIENTHOUSE OF BLACK

Mrs. Weasley followed them upstairs looking grim.

“I want you all to go straight to bed, no talking,” shesaid as they reached the first landing. “We’ve got abusy day tomorrow. I expect Ginny’s asleep,” sheadded to Hermione, “so try not to wake her up.”

“Asleep, yeah, right,” said Fred in an undertone, afterHermione bade them good night and they wereclimbing to the next floor. “If Ginny’s not lying awakewaiting for Hermione to tell her everything they saiddownstairs, then I’m a flobberworm...”

“All right, Ron, Harry,” said Mrs. Weasley on thesecond landing, pointing them into their bedroom.

“Off to bed with you.”

“ ’Night,” Harry and Ron said to the twins.

“Sleep tight,” said Fred, winking.

Page | 127Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley closed the door behind Harry with asharp snap. The bedroom looked, if anything, evendanker and gloomier than it had on first sight. Theblank picture on the wall was now breathing veryslowly and deeply, as though its invisible occupantwas asleep. Harry put on his pajamas, took off hisglasses, and climbed into his chilly bed while Ronthrew Owl Treats up on top of the wardrobe to pacifyHedwig and Pigwidgeon, who were clattering aroundand rustling their wings restlessly.

“We can’t let them out to hunt every night,” Ronexplained as he pulled on his maroon pajamas.“Dumbledore doesn’t want too many owls swoopingaround the square, thinks it’ll look suspicious. Ohyeah ... I forgot...”

He crossed to the door and bolted it.

“What’re you doing that for?”

“Kreacher,” said Ron as he turned off the light. “Firstnight I was here he came wandering in at three in themorning. Trust me, you don’t want to wake up andfind him prowling around your room. Anyway ...” Hegot into his bed, settled down under the covers, thenturned to look at Harry in the darkness. Harry couldsee his outline by the moonlight filtering in throughthe grimy window. “What d’you reckon?”

Harry didn’t need to ask what Ron meant.

“Well, they didn’t tell us much we couldn’t haveguessed, did they?” he said, thinking of all that hadbeen said downstairs. “I mean, all they’ve really saidis that the Order’s trying to stop people joining Vol —”

There was a sharp intake of breath from Ron.

Page | 128Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“— demort” said Harry firmly. “When are you going tostart using his name? Sirius and Lupin do.”

Ron ignored this last comment. “Yeah, you’re right,”he said. “We already knew nearly everything they toldus, from using the Extendable Ears. The only new bitwas —”

Crack.

“OUCH!”

“Keep your voice down, Ron, or Mum’ll be back uphere.”

“You two just Apparated on my knees!”

“Yeah, well, it’s harder in the dark —”

Harry saw the blurred outlines of Fred and Georgeleaping down from Ron’s bed. There was a groan ofbedsprings and Harry’s mattress descended a fewinches as George sat down near his feet.

“So, got there yet?” said George eagerly.

“The weapon Sirius mentioned?” said Harry.

“Let slip, more like,” said Fred with relish, now sittingnext to Ron. “We didn’t hear about that on the oldExtendables, did we?”

“What d’you reckon it is?” said Harry.

“Could be anything,” said Fred.

“But there can’t be anything worse than the AvadaKedavra curse, can there?” said Ron. “What’s worsethan death?”

Page | 129Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Maybe it’s something that can kill loads of people atonce,” suggested George.

“Maybe it’s some particularly painful way of killingpeople,” said Ron fearfully.

“He’s got the Cruciatus Curse for causing pain,” saidHarry. “He doesn’t need anything more efficient thanthat.”

There was a pause and Harry knew that the others,like him, were wondering what horrors this weaponcould perpetrate.

“So who d’you thinks got it now?” asked George.

“I hope it’s our side,” said Ron, sounding slightlynervous.

“If it is, Dumbledore’s probably keeping it,” said Fred.

“Where?” said Ron quickly. “Hogwarts?”

“Bet it is!” said George. “That’s where he hid theSorcerer’s Stone!”

“A weapon’s going to be a lot bigger than the Stone,though!” said Ron.

“Not necessarily,” said Fred.

“Yeah, size is no guarantee of power,” said George.“Look at Ginny.”

“What d’you mean?” said Harry.

“You’ve never been on the receiving end of one of herBat-Bogey Hexes, have you?”

Page | 130Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Shhh!” said Fred, half-rising from the bed. “Listen!”

They fell silent. Footsteps were coming up the stairsagain.

“Mum,” said George, and without further ado therewas a loud crack and Harry felt the weight vanishfrom the end of his bed. A few seconds later and theyheard the floorboard creak outside their door; Mrs.Weasley was plainly listening to see whether theywere talking or not.

Hedwig and Pigwidgeon hooted dolefully. Thefloorboard creaked again and they heard her headingupstairs to check on Fred and George.

“She doesn’t trust us at all, you know,” said Ronregretfully.

Harry was sure he would not be able to fall asleep;the evening had been so packed with things to thinkabout that he fully expected to lie awake for hoursmulling it all over. He wanted to continue talking toRon, but Mrs. Weasley was now creaking backdownstairs again, and once she had gone he distinctlyheard others making their way upstairs... In fact,many-legged creatures were cantering softly up anddown outside the bedroom door, and Hagrid, the Careof Magical Creatures teacher, was saying, “Beauties,aren’ they, eh, Harry? We’ll be study in’ weapons thisterm...” And Harry saw that the creatures hadcannons for heads and were wheeling to face him...

He ducked...

The next thing he knew, he was curled in a warm ballunder his bedclothes, and George’s loud voice wasfilling the room.

Page | 131Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Mum says get up, your breakfast is in the kitchenand then she needs you in the drawing room, thereare loads more doxies than she thought and she’sfound a nest of dead puffskeins under the sofa.”

Half an hour later, Harry and Ron, who had dressedand breakfasted quickly, entered the drawing room, along, high-ceilinged room on the first floor with olive-green walls covered in dirty tapestries. The carpetexhaled little clouds of dust every time someone puttheir foot on it and the long, moss-green velvetcurtains were buzzing as though swarming withinvisible bees. It was around these that Mrs. Weasley,Hermione, Ginny, Fred, and George were grouped, alllooking rather peculiar, as they had tied cloths overtheir noses and mouths. Each of them was alsoholding a large bottle of black liquid with a nozzle atthe end.

“Cover your faces and take a spray,” Mrs. Weasleysaid to Harry and Ron the moment she saw them,pointing to two more bottles of black liquid standingon a spindle-legged table. “It’s Doxycide. I’ve neverseen an infestation this bad — what that house-elf’sbeen doing for the last ten years —”

Hermione’s face was half concealed by a tea towel butHarry distinctly saw her throw a reproachful look atMrs. Weasley at these words.

“Kreacher’s really old, he probably couldn’t manage —

“You’d be surprised what Kreacher can manage whenhe wants to, Hermione,” said Sirius, who had justentered the room carrying a bloodstained bag of whatappeared to be dead rats. “I’ve just been feedingBuckbeak,” he added, in reply to Harry’s inquiring

Page | 132Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

look. “I keep him upstairs in my mother’s bedroom.Anyway ... this writing desk ...”

He dropped the bag of rats onto an armchair, thenbent over to examine the locked cabinet which, Harrynow noticed for the first time, was shaking slightly.

“Well, Molly, I’m pretty sure this is a boggart,” saidSirius, peering through the keyhole, “but perhaps weought to let Mad-Eye have a shifty at it before we let itout — knowing my mother it could be somethingmuch worse.”

“Right you are, Sirius,” said Mrs. Weasley.

They were both speaking in carefully light, politevoices that told Harry quite plainly that neither hadforgotten their disagreement of the night before.

A loud, clanging bell sounded from downstairs,followed at once by the cacophony of screams andwails that had been triggered the previous night byTonks knocking over the umbrella stand.

“I keep telling them not to ring the doorbell!” saidSirius exasperatedly, hurrying back out of the room.They heard him thundering down the stairs as Mrs.Black’s screeches echoed up through the house oncemore: “Stains of dishonor, filthy half-breeds, bloodtraitors, children of filth ...”

“Close the door, please, Harry,” said Mrs. Weasley.

Harry took as much time as he dared to close thedrawing room door; he wanted to listen to what wasgoing on downstairs. Sirius had obviously managed toshut the curtains over his mother’s portrait becauseshe had stopped screaming. He heard Sirius walkingdown the hall, then the clattering of the chain on thePage | 133Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

front door, and then a deep voice he recognized asKingsley Shacklebolt’s saying, “Hestia’s just relievedme, so she’s got Moody’s cloak now, thought I’d leavea report for Dumbledore...”

Feeling Mrs. Weasley’s eyes on the back of his head,Harry regretfully closed the drawing room door andrejoined the doxy party.

Mrs. Weasley was bending over to check the page ondoxies in Gilderoy Lockhart’s Guide to HouseholdPests, which was lying open on the sofa.

“Right, you lot, you need to be careful, because doxiesbite and their teeth are poisonous. I’ve got a bottle ofantidote here, but I’d rather nobody needed it.”

She straightened up, positioned herself squarely infront of the curtains, and beckoned them all forward.

“When I say the word, start spraying immediately,”she said. “They’ll come flying out at us, I expect, but itsays on the sprays one good squirt will paralyze them.When they’re immobilized, just throw them in thisbucket.”

She stepped carefully out of their line of fire andraised her own spray. “All right — squirti”

Harry had been spraying only a few seconds when afully grown doxy came soaring out of a fold in thematerial, shiny beetlelike wings whirring, tiny needle-sharp teeth bared, its fairylike body covered withthick black hair and its four tiny fists clenched withfury. Harry caught it full in the face with a blast ofDoxycide; it froze in midair and fell, with asurprisingly loud thunk, onto the worn carpet below.Harry picked it up and threw it in the bucket.

Page | 134Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Fred, what are you doing?” said Mrs. Weasleysharply. “Spray that at once and throw it away!”

Harry looked around. Fred was holding a strugglingdoxy between his forefinger and thumb.

“Right-o,” Fred said brightly, spraying the doxyquickly in the face so that it fainted, but the momentMrs. Weasley’s back was turned he pocketed it with awink.

“We want to experiment with doxy venom for ourSkiving Snack-boxes,” George told Harry under hisbreath.

Deftly spraying two doxies at once as they soaredstraight for his nose, Harry moved closer to Georgeand muttered out of the corner of his mouth, “Whatare Skiving Snackboxes?”

“Range of sweets to make you ill,” George whispered,keeping a wary eye on Mrs. Weasley’s back. “Notseriously ill, mind, just ill enough to get you out of aclass when you feel like it. Fred and I have beendeveloping them this summer. They’re double-ended,color-coded chews. If you eat the orange half of thePuking Pastilles, you throw up. Moment you’ve beenrushed out of the lesson for the hospital wing, youswallow the purple half —”

“ ‘— which restores you to full fitness, enabling you topursue the leisure activity of your own choice duringan hour that would otherwise have been devoted tounprofitable boredom.’ That’s what we’re putting inthe adverts, anyway,” whispered Fred, who had edgedover out of Mrs. Weasley’s line of vision and was nowsweeping a few stray doxies from the floor and addingthem to his pocket. “But they still need a bit of work.At the moment our testers are having a bit of troublePage | 135Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

stopping puking long enough to swallow the purpleend.”

“Testers?”

“Us,” said Fred. “We take it in turns. George did theFainting Fancies — we both tried the NosebleedNougat —”

“Mum thought we’d been dueling,” said George.

“Joke shop still on, then?” Harry muttered,pretending to be adjusting the nozzle on his spray.

“Well, we haven’t had a chance to get premises yet,”said Fred, dropping his voice even lower as Mrs.Weasley mopped her brow with her scarf beforereturning to the attack, “so we’re running it as a mail-order service at the moment. We put advertisementsin the Daily Prophet last week.”

“All thanks to you, mate,” said George. “But don’tworry ... Mum hasn’t got a clue. She won’t read theDaily Prophet anymore, ’cause of it telling lies aboutyou and Dumbledore.”

Harry grinned. He had forced the Weasley twins totake the thousand-Galleon prize money he had wonin the Triwizard Tournament to help them realizetheir ambition to open a joke shop, but he was stillglad to know that his part in furthering their planswas unknown to Mrs. Weasley, who did not think thatrunning a joke shop was a suitable career for two ofher sons.

The de-doxying of the curtains took most of themorning. It was past midday when Mrs. Weasleyfinally removed her protective scarf, sank into asagging armchair, and sprang up again with a cry of

Page | 136Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

disgust, having sat on the bag of dead rats. Thecurtains were no longer buzzing; they hung limp anddamp from the intensive spraying; unconsciousdoxies lay crammed in the bucket at the foot of thembeside a bowl of their black eggs, at whichCrookshanks was now sniffing and Fred and Georgewere shooting covetous looks.

“I think well tackle those after lunch.”

Mrs. Weasley pointed at the dusty glass-frontedcabinets standing on either side of the mantelpiece.They were crammed with an odd assortment ofobjects: a selection of rusty daggers, claws, a coiledsnakeskin, a number of tarnished silver boxesinscribed with languages Harry could not understandand, least pleasant of all, an ornate crystal bottle witha large opal set into the stopper, full of what Harrywas quite sure was blood.

The clanging doorbell rang again. Everyone looked atMrs. Weasley.

“Stay here,” she said firmly, snatching up the bag ofrats as Mrs. Blacks screeches started up again fromdown below. “I’ll bring up some sandwiches.”

She left the room, closing the door carefully behindher. At once, everyone dashed over to the window tolook down onto the doorstep. They could see the topof an unkempt gingery head and a stack ofprecariously balanced cauldrons.

“Mundungus!” said Hermione. “What’s he brought allthose cauldrons for?”

“Probably looking for a safe place to keep them,” saidHarry. “Isn’t that what he was doing the night he was

Page | 137Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

supposed to be tailing me? Picking up dodgycauldrons?”

“Yeah, you’re right!” said Fred, as the front dooropened; Mundungus heaved his cauldrons through itand disappeared from view. “Blimey, Mum won’t likethat...”

He and George crossed to the door and stood besideit, listening intently. Mrs. Black’s screaming hadstopped again.

“Mundungus is talking to Sirius and Kingsley,” Fredmuttered, frowning with concentration. “Can’t hearproperly ... d’you reckon we can risk the ExtendableEars?”

“Might be worth it,” said George. “I could sneakupstairs and get a pair —”

But at that precise moment there was an explosion ofsound from downstairs that rendered ExtendableEars quite unnecessary. All of them could hearexactly what Mrs. Weasley was shouting at the top ofher voice.

“WE ARE NOT RUNNING A HIDEOUT FOR STOLENGOODS!”

“I love hearing Mum shouting at someone else,” saidFred, with a satisfied smile on his face as he openedthe door an inch or so to allow Mrs. Weasley’s voice topermeate the room better. “It makes such a nicechange.”

COMPLETELY IRRESPONSIBLE, AS IF WEHAVENT GOT ENOUGH TO WORRY ABOUTWITHOUT YOU DRAGGING STOLEN CAULDRONSINTO THE HOUSE —”

Page | 138Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“The idiots are letting her get into her stride,” saidGeorge, shaking his head. “You’ve got to head her offearly, otherwise she builds up a head of steam andgoes on for hours. And she’s been dying to have a goat Mundungus ever since he sneaked off when he wassupposed to be following you, Harry — and there goesSirius’s mum again —”

Mrs. Weasley’s voice was lost amid fresh shrieks andscreams from the portraits in the hall. George madeto shut the door to drown the noise, but before hecould do so, a house-elf edged into the room.

Except for the filthy rag tied like a loincloth aroundits middle, it was completely naked. It looked very old.Its skin seemed to be several times too big for it andthough it was bald like all house-elves, there was aquantity of white hair growing out of its large, batlikeears. Its eyes were a bloodshot and watery gray, andits fleshy nose was large and rather snoutlike.

The elf took absolutely no notice of Harry and therest. Acting as though it could not see them, itshuffled hunchbacked, slowly and doggedly, towardthe far end of the room, muttering under its breath allthe while in a hoarse, deep voice like a bullfrog’s, "...Smells like a drain and a criminal to boot, but she’sno better, nasty old blood traitor with her bratsmessing up my Mistress’s house, oh my poorMistress, if she knew, if she knew the scum they’ve letin her house, what would she say to old Kreacher, ohthe shame of it, Mudbloods and werewolves andtraitors and thieves, poor old Kreacher, what can hedo...”

“Hello, Kreacher,” said Fred very loudly, closing thedoor with a snap.

Page | 139Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The house-elf froze in his tracks, stopped muttering,and then gave a very pronounced and veryunconvincing start of surprise.

“Kreacher did not see Young Master,” he said, turningaround and bowing to Fred. Still facing the carpet, headded, perfectly audibly, “Nasty little brat of a bloodtraitor it is.”

“Sorry?” said George. “Didn’t catch that last bit.”

“Kreacher said nothing,” said the elf, with a secondbow to George, adding in a clear undertone, “andthere’s its twin, unnatural little beasts they are.”

Harry didn’t know whether to laugh or not. The elfstraightened up, eyeing them all very malevolently,and apparently convinced that they could not hearhim as he continued to mutter.

"... and there’s the Mudblood, standing there bold asbrass, oh if my Mistress knew, oh how she’d cry, andthere’s a new boy, Kreacher doesn’t know his name,what is he doing here, Kreacher doesn’t know ...”

“This is Harry, Kreacher,” said Hermione tentatively.“Harry Potter.”

Kreacher’s pale eyes widened and he muttered fasterand more furiously than ever.

“The Mudblood is talking to Kreacher as though sheis my friend, if Kreacher’s Mistress saw him in suchcompany, oh what would she say —”

“Don’t call her a Mudblood!” said Ron and Ginnytogether, very angrily.

Page | 140Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It doesn’t matter,” Hermione whispered, “he’s not inhis right mind, he doesn’t know what he’s —”

“Don’t kid yourself, Hermione, he knows exactly whathe’s saying,” said Fred, eyeing Kreacher with greatdislike.

Kreacher was still muttering, his eyes on Harry.

“Is it true? Is it Harry Potter? Kreacher can see thescar, it must be true, that’s that boy who stopped theDark Lord, Kreacher wonders how he did it —”

“Don’t we all, Kreacher?” said Fred.

“What do you want anyway?” George asked.

Kreacher’s huge eyes darted onto George.

“Kreacher is cleaning,” he said evasively.

“A likely story,” said a voice behind Harry.

Sirius had come back; he was glowering at the elffrom the doorway. The noise in the hall had abated;perhaps Mrs. Weasley and Mundungus had movedtheir argument down into the kitchen. At the sight ofSirius, Kreacher flung himself into a ridiculously lowbow that flattened his snoutlike nose on the floor.

“Stand up straight,” said Sirius impatiently. “Now,what are you up to?”

“Kreacher is cleaning,” the elf repeated. “Kreacherlives to serve the noble house of Black —”

“— and it’s getting blacker every day, it’s filthy,” saidSirius.

Page | 141Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Master always liked his little joke,” said Kreacher,bowing again, and continuing in an undertone,“Master was a nasty ungrateful swine who broke hismother’s heart —”

“My mother didn’t have a heart, Kreacher,” Siriussnapped. “She kept herself alive out of pure spite.”

Kreacher bowed again and said, “Whatever Mastersays,” then muttered furiously, “Master is not fit towipe slime from his mother’s boots, oh my poorMistress, what would she say if she saw Kreacherserving him, how she hated him, what adisappointment he was —”

“I asked you what you were up to,” said Sirius coldly.“Every time you show up pretending to be cleaning,you sneak something off to your room so we can’tthrow it out.”

“Kreacher would never move anything from its properplace in Master’s house,” said the elf, then mutteredvery fast, “Mistress would never forgive Kreacher ifthe tapestry was thrown out, seven centuries it’s beenin the family, Kreacher must save it, Kreacher will notlet Master and the blood traitors and the bratsdestroy it —”

“I thought it might be that,” said Sirius, casting adisdainful look at the opposite wall. “She’ll have putanother Permanent Sticking Charm on the back of it,

I don’t doubt, but if I can get rid of it I certainly will.Now go away, Kreacher.”

It seemed that Kreacher did not dare disobey a directorder; nevertheless, the look he gave Sirius as heshuffled out past him was redolent of deepest loathingand he muttered all the way out of the room.

Page | 142Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“— comes back from Azkaban ordering Kreacheraround, oh my poor Mistress, what would she say ifshe saw the house now, scum living in it, hertreasures thrown out, she swore he was no son ofhers and he’s back, they say he’s a murderer too —”

“Keep muttering and I will be a murderer!” said Siriusirritably, and he slammed the door shut on the elf.

“Sirius, he’s not right in the head,” said Hermionepleadingly, “I don’t think he realizes we can hearhim.”

“He’s been alone too long,” said Sirius, “taking madorders from my mother’s portrait and talking tohimself, but he was always a foul little —”

“If you just set him free,” said Hermione hopefully,“maybe —”

“We can’t set him free, he knows too much about theOrder,” said Sirius curtly. “And anyway, the shockwould kill him. You suggest to him that he leaves thishouse, see how he takes it.”

Sirius walked across the room, where the tapestryKreacher had been trying to protect hung the lengthof the wall. Harry and the others followed.

The tapestry looked immensely old; it was faded andlooked as though doxies had gnawed it in places;nevertheless, the golden thread with which it wasembroidered still glinted brightly enough to showthem a sprawling family tree dating back (as far asHarry could tell) to the Middle Ages. Large words atthe very top of the tapestry read:

THE NOBLE AND MOST ANCIENT HOUSE OF BLACK

Page | 143Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“TOUJOURS PUR”

“You’re not on here!” said Harry, after scanning thebottom of the tree.

“I used to be there,” said Sirius, pointing at a small,round, charred hole in the tapestry, rather like acigarette burn. “My sweet old mother blasted me offafter I ran away from home — Kreacher’s quite fond ofmuttering the story under his breath.”

“You ran away from home?”

“When I was about sixteen,” said Sirius. “I’d hadenough.”

“Where did you go?” asked Harry, staring at him.

“Your dad’s place,” said Sirius. “Your grandparentswere really good about it; they sort of adopted me as asecond son. Yeah, I camped out at your dad’s duringthe school holidays, and then when I was seventeen Igot a place of my own, my Uncle Alphard had left mea decent bit of gold — he’s been wiped off here too,that’s probably why — anyway, after that I lookedafter myself. I was always welcome at Mr. and Mrs.Potter’s for Sunday lunch, though.”

“But ... why did you ... ?”

“Leave?” Sirius smiled bitterly and ran a handthrough his long, unkempt hair. “Because I hated thewhole lot of them: my parents, with their pure-bloodmania, convinced that to be a Black made youpractically royal ... my idiot brother, soft enough tobelieve them ... that’s him.”

Page | 144Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Sirius jabbed a finger at the very bottom of the tree,at the name REGULUS BLACK. A date of death (somefifteen years previously) followed the date of birth.

“He was younger than me,” said Sirius, “and a muchbetter son, as I was constantly reminded.”

“But he died,” said Harry.

“Yeah,” said Sirius. “Stupid idiot ... he joined theDeath Eaters.”

“You’re kidding!”

“Come on, Harry, haven’t you seen enough of thishouse to tell what kind of wizards my family were?”said Sirius testily.

“Were — were your parents Death Eaters as well?”

“No, no, but believe me, they thought Voldemort hadthe right idea, they were all for the purification of theWizarding race, getting rid of Muggle-borns andhaving purebloods in charge. They weren’t aloneeither, there were quite a few people, beforeVoldemort showed his true colors, who thought hehad the right idea about things... They got cold feetwhen they saw what he was prepared to do to getpower, though. But I bet my parents thought Reguluswas a right little hero for joining up at first.”

“Was he killed by an Auror?” Harry asked tentatively.

“Oh no,” said Sirius. “No, he was murdered byVoldemort. Or on Voldemort’s orders, more likely, Idoubt Regulus was ever important enough to be killedby Voldemort in person. From what I found out afterhe died, he got in so far, then panicked about what hewas being asked to do and tried to back out. Well, youPage | 145Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

don’t just hand in your resignation to Voldemort. It’sa lifetime of service or death.”

“Lunch,” said Mrs. Weasley’s voice.

She was holding her wand high in front of her,balancing a huge tray loaded with sandwiches andcake on its tip. She was very red in the face and stilllooked angry. The others moved over to her, eager forsome food, but Harry remained with Sirius, who hadbent closer to the tapestry.

“I haven’t looked at this for years. There’s PhineasNigellus ... my great-great-grandfather, see? Leastpopular headmaster Hogwarts ever had ... andAraminta Meliflua ... cousin of my mother’s ... tried toforce through a Ministry Bill to make Muggle-huntinglegal ... and dear Aunt Elladora ... she started thefamily tradition of beheading house-elves when theygot too old to carry tea trays ... of course, anytime thefamily produced someone halfway decent they weredisowned. I see Tonks isn’t on here. Maybe that’s whyKreacher won’t take orders from her — he’s supposedto do whatever anyone in the family asks him...”

“You and Tonks are related?” Harry asked, surprised.

“Oh yeah, her mother, Andromeda, was my favoritecousin,” said Sirius, examining the tapestry carefully.“No, Andromeda’s not on here either, look —”

He pointed to another small round burn markbetween two names, Bellatrix and Narcissa.

“Andromeda’s sisters are still here because they madelovely, respectable pure-blood marriages, butAndromeda married a Muggle-born, Ted Tonks, so —”

Page | 146Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Sirius mimed blasting the tapestry with a wand andlaughed sourly. Harry, however, did not laugh; he wastoo busy staring at the names to the right ofAndromeda’s burn mark. A double line of goldembroidery linked Narcissa Black with Lucius Malfoy,and a single vertical gold line from their names led tothe name Draco.

“You’re related to the Malfoys!”

“The pure-blood families are all interrelated,” saidSirius. “If you’re only going to let your sons anddaughters marry purebloods your choice is verylimited, there are hardly any of us left. Molly and I arecousins by marriage and Arthur’s something like mysecond cousin once removed. But there’s no pointlooking for them on here — if ever a family was abunch of blood traitors it’s the Weasleys.”

But Harry was now looking at the name to the left ofAndromeda’s burn: Bellatrix Black, which wasconnected by a double line to Rodolphus Lestrange.

“Lestrange ...” Harry said aloud. The name hadstirred something in his memory; he knew it fromsomewhere, but for a moment he couldn’t thinkwhere, though it gave him an odd, creeping sensationin the pit of his stomach.

“They’re in Azkaban,” said Sirius shortly.

Harry looked at him curiously.

“Bellatrix and her husband Rodolphus came in withBarty Crouch, Junior,” said Sirius in the samebrusque voice. “Rodolphus’s brother, Rabastan, waswith them too.”

Page | 147Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

And Harry remembered: He had seen BellatrixLestrange inside Dumbledore’s Pensieve, the strangedevice in which thoughts and memories could bestored: a tall dark woman with heavy-lidded eyes,who had stood at her trial and proclaimed hercontinuing allegiance to Lord Voldemort, her pridethat she had tried to find him after his downfall andher conviction that she would one day be rewardedfor her loyalty.

“You never said she was your —”

“Does it matter if she’s my cousin?” snapped Sirius.“As far as I’m concerned, they’re not my family. She’scertainly not my family. I haven’t seen her since I wasyour age, unless you count a glimpse of her coming into Azkaban. D’you think I’m proud of having relativeslike her?”

“Sorry,” said Harry quickly, “I didn’t mean — I wasjust surprised, that’s all —”

“It doesn’t matter, don’t apologize,” Sirius mumbled atonce. He turned away from the tapestry, his handsdeep in his pockets. “I don’t like being back here,” hesaid, staring across the drawing room. “I neverthought I’d be stuck in this house again.”

Harry understood completely. He knew how he wouldfeel if forced, when he was grown up and thought hewas free of the place forever, to return and live atnumber four, Privet Drive.

“It’s ideal for headquarters, of course,” Sirius said.

“My father put every security measure known toWizard-kind on it when he lived here. It’s Unplottable,so Muggles could never come and call — as if they’dhave wanted to — and now Dumbledore’s added hisprotection, you’d be hard put to find a safer housePage | 148Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

anywhere. Dumbledore’s Secret-Keeper for the Order,you know — nobody can find headquarters unless hetells them personally where it is — that note Moodyshowed you last night, that was from Dumbledore...”Sirius gave a short, barklike laugh. “If my parentscould see the use it was being put to now ... well, mymother’s portrait should give you some idea...”

He scowled for a moment, then sighed.

“I wouldn’t mind if I could just get out occasionallyand do something useful. I’ve asked Dumbledorewhether I can escort you to your hearing — asSnuffles, obviously — so I can give you a bit of moralsupport, what d’you think?”

Harry felt as though his stomach had sunk throughthe dusty carpet. He had not thought about thehearing once since dinner the previous evening; in theexcitement of being back with the people he likedbest, of hearing everything that was going on, it hadcompletely flown his mind. At Sirius’s words,however, the crushing sense of dread returned tohim. He stared at Hermione and the Weasleys, alltucking into their sandwiches, and thought how hewould feel if they went back to Hogwarts without him.

“Don’t worry,” Sirius said. Harry looked up andrealized that Sirius had been watching him. “I’m surethey’re going to clear you, there’s definitely somethingin the International Statute of Secrecy about beingallowed to use magic to save your own life.”

“But if they do expel me,” said Harry, quietly, “can Icome back here and live with you?”

Sirius smiled sadly.

“We’ll see.”

Page | 149Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I’d feel a lot better about the hearing if I knew I didn’thave to go back to the Dursleys,” Harry pressed him.

“They must be bad if you prefer this place,” saidSirius gloomily.

“Hurry up, you two, or there won’t be any food left,”Mrs. Weasley called.

Sirius heaved another great sigh, cast a dark look atthe tapestry, and he and Harry went to join theothers.

Harry tried his best not to think about the hearingwhile they emptied the glass cabinets that afternoon.Fortunately for him, it was a job that required a lot ofconcentration, as many of the objects in there seemedvery reluctant to leave their dusty shelves. Siriussustained a bad bite from a silver snuffbox; withinseconds, his bitten hand had developed anunpleasant crusty covering like a tough brown glove.

“It’s okay,” he said, examining the hand with interestbefore tapping it lightly with his wand and restoringits skin to normal, “must be Wartcap powder inthere.”

He threw the box aside into the sack where they weredepositing the debris from the cabinets; Harry sawGeorge wrap his own hand carefully in a clothmoments later and sneak the box into his alreadydoxy-filled pocket.

They found an unpleasant-looking silver instrument,something like a many-legged pair of tweezers, whichscuttled up Harry’s arm like a spider when he pickedit up, and attempted to puncture his skin; Siriusseized it and smashed it with a heavy book entitledNature’s Nobility: A Wizarding Genealogy. There was aPage | 150Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

musical box that emitted a faintly sinister, tinklingtune when wound, and they all found themselvesbecoming curiously weak and sleepy until Ginny hadthe sense to slam the lid shut; also a heavy locketthat none of them could open, a number of ancientseals and, in a dusty box, an Order of Merlin, FirstClass, that had been awarded to Sirius’s grandfatherfor “Services to the Ministry.”

“It means he gave them a load of gold,” said Siriuscontemptuously, throwing the medal into the rubbishsack.

Several times, Kreacher sidled into the room andattempted to smuggle things away under hisloincloth, muttering horrible curses every time theycaught him at it. When Sirius wrested a large goldenring bearing the Black crest from his grip Kreacheractually burst into furious tears and left the roomsobbing under his breath and calling Sirius namesHarry had never heard before.

“It was my father’s,” said Sirius, throwing the ringinto the sack. “Kreacher wasn’t quite as devoted tohim as to my mother, but I still caught him snogginga pair of my father’s old trousers last week.”

Mrs. Weasley kept them all working very hard overthe next few days. The drawing room took three daysto decontaminate; finally the only undesirable thingsleft in it were the tapestry of the Black family tree,which resisted all their attempts to remove it from thewall, and the rattling writing desk; Moody had notdropped by headquarters yet, so they could not besure what was inside it.

They moved from the drawing room to a dining roomon the ground floor where they found spiders large assaucers lurking in the dresser (Ron left the room

Page | 151Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

hurriedly to make a cup of tea and did not return foran hour and a half). The china, which bore the Blackcrest and motto, was all thrown unceremoniously intoa sack by Sirius, and the same fate met a set of oldphotographs in tarnished silver frames, all of whoseoccupants squealed shrilly as the glass covering themsmashed.

Snape might refer to their work as “cleaning,” but inHarry’s opinion they were really waging war on thehouse, which was putting up a very good fight, aidedand abetted by Kreacher. The house-elf keptappearing wherever they were congregated, hismuttering becoming more and more offensive as heattempted to remove anything he could from therubbish sacks. Sirius went as far as to threaten himwith clothes, but Kreacher fixed him with a waterystare and said, “Master must do as Master wishes,”before turning away and muttering very loudly, “butMaster will not turn Kreacher away, no, becauseKreacher knows what they are up to, oh yes, he isplotting against the Dark Lord, yes, with theseMudbloods and traitors and scum...”

At which Sirius, ignoring Hermione’s protests, seizedKreacher by the back of his loincloth and threw himbodily from the room.

The doorbell rang several times a day, which was thecue for Sirius’s mother to start shrieking again, andfor Harry and the others to attempt to eavesdrop onthe visitor, though they gleaned very little from thebrief glimpses and snatches of conversation they wereable to sneak before Mrs. Weasley recalled them totheir tasks. Snape flitted in and out of the houseseveral times more, though to Harry’s relief they nevercame face-to-face; he also caught sight of hisTransfiguration teacher, Professor McGonagall,

Page | 152Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

looking very odd in a Muggle dress and coat, thoughshe also seemed too busy to linger.

Sometimes, however, the visitors stayed to help;

Tonks joined them for a memorable afternoon inwhich they found a murderous old ghoul lurking inan upstairs toilet, and Lupin, who was staying in thehouse with Sirius but who left it for long periods to domysterious work for the Order, helped them repair agrandfather clock that had developed the unpleasanthabit of shooting heavy bolts at passersby.Mundungus redeemed himself slightly in Mrs.Weasley’s eyes by rescuing Ron from an ancient set ofpurple robes that had tried to strangle him when heremoved them from their wardrobe.

Despite the fact that he was still sleeping badly, stillhaving dreams about corridors and locked doors thatmade his scar prickle, Harry was managing to havefun for the first time all summer. As long as he wasbusy he was happy; when the action abated, however,whenever he dropped his guard, or lay exhausted inbed watching blurred shadows move across theceiling, the thought of the looming Ministry hearingreturned to him. Fear jabbed at his insides likeneedles as he wondered what was going to happen tohim if he was expelled. The idea was so terrible thathe did not dare voice it aloud, not even to Ron andHermione, who, though he often saw them whisperingtogether and casting anxious looks in his direction,followed his lead in not mentioning it. Sometimes hecould not prevent his imagination showing him afaceless Ministry official who was snapping his wandin two and ordering him back to the Dursleys’ ... buthe would not go. He was determined on that. Hewould come back here to Grimmauld Place and livewith Sirius.

Page | 153Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He felt as though a brick had dropped into hisstomach when Mrs. Weasley turned to him duringdinner on Wednesday evening and said quietly, “I’veironed your best clothes for tomorrow morning,

Harry, and I want you to wash your hair tonight too.

A good first impression can work wonders.”

Ron, Hermione, Fred, George, and Ginny all stoppedtalking and looked over at him. Harry nodded andtried to keep eating his chops, but his mouth hadbecome so dry he could not chew.

“How am I getting there?” he asked Mrs. Weasley,trying to sound unconcerned.

“Arthur’s taking you to work with him,” said Mrs.Weasley gently.

Mr. Weasley smiled encouragingly at Harry across thetable.

“You can wait in my office until it’s time for thehearing,” he said.

Harry looked over at Sirius, but before he could askthe question, Mrs. Weasley had answered it.

“Professor Dumbledore doesn’t think it’s a good ideafor Sirius to go with you, and I must say I —”

“— think he’s quite right,” said Sirius throughclenched teeth.

Mrs. Weasley pursed her lips.

“When did Dumbledore tell you that?” Harry said,staring at Sirius.

Page | 154Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“He came last night, when you were in bed,” said Mr.Weasley.

Sirius stabbed moodily at a potato with his fork.Harry dropped his own eyes to his plate. The thoughtthat Dumbledore had been in the house on the eve ofhis hearing and not asked to see him made him feel,if that were possible, even worse.

Page | 155Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC

Harry awoke at half-past five the next morning asabruptly and completely as if somebody had yelled inhis ear. For a few moments he lay immobile as theprospect of the hearing filled every tiny particle of hisbrain, then, unable to bear it, he leapt out of bed andput on his glasses. Mrs. Weasley had laid out hisfreshly laundered jeans and T-shirt at the foot of hisbed. Harry scrambled into them. The blank picture onthe wall sniggered again.

Ron was lying sprawled on his back with his mouthwide open, fast asleep. He did not stir as Harrycrossed the room, stepped out onto the landing, andclosed the door softly behind him. Trying not to thinkof the next time he would see Ron, when they mightno longer be fellow students at Hogwarts, Harrywalked quietly down the stairs, past the heads ofKreacher’s ancestors, and into the kitchen.

He had expected it to be empty, but it was not. Whenhe reached the door he heard the soft rumble ofvoices on the other side and when he pushed it open

Page | 156Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

he saw Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, Sirius, Lupin, andTonks sitting there almost as though they werewaiting for him. All were fully dressed except Mrs.Weasley, who was wearing a quilted, purple dressinggown. She leapt to her feet the moment he entered.

“Breakfast,” she said as she pulled out her wand andhurried over to the fire.

“M-m-morning, Harry,” yawned Tonks. Her hair wasblonde and curly this morning. “Sleep all right?”

“Yeah,” said Harry.

“I’ve b-b-been up all night,” she said, with anothershuddering yawn. “Come and sit down...”

She drew out a chair, knocking over the one beside itin the process.

“What do you want, Harry?” Mrs. Weasley called.“Porridge? Muffins? Kippers? Bacon and eggs?

Toast?”

“Just — just toast, thanks,” said Harry.

Lupin glanced at Harry, then said to Tonks, “Whatwere you saying about Scrimgeour?”

“Oh ... yeah ... well, we need to be a bit more careful,he’s been asking Kingsley and me funny questions...”

Harry felt vaguely grateful that he was not required tojoin in the conversation. His insides were squirming.Mrs. Weasley placed a couple of pieces of toast andmarmalade in front of him; he tried to eat, but it waslike chewing carpet. Mrs. Weasley sat down on hisother side and started fussing with his T-shirt,

Page | 157Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

tucking in the label and smoothing out creases acrossthe shoulders. He wished she wouldn’t.

"... and I’ll have to tell Dumbledore I can’t do nightduty tomorrow, I’m just t-t-too tired,” Tonks finished,yawning hugely again.

“I’ll cover for you,” said Mr. Weasley. “I’m okay, I’vegot a report to finish anyway...”

Mr. Weasley was not wearing wizard’s robes but apair of pinstriped trousers and an old bomber jacket.He turned from Tonks to Harry.

“How are you feeling?”

Harry shrugged.

“It’ll all be over soon,” Mr. Weasley said bracingly. “Ina few hours’ time you’ll be cleared.”

Harry said nothing.

“The hearing’s on my floor, in Amelia Bones’s office.She’s Head of the Department of Magical LawEnforcement and she’s the one who’ll be questioningyou.”

“Amelia Bones is okay, Harry,” said Tonks earnestly.“She’s fair, she’ll hear you out.”

Harry nodded, still unable to think of anything to say.

“Don’t lose your temper,” said Sirius abruptly. “Bepolite and stick to the facts.”

Harry nodded again.

Page | 158Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“The law’s on your side,” said Lupin quietly. “Evenunderage wizards are allowed to use magic in life-threatening situations.”

Something very cold trickled down the back of Harry’sneck; for a moment he thought someone was puttinga Disillusionment Charm on him again, then herealized that Mrs. Weasley was attacking his hair witha wet comb. She pressed hard on the top of his head.

“Doesn’t it ever lie flat?” she said desperately.

Harry shook his head.

Mr. Weasley checked his watch and looked up atHarry.

“I think we’ll go now,” he said. “We’re a bit early, but Ithink you’ll be better off there than hanging aroundhere.”

“Okay,” said Harry automatically, dropping his toastand getting to his feet.

“You’ll be all right, Harry,” said Tonks, patting him onthe arm.

“Good luck,” said Lupin. “I’m sure it will be fine.”

“And if it’s not,” said Sirius grimly, “I’ll see to AmeliaBones for you...”

Harry smiled weakly. Mrs. Weasley hugged him.

“We’ve all got our fingers crossed,” she said.

“Right,” said Harry. “Well ... see you later then.”

Page | 159Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He followed Mr. Weasley upstairs and along the hall.He could hear Sirius’s mother grunting in her sleepbehind her curtains. Mr. Weasley unbolted the doorand they stepped out into the cold, gray dawn.

“You don’t normally walk to work, do you?” Harryasked him, as they set off briskly around the square.

“No, I usually Apparate,” said Mr. Weasley, “butobviously you can’t, and I think it’s best we arrive in athoroughly non-magical fashion ... makes a betterimpression, given what you’re being disciplined for...”

Mr. Weasley kept his hand inside his jacket as theywalked. Harry knew it was clenched around his wand.The run-down streets were almost deserted, but whenthey arrived at the miserable little Undergroundstation they found it already full of early morningcommuters. As ever when he found himself in closeproximity to Muggles going about their daily business,Mr. Weasley was hard put to contain his enthusiasm.

“Simply fabulous,” he whispered, indicating theautomatic ticket machines. “Wonderfully ingenious.”

“They’re out of order,” said Harry, pointing at thesign.

“Yes, but even so ...” said Mr. Weasley, beamingfondly at them.

They bought their tickets instead from a sleepy-looking guard (Harry handled the transaction, as Mr.Weasley was not very good with Muggle money) andfive minutes later they were boarding an Undergroundtrain that rattled them off toward the center ofLondon. Mr. Weasley kept anxiously checking andrechecking the Underground map above the windows.

Page | 160Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Four stops, Harry ... three stops left now ... twostops to go, Harry ...”

They got off at a station in the very heart of London,swept from the train in a tide of besuited men andwomen carrying briefcases. Up the escalator theywent, through the ticket barrier (Mr. Weasleydelighted with the way the stile swallowed his ticket),and emerged onto a broad street lined with imposing-looking buildings, already full of traffic.

“Where are we?” said Mr. Weasley blankly, and forone heart-stopping moment Harry thought they hadgotten off at the wrong station despite Mr. Weasley’scontinual references to the map; but a second later hesaid, “Ah yes ... this way, Harry,” and led him down aside road.

“Sorry,” he said, “but I never come by train and it alllooks rather different from a Muggle perspective. As amatter of fact I’ve never even used the visitor’sentrance before.”

The farther they walked, the smaller and lessimposing the buildings became, until finally theyreached a street that contained several rathershabby-looking offices, a pub, and an overflowingdumpster. Harry had expected a rather moreimpressive location for the Ministry of Magic.

“Here we are,” said Mr. Weasley brightly, pointing atan old red telephone box, which was missing severalpanes of glass and stood before a heavily graffittiedwall. “After you, Harry.”

He opened the telephone box door.

Harry stepped inside, wondering what on earth thiswas about. Mr. Weasley folded himself in beside Harry

Page | 161Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and closed the door. It was a tight fit; Harry wasjammed against the telephone apparatus, which washanging crookedly from the wall as though a vandalhad tried to rip it off. Mr. Weasley reached past Harryfor the receiver.

“Mr. Weasley, I think this might be out of order too,”Harry said.

“No, no, I’m sure it’s fine,” said Mr. Weasley, holdingthe receiver above his head and peering at the dial.“Let’s see ... six ...” he dialed the number, “two ... four... and another four ... and another two ...”

As the dial whirred smoothly back into place, a coolfemale voice sounded inside the telephone box, notfrom the receiver in Mr. Weasley’s hand, but as loudlyand plainly as though an invisible woman werestanding right beside them.

“Welcome to the Ministry of Magic. Please state yourname and business.”

“Er ...” said Mr. Weasley, clearly uncertain whether heshould talk into the receiver or not; he compromisedby holding the mouthpiece to his ear, “ArthurWeasley, Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office, here toescort Harry Potter, who has been asked to attend adisciplinary hearing...”

“Thank you,” said the cool female voice. “Visitor,please take the badge and attach it to the front ofyour robes.”

There was a click and a rattle, and Harry sawsomething slide out of the metal chute wherereturned coins usually appeared. He picked it up: Itwas a square silver badge with Harry Potter,

Page | 162Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Disciplinary Hearing on it. He pinned it to the front ofhis T-shirt as the female voice spoke again.

“Visitor to the Ministry, you are required to submit toa search and present your wand for registration at thesecurity desk, which is located at the far end of theAtrium.”

The floor of the telephone box shuddered. They weresinking slowly into the ground. Harry watchedapprehensively as the pavement rose up past theglass windows of the telephone box until darknessclosed over their heads. Then he could see nothing atall; he could only hear a dull grinding noise as thetelephone box made its way down through the earth.After about a minute, though it felt much longer toHarry, a chink of golden light illuminated his feetand, widening, rose up his body, until it hit him inthe face and he had to blink to stop his eyes fromwatering.

“The Ministry of Magic wishes you a pleasant day,”said the woman’s voice.

The door of the telephone box sprang open and Mr.Weasley stepped out of it, followed by Harry, whosemouth had fallen open.

They were standing at one end of a very long andsplendid hall with a highly polished, dark wood floor.The peacock-blue ceiling was inlaid with gleaminggolden symbols that were continually moving andchanging like some enormous heavenly notice board.The walls on each side were paneled in shiny darkwood and had many gilded fireplaces set into them.Every few seconds a witch or wizard would emergefrom one of the left-hand fireplaces with a softwhoosh; on the right-hand side, short queues of

Page | 163Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

wizards were forming before each fireplace, waiting todepart.

Halfway down the hall was a fountain. A group ofgolden statues, larger than life-size, stood in themiddle of a circular pool. Tallest of them all was anoble-looking wizard with his wand pointing straightup in the air. Grouped around him were a beautifulwitch, a centaur, a goblin, and a house-elf. The lastthree were all looking adoringly up at the witch andwizard. Glittering jets of water were flying from theends of the two wands, the point of the centaur’sarrow, the tip of the goblin’s hat, and each of thehouse-elf’s ears, so that the tinkling hiss of fallingwater was added to the pops and cracks ofApparators and the clatter of footsteps as hundreds ofwitches and wizards, most of whom were wearingglum, early-morning looks, strode toward a set ofgolden gates at the far end of the hall.

“This way,” said Mr. Weasley.

They joined the throng, wending their way betweenthe Ministry workers, some of whom were carryingtottering piles of parchment, others batteredbriefcases, still others reading the Daily Prophet asthey walked. As they passed the fountain Harry sawsilver Sickles and bronze Knuts glinting up at himfrom the bottom of the pool. A small, smudged signbeside it read:

All proceeds from the Fountain of Magical Brethren willbe given to

St. Mungo’s Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries

If I’m not expelled from Hogwarts, I’ll put in tenGalleons, Harry found himself thinking desperately.

Page | 164Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Over here, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, and theystepped out of the stream of Ministry employeesheading for the golden gates, toward a desk on theleft, over which hung a sign saying SECURITY. Abadly shaven wizard in peacock-blue robes looked upas they approached and put down his Daily Prophet.

“I’m escorting a visitor,” said Mr. Weasley, gesturingtoward Harry.

“Step over here,” said the wizard in a bored voice.

Harry walked closer to him and the wizard held up along golden rod, thin and flexible as a car aerial, andpassed it up and down Harry’s front and back.

“Wand,” grunted the security wizard at Harry, puttingdown the golden instrument and holding out hishand.

Harry produced his wand. The wizard dropped it ontoa strange brass instrument, which looked somethinglike a set of scales with only one dish. It began tovibrate. A narrow strip of parchment came speedingout of a slit in the base. The wizard tore this off andread the writing upon it.

“Eleven inches, phoenix-feather core, been in use fouryears. That correct?”

“Yes,” said Harry nervously.

“I keep this,” said the wizard, impaling the slip ofparchment on a small brass spike. “You get thisback,” he added, thrusting the wand at Harry.

“Thank you.”

“Hang on...” said the wizard slowly.

Page | 165Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

His eyes had darted from the silver visitor’s badge onHarry’s chest to his forehead.

“Thank you, Eric,” said Mr. Weasley firmly, andgrasping Harry by the shoulder, he steered him awayfrom the desk and back into the stream of wizardsand witches walking through the golden gates.

Jostled slightly by the crowd, Harry followed Mr.Weasley through the gates into the smaller hallbeyond, where at least twenty lifts stood behindwrought golden grilles. Harry and Mr. Weasley joinedthe crowd around one of them. A big, bearded wizardholding a large cardboard box stood nearby. The boxwas emitting rasping noises.

“All right, Arthur?” said the wizard, nodding at Mr.Weasley.

“What’ve you got there, Bob?” asked Mr. Weasley,looking at the box.

“We’re not sure,” said the wizard seriously. “Wethought it was a bog-standard chicken until it startedbreathing fire. Looks like a serious breach of the Banon Experimental Breeding to me.”

With a great jangling and clattering a lift descended infront of them; the golden grille slid back and Harryand Mr. Weasley moved inside it with the rest of thecrowd. Harry found himself jammed against the backwall of the lift. Several witches and wizards werelooking at him curiously; he stared at his feet to avoidcatching anyone’s eye, flattening his fringe as he didso. The grilles slid shut with a crash and the liftascended slowly, chains rattling all the while, whilethe same cool female voice Harry had heard in thetelephone box rang out again.

Page | 166Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Level seven, Department of Magical Games andSports, incorporating the British and Irish QuidditchLeague Headquarters, Official Gobstones Club, andLudicrous Patents Office.”

The lift doors opened; Harry glimpsed an untidy-looking corridor, with various posters of Quidditchteams tacked lopsidedly on the walls; one of thewizards in the lift, who was carrying an armful ofbroomsticks, extricated himself with difficulty anddisappeared down the corridor. The doors closed, thelift juddered upward again, and the woman’s voicesaid, “Level six, Department of Magical Transport,incorporating the Floo Network Authority, BroomRegulatory Control, Portkey Office, and ApparationTest Center.”

Once again the lift doors opened and four or fivewitches and wizards got out; at the same time, severalpaper airplanes swooped into the lift. Harry stared upat them as they flapped idly around above his head;they were a pale violet color and he could seeMINISTRY OF MAGIC stamped along the edges oftheir wings.

“Just Interdepartmental memos,” Mr. Weasleymuttered to him. “We used to use owls, but the messwas unbelievable ... droppings all over the desks ...”

As they clattered upward again, the memos flappedaround the swaying lamp in the lift’s ceiling.

“Level five, Department of International MagicalCooperation, incorporating the International MagicalTrading Standards Body, the International MagicalOffice of Law, and the International Confederation ofWizards, British Seats.”

Page | 167Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

When the doors opened, two of the memos zoomedout with a few more witches and wizards, but severalmore memos zoomed in, so that the light from thelamp in the ceiling flickered and flashed as theydarted around it.

“Level four, Department for the Regulation andControl of Magical Creatures, incorporating Beast,Being, and Spirit Divisions, Goblin Liaison Office, andPest Advisory Bureau.”

“ ’S’cuse,” said the wizard carrying the fire-breathingchicken and he left the lift pursued by a little flock ofmemos. The doors clanged shut yet again.

“Level three, Department of Magical Accidents andCatastrophes, including the Accidental MagicReversal Squad, Obliviator Headquarters, andMuggle-Worthy Excuse Committee.”

Everybody left the lift on this floor except Mr.

Weasley, Harry, and a witch who was reading anextremely long piece of parchment that was trailingon the ground. The remaining memos continued tosoar around the lamp as the lift juddered upwardagain, and then the doors opened and the voice said,“Level two, Department of Magical Law Enforcement,including the Improper Use of Magic Office, AurorHeadquarters, and Wizengamot AdministrationServices.”

“This is us, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, and theyfollowed the witch out of the lift into a corridor linedwith doors. “My office is on the other side of the floor.”

“Mr. Weasley,” said Harry, as they passed a windowthrough which sunlight was streaming, “aren’t weunderground?”

Page | 168Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, we are,” said Mr. Weasley, “those are enchantedwindows; Magical Maintenance decide what weatherwe’re getting every day. We had two months ofhurricanes last time they were angling for a payraise... Just round here, Harry.”

They turned a corner, walked through a pair of heavyoak doors, and emerged in a cluttered, open areadivided into cubicles, which were buzzing with talkand laughter. Memos were zooming in and out ofcubicles like miniature rockets. A lopsided sign on thenearest cubicle read AUROR HEADQUARTERS.

Harry looked surreptitiously through the doorways asthey passed. The Aurors had covered their cubiclewalls with everything from pictures of wanted wizardsand photographs of their families, to posters of theirfavorite Quidditch teams and articles from the DailyProphet A scarlet-robed man with a ponytail longerthan Bill’s was sitting with his boots up on his desk,dictating a report to his quill. A little farther along, awitch with a patch over her eye was talking over thetop of her cubicle wall to Kingsley Shacklebolt.

“Morning, Weasley,” said Kingsley carelessly, as theydrew nearer. “I’ve been wanting a word with you, haveyou got a second?”

“Yes, if it really is a second,” said Mr. Weasley, “I’m inrather a hurry.”

They were talking to each other as though they hardlyknew each other, and when Harry opened his mouthto say hello to Kingsley, Mr. Weasley stood on hisfoot. They followed Kingsley along the row and intothe very last cubicle.

Harry received a slight shock; Sirius’s face wasblinking down at him from every direction. Newspaper

Page | 169Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

cuttings and old photographs — even the one ofSirius being best man at the Potters’ wedding —papered the walls. The only Sirius-free space was amap of the world in which little red pins were glowinglike jewels.

“Here,” said Kingsley brusquely to Mr. Weasley,shoving a sheaf of parchment into his hand, “I needas much information as possible on flying Mugglevehicles sighted in the last twelve months. We’vereceived information that Black might still be usinghis old motorcycle.”

Kingsley tipped Harry an enormous wink and added,in a whisper, “Give him the magazine, he might find itinteresting.” Then he said in normal tones, “And don’ttake too long, Weasley, the delay on that firelegsreport held our investigation up for a month.”

“If you had read my report you would know that theterm is ‘firearms,’ ” said Mr. Weasley coolly. “And I’mafraid you’ll have to wait for information onmotorcycles, we’re extremely busy at the moment.” Hedropped his voice and said, “If you can get awaybefore seven, Molly’s making meatballs.”

He beckoned to Harry and led him out of Kingsley’scubicle, through a second set of oak doors, intoanother passage, turned left, marched along anothercorridor, turned right into a dimly lit and distinctlyshabby corridor, and finally reached a dead end,where a door on the left stood ajar, revealing a broomcupboard, and a door on the right bore a tarnishedbrass plaque reading MISUSE OF MUGGLEARTIFACTS.

Mr. Weasley’s dingy office seemed to be slightlysmaller than the broom cupboard. Two desks hadbeen crammed inside it and there was barely room to

Page | 170Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

move around them because of all the overflowingfiling cabinets lining the walls, on top of which weretottering piles of files. The little wall space availablebore witness to Mr. Weasley’s obsessions; there wereseveral posters of cars, including one of a dismantledengine, two illustrations of postboxes he seemed tohave cut out of Muggle children’s books, and adiagram showing how to wire a plug.

Sitting on top of Mr. Weasley’s overflowing in-tray wasan old toaster that was hiccuping in a disconsolateway and a pair of empty leather gloves that weretwiddling their thumbs. A photograph of the Weasleyfamily stood beside the in-tray. Harry noticed thatPercy appeared to have walked out of it.

“We haven’t got a window,” said Mr. Weasleyapologetically, taking off his bomber jacket andplacing it on the back of his chair. “We’ve asked, butthey don’t seem to think we need one. Have a seat,Harry, doesn’t look as if Perkins is in yet.”

Harry squeezed himself into the chair behindPerkins’s desk while Mr. Weasley rifled through thesheaf of parchment Kingsley Shacklebolt had givenhim.

“Ah,” he said, grinning, as he extracted a copy of amagazine entitled The Quibbler from its midst, “yes...” He flicked through it. “Yes, he’s right, I’m sureSirius will find that very amusing — oh dear, what’sthis now?”

A memo had just zoomed in through the open doorand fluttered to rest on top of the hiccuping toaster.Mr. Weasley unfolded it and read aloud, “ Thirdregurgitating public toilet reported in Bethnal Green,kindly investigate immediately. ’ This is gettingridiculous...”

Page | 171Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“A regurgitating toilet?”

“Anti-Muggle pranksters,” said Mr. Weasley, frowning.“We had two last week, one in Wimbledon, one inElephant and Castle. Muggles are pulling the flushand instead of everything disappearing — well, youcan imagine. The poor things keep calling in those —those pumbles, I think they’re called — you know, theones who mend pipes and things —”

“Plumbers?”

“— exactly, yes, but of course they’re flummoxed. Ionly hope we can catch whoever’s doing it.”

“Will it be Aurors who catch them?”

“Oh no, this is too trivial for Aurors, it’ll be theordinary Magical Law Enforcement Patrol — ah,

Harry, this is Perkins.”

A stooped, timid-looking old wizard with fluffy whitehair had just entered the room, panting.

“Oh Arthur!” he said desperately, without looking atHarry. “Thank goodness, I didn’t know what to do forthe best, whether to wait here for you or not, I’ve justsent an owl to your home but you’ve obviously missedit — an urgent message came ten minutes ago —”

“I know about the regurgitating toilet,” said Mr.Weasley.

“No, no, it’s not the toilet, it’s the Potter boy’s hearing— they’ve changed the time and venue — it starts ateight o’clock now and it’s down in old Courtroom Ten

“Down in old — but they told me — Merlin’s beard —”

Page | 172Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Mr. Weasley looked at his watch, let out a yelp, andleapt from his chair.

“Quick, Harry, we should have been there fiveminutes ago!”

Perkins flattened himself against the filing cabinets asMr. Weasley left the office at a run, Harry on hisheels.

“Why have they changed the time?” Harry saidbreathlessly as they hurtled past the Auror cubicles;people poked out their heads and stared as theystreaked past. Harry felt as though he had left all hisinsides back at Perkins’s desk.

“I’ve no idea, but thank goodness we got here so early,if you’d missed it it would have been catastrophic!”

Mr. Weasley skidded to a halt beside the lifts andjabbed impatiently at the down button.

“Come ON!”

The lift clattered into view and they hurried inside.Every time it stopped Mr. Weasley cursed furiouslyand pummelled the number nine button.

“Those courtrooms haven’t been used in years,” saidMr. Weasley angrily. “I can’t think why they’re doing itdown there — unless — but no ...”

A plump witch carrying a smoking goblet entered thelift at that moment, and Mr. Weasley did notelaborate.

“The Atrium,” said the cool female voice and thegolden grilles slid open, showing Harry a distantglimpse of the golden statues in the fountain. The

Page | 173Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

plump witch got out and a sallow-skinned wizard witha very mournful face got in.

“Morning, Arthur,” he said in a sepulchral voice asthe lift began to descend. “Don’t often see you downhere...”

“Urgent business, Bode,” said Mr. Weasley, who wasbouncing on the balls of his feet and throwinganxious looks over at Harry.

“Ah, yes,” said Bode, surveying Harry unblinkingly.

“Of course.”

Harry barely had emotion to spare for Bode, but hisunfaltering gaze did not make him feel any morecomfortable.

“Department of Mysteries,” said the cool female voice,and left it at that.

“Quick, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley as the lift doorsrattled open, and they sped up a corridor that wasquite different from those above. The walls were bare;there were no windows and no doors apart from aplain black one set at the very end of the corridor.Harry expected them to go through it, but instead Mr.Weasley seized him by the arm and dragged him tothe left, where there was an opening leading to a flightof steps.

“Down here, down here,” panted Mr. Weasley, takingtwo steps at a time. “The lift doesn’t even come downthis far ... why they’re doing it there ...”

They reached the bottom of the steps and ran alongyet another corridor, which bore a great resemblanceto that which led to Snape’s dungeon at Hogwarts,with rough stone walls and torches in brackets. The

Page | 174Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

doors they passed here were heavy wooden ones withiron bolts and keyholes.

“Courtroom ... ten ... I think ... we’re nearly ... yes.”

Mr. Weasley stumbled to a halt outside a grimy darkdoor with an immense iron lock and slumped againstthe wall, clutching at a stitch in his chest.

“Go on,” he panted, pointing his thumb at the door.“Get in there.”

“Aren’t — aren’t you coming with — ?”

“No, no, I’m not allowed. Good luck!”

Harry’s heart was beating a violent tattoo against hisAdam’s apple. He swallowed hard, turned the heavyiron door handle, and stepped inside the courtroom.

Page | 175Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



THE HEARING

Harry gasped; he could not help himself. The largedungeon he had entered was horribly familiar. He hadnot only seen it before, he had been here before: Thiswas the place he had visited inside Dumbledore’sPensieve, the place where he had watched theLestranges sentenced to life imprisonment inAzkaban.

The walls were made of dark stone, dimly lit bytorches. Empty benches rose on either side of him,but ahead, in the highest benches of all, were manyshadowy figures. They had been talking in low voices,but as the heavy door swung closed behind Harry anominous silence fell.

A cold male voice rang across the courtroom.

“You’re late.”

“Sorry,” said Harry nervously. “I-I didn’t know thetime had changed.”

Page | 176Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“That is not the Wizengamot’s fault,” said the voice.“An owl was sent to you this morning. Take yourseat.”

Harry dropped his gaze to the chair in the center ofthe room, the arms of which were covered in chains.He had seen those chains spring to life and bindwhoever sat between them. His footsteps echoedloudly as he walked across the stone floor. When hesat gingerly on the edge of the chair the chainsclinked rather threateningly but did not bind him.Feeling rather sick he looked up at the people seatedat the bench above.

There were about fifty of them, all, as far as he couldsee, wearing plum-colored robes with an elaboratelyworked silver W on the left-hand side of the chest andall staring down their noses at him, some with veryaustere expressions, others looks of frank curiosity.

In the very middle of the front row sat CorneliusFudge, the Minister of Magic. Fudge was a portly manwho often sported a lime-green bowler hat, thoughtoday he had dispensed with it; he had dispensed toowith the indulgent smile he had once worn when hespoke to Harry. A broad, square-jawed witch withvery short gray hair sat on Fudge’s left; she wore amonocle and looked forbidding. On Fudge’s right wasanother witch, but she was sitting so far back on thebench that her face was in shadow.

“Very well,” said Fudge. “The accused being present— finally — let us begin. Are you ready?” he calleddown the row.

“Yes, sir,” said an eager voice Harry knew. Ron’sbrother Percy was sitting at the very end of the frontbench. Harry looked at Percy, expecting some sign ofrecognition from him, but none came. Percy’s eyes,

Page | 177Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

behind his horn-rimmed glasses, were fixed on hisparchment, a quill poised in his hand.

“Disciplinary hearing of the twelfth of August,” saidFudge in a ringing voice, and Percy began takingnotes at once, “into offenses committed under theDecree for the Reasonable Restriction of UnderageSorcery and the International Statute of Secrecy byHarry James Potter, resident at number four, PrivetDrive, Little Whinging, Surrey.

“Interrogators: Cornelius Oswald Fudge, Minister ofMagic; Amelia Susan Bones, Head of the Departmentof Magical Law Enforcement; Dolores Jane Umbridge,Senior Undersecretary to the Minister. Court Scribe,Percy Ignatius Weasley —”

“— Witness for the defense, Albus Percival WulfricBrian Dumbledore,” said a quiet voice from behindHarry, who turned his head so fast he cricked hisneck.

Dumbledore was striding serenely across the roomwearing long midnight-blue robes and a perfectlycalm expression. His long silver beard and hairgleamed in the torchlight as he drew level with Harryand looked up at Fudge through the half-moonspectacles that rested halfway down his very crookednose.

The members of the Wizengamot were muttering. Alleyes were now on Dumbledore. Some looked annoyed,others slightly frightened; two elderly witches in theback row, however, raised their hands and waved inwelcome.

A powerful emotion had risen in Harry’s chest at thesight of Dumbledore, a fortified, hopeful feeling ratherlike that which phoenix song gave him. He wanted to

Page | 178Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

catch Dumbledore’s eye, but Dumbledore was notlooking his way; he was continuing to look up at theobviously flustered Fudge.

“Ah,” said Fudge, who looked thoroughlydisconcerted. “Dumbledore. Yes. You — er — got our

— er — message that the time and — er — place ofthe hearing had been changed, then?”

“I must have missed it,” said Dumbledore cheerfully.“However, due to a lucky mistake I arrived at theMinistry three hours early, so no harm done.”

“Yes — well — I suppose well need another chair — I

— Weasley, could you — ?”

“Not to worry, not to worry,” said Dumbledorepleasantly; he took out his wand, gave it a little flick,and a squashy chintz armchair appeared out ofnowhere next to Harry. Dumbledore sat down, put thetips of his long fingers together, and looked at Fudgeover them with an expression of polite interest. TheWizengamot was still muttering and fidgetingrestlessly; only when Fudge spoke again did theysettle down.

“Yes,” said Fudge again, shuffling his notes. “Well,then. So. The charges. Yes.”

He extricated a piece of parchment from the pilebefore him, took a deep breath, and read, “Thecharges against the accused are as follows: That hedid knowingly, deliberately, and in full awareness ofthe illegality of his actions, having received a previouswritten warning from the Ministry of Magic on asimilar charge, produce a Patronus Charm in aMuggle-inhabited area, in the presence of a Muggle,on August the second at twenty-three minutes pastnine, which constitutes an offense under paragraph CPage | 179Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

of the Decree for the Reasonable Restriction ofUnderage Sorcery, 1875, and also under sectionthirteen of the International Confederation of Wizards’Statute of Secrecy.

“You are Harry James Potter, of number four, PrivetDrive, Little Whinging, Surrey?” Fudge said, glaring atHarry over the top of his parchment.

“Yes,” Harry said.

“You received an official warning from the Ministry forusing illegal magic three years ago, did you not?”

“Yes, but —”

“And yet you conjured a Patronus on the night of thesecond of August?” said Fudge.

“Yes,” said Harry, “but —”

“Knowing that you are not permitted to use magicoutside school while you are under the age ofseventeen?”

“Yes, but —”

“Knowing that you were in an area full of Muggles?”“Yes, but —”

“Fully aware that you were in close proximity to aMuggle at the time?

“Yes,” said Harry angrily, “but I only used it becausewe were —”

The witch with the monocle on Fudge’s left cut acrosshim in a booming voice.

Page | 180Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You produced a fully fledged Patronus?”

“Yes,” said Harry, “because —”

“A corporeal Patronus?”

“A — what?” said Harry.

“Your Patronus had a clearly defined form? I mean tosay, it was more than vapor or smoke?”

“Yes,” said Harry, feeling both impatient and slightlydesperate, “it’s a stag, it’s always a stag.”

“Always?” boomed Madam Bones. “You haveproduced a Patronus before now?”

“Yes” said Harry, “I’ve been doing it for over a year —

“And you are fifteen years old?”

“Yes, and —”

“You learned this at school?”

“Yes, Professor Lupin taught me in my third year,because of the —”

“Impressive,” said Madam Bones, staring down athim, “a true Patronus at that age ... very impressiveindeed.”

Some of the wizards and witches around her weremuttering again; a few nodded, but others werefrowning and shaking their heads.

“It’s not a question of how impressive the magic was,”said Fudge in a testy voice. “In fact, the more

Page | 181Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

impressive the worse it is, I would have thought, giventhat the boy did it in plain view of a Muggle!”

Those who had been frowning now murmured inagreement, but it was the sight of Percy’ssanctimonious little nod that goaded Harry intospeech.

“I did it because of the dementors!” he said loudly,before anyone could interrupt him again.

He had expected more muttering, but the silence thatfell seemed to be somehow denser than before.

“Dementors?” said Madam Bones after a moment,raising her thick eyebrows so that her monocle lookedin danger of falling out. “What do you mean, boy?”

“I mean there were two dementors down that alleywayand they went for me and my cousin!”

“Ah,” said Fudge again, smirking unpleasantly as helooked around at the Wizengamot, as though invitingthem to share the joke. “Yes. Yes, I thought we’d behearing something like this.”

“Dementors in Little Whinging?” Madam Bones saidin tones of great surprise. “I don’t understand —”

“Don’t you, Amelia?” said Fudge, still smirking. “Letme explain. He’s been thinking it through and decideddementors would make a very nice little cover story,very nice indeed. Muggles can’t see dementors, canthey, boy? Highly convenient, highly convenient ... soit’s just your word and no witnesses...”

“I’m not lying!” said Harry loudly, over anotheroutbreak of muttering from the court. “There were twoof them, coming from opposite ends of the alley,

Page | 182Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

everything went dark and cold and my cousin feltthem and ran for it —”

“Enough, enough!” said Fudge with a verysupercilious look on his face. “I’m sorry to interruptwhat I’m sure would have been a very well-rehearsedstory —”

Dumbledore cleared his throat. The Wizengamot fellsilent again.

“We do, in fact, have a witness to the presence ofdementors in that alleyway,” he said, “other thanDudley Dursley, I mean.”

Fudge’s plump face seemed to slacken, as thoughsomebody had let air out of it. He stared down atDumbledore for a moment or two, then, with theappearance of a man pulling himself back together,said, “We haven’t got time to listen to moretaradiddles, I’m afraid, Dumbledore. I want this dealtwith quickly —”

“I may be wrong,” said Dumbledore pleasantly, “but Iam sure that under the Wizengamot Charter ofRights, the accused has the right to present witnessesfor his or her case? Isn’t that the policy of theDepartment of Magical Law Enforcement, MadamBones?” he continued, addressing the witch in themonocle.

“True,” said Madam Bones. “Perfectly true.”

“Oh, very well, very well,” snapped Fudge. “Where isthis person?”

“I brought her with me,” said Dumbledore. “She’s justoutside the door. Should I — ?”

Page | 183Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No — Weasley, you go,” Fudge barked at Percy, whogot up at once, hurried down the stone steps from thejudge’s balcony, and hastened past Dumbledore andHarry without glancing at them.

A moment later, Percy returned, followed by Mrs.

Figg. She looked scared and more batty than ever.Harry wished she had thought to change out of hercarpet slippers.

Dumbledore stood up and gave Mrs. Figg his chair,conjuring a second one for himself.

“Full name?” said Fudge loudly, when Mrs. Figg hadperched herself nervously on the very edge of herseat.

“Arabella Doreen Figg,” said Mrs. Figg in her quaveryvoice.

“And who exactly are you?” said Fudge, in a boredand lofty voice.

“I’m a resident of Little Whinging, close to whereHarry Potter lives,” said Mrs. Figg.

“We have no record of any witch or wizard living inLittle Whinging other than Harry Potter,” said MadamBones at once. “That situation has always beenclosely monitored, given ... given past events.”

“I’m a Squib,” said Mrs. Figg. “So you wouldn’t haveme registered, would you?”

“A Squib, eh?” said Fudge, eyeing her suspiciously.“We’ll be checking that. You’ll leave details of yourparentage with my assistant, Weasley. Incidentally,can Squibs see dementors?” he added, looking leftand right along the bench where he sat.

Page | 184Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, we can!” said Mrs. Figg indignantly.

Fudge looked back down at her, his eyebrows raised.“Very well,” he said coolly. “What is your story?”

“I had gone out to buy cat food from the corner shopat the end of Wisteria Walk, shortly after nine on theevening of the second of August,” gabbled Mrs. Figg atonce, as though she had learned what she was sayingby heart, “when I heard a disturbance down thealleyway between Magnolia Crescent and WisteriaWalk. On approaching the mouth of the alleyway Isaw dementors running —”

“Running?” said Madam Bones sharply. “Dementorsdon’t run, they glide.”

“That’s what I meant to say,” said Mrs. Figg quickly,patches of pink appearing in her withered cheeks.“Gliding along the alley toward what looked like twoboys.”

“What did they look like?” said Madam Bones,narrowing her eyes so that the monocle’s edgesdisappeared into her flesh.

“Well, one was very large and the other one ratherskinny —”

“No, no,” said Madam Bones impatiently, “thedementors ... describe them.”

“Oh,” said Mrs. Figg, the pink flush creeping up herneck now. “They were big. Big and wearing cloaks.”

Harry felt a horrible sinking in the pit of his stomach.Whatever Mrs. Figg said to the contrary, it sounded tohim as though the most she had ever seen was apicture of a dementor, and a picture could never

Page | 185Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

convey the truth of what these beings were like: theeerie way they moved, hovering inches over theground, or the rotting smell of them, or that terrible,rattling noise they made as they sucked on thesurrounding air ... A dumpy wizard with a large blackmustache in the second row leaned close to hisneighbor, a frizzy-haired witch, and whisperedsomething in her ear. She smirked and nodded.

“Big and wearing cloaks,” repeated Madam Bonescoolly, while Fudge snorted derisively. “I see. Anythingelse?”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Figg. “I felt them. Everything wentcold, and this was a very warm summer’s night, markyou. And I felt ... as though all happiness had gonefrom the world ... and I remembered ... dreadfulthings...”

Her voice shook and died.

Madam Bones’ eyes widened slightly. Harry could seered marks under her eyebrow where the monocle haddug into it.

“What did the dementors do?” she asked, and Harryfelt a rush of hope.

“They went for the boys,” said Mrs. Figg, her voicestronger and more confident now, the pink flushebbing away from her face. “One of them had fallen.The other was backing away, trying to repel thedementor. That was Harry. He tried twice andproduced silver vapor. On the third attempt, heproduced a Patronus, which charged down the firstdementor and then, with his encouragement, chasedaway the second from his cousin. And that ... thatwas what happened,” Mrs. Figg finished, somewhatlamely.

Page | 186Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Madam Bones looked down at Mrs. Figg in silence;Fudge was not looking at her at all, but fidgeting withhis papers. Finally he raised his eyes and said, ratheraggressively “That’s what you saw, is it?”

“That was what happened,” Mrs. Figg repeated.

“Very well,” said Fudge. “You may go.”

Mrs. Figg cast a frightened look from Fudge toDumbledore, then got up and shuffled off toward thedoor again. Harry heard it thud shut behind her.

“Not a very convincing witness,” said Fudge loftily.

“Oh, I don’t know,” said Madam Bones in herbooming voice. “She certainly described the effects ofa dementor attack very accurately. And I can’timagine why she would say they were there if theyweren’t —”

“But dementors wandering into a Muggle suburb andjust happening to come across a wizard?” snortedFudge. “The odds on that must be very, very long,even Bagman wouldn’t have bet —”

“Oh, I don’t think any of us believe the dementorswere there by coincidence,” said Dumbledore lightly.

The witch sitting to the right of Fudge with her face inshadow moved slightly, but everyone else was quitestill and silent.

“And what is that supposed to mean?” asked Fudgeicily.

“It means that I think they were ordered there,” saidDumbledore.

Page | 187Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I think we might have a record of it if someone hadordered a pair of dementors to go strolling throughLittle Whinging!” barked Fudge.

“Not if the dementors are taking orders from someoneother than the Ministry of Magic these days,” saidDumbledore calmly. “I have already given you myviews on this matter, Cornelius.”

“Yes, you have,” said Fudge forcefully, “and I have noreason to believe that your views are anything otherthan bilge, Dumbledore. The dementors remain inplace in Azkaban and are doing everything we askthem to.”

“Then,” said Dumbledore, quietly but clearly, “wemust ask ourselves why somebody within theMinistry ordered a pair of dementors into thatalleyway on the second of August.”

In the complete silence that greeted these words, thewitch to the right of Fudge leaned forward so thatHarry saw her for the first time.

He thought she looked just like a large, pale toad. Shewas rather squat with a broad, flabby face, as littleneck as Uncle Vernon, and a very wide, slack mouth.Her eyes were large, round, and slightly bulging. Eventhe little black velvet bow perched on top of her shortcurly hair put him in mind of a large fly she wasabout to catch on a long sticky tongue.

“The Chair recognizes Dolores Jane Umbridge, SeniorUndersecretary to the Minister,” said Fudge.

The witch spoke in a fluttery, girlish, high-pitchedvoice that took Harry aback; he had been expecting acroak.

Page | 188Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I’m sure I must have misunderstood you, ProfessorDumbledore,” she said with a simper that left her big,round eyes as cold as ever. “So silly of me. But itsounded for a teensy moment as though you weresuggesting that the Ministry of Magic had ordered anattack on this boy!”

She gave a silvery laugh that made the hairs on theback of Harry’s neck stand up. A few other membersof the Wizengamot laughed with her. It could not havebeen plainer that not one of them was really amused.

“If it is true that the dementors are taking orders onlyfrom the Ministry of Magic, and it is also true that twodementors attacked Harry and his cousin a week ago,then it follows logically that somebody at the Ministrymight have ordered the attacks,” said Dumbledorepolitely. “Of course, these particular dementors mayhave been outside Ministry control —”

“There are no dementors outside Ministry control!”snapped Fudge, who had turned brick red.

Dumbledore inclined his head in a little bow.

“Then undoubtedly the Ministry will be making a fullinquiry into why two dementors were so very far fromAzkaban and why they attacked withoutauthorization.”

“It is not for you to decide what the Ministry of Magicdoes or does not do, Dumbledore!” snapped Fudge,now a shade of magenta of which Uncle Vernon wouldhave been proud.

“Of course it isn’t,” said Dumbledore mildly. “I wasmerely expressing my confidence that this matter willnot go uninvestigated.”

Page | 189Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He glanced at Madam Bones, who readjusted hermonocle and stared back at him, frowning slightly.

“I would remind everybody that the behavior of thesedementors, if indeed they are not figments of thisboy’s imagination, is not the subject of this hearing!”said Fudge. “We are here to examine Harry Potter’soffenses under the Decree for the ReasonableRestriction of Underage Sorcery!”

“Of course we are,” said Dumbledore, “but thepresence of dementors in that alleyway is highlyrelevant. Clause seven of the Decree states that magicmay be used before Muggles in exceptionalcircumstances, and as those exceptionalcircumstances include situations that threaten thelife of the wizard or witch himself, or witches, wizards,or Muggles present at the time of the —”

“We are familiar with clause seven, thank you verymuch!” snarled Fudge.

“Of course you are,” said Dumbledore courteously.“Then we are in agreement that Harry’s use of thePatronus Charm in these circumstances fallsprecisely into the category of exceptionalcircumstances it describes?”

“If there were dementors, which I doubt —”

“You have heard from an eyewitness,” Dumbledoreinterrupted. “If you still doubt her truthfulness, callher back, question her again. I am sure she would notobject.”

“I — that — not —” blustered Fudge, fiddling with thepapers before him. “It’s — I want this over with today,Dumbledore!”

Page | 190Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But naturally, you would not care how many timesyou heard from a witness, if the alternative was aserious miscarriage of justice,” said Dumbledore.

“Serious miscarriage, my hat!” said Fudge at the topof his voice. “Have you ever bothered to tot up thenumber of cock-and-bull stories this boy has comeout with, Dumbledore, while trying to cover up hisflagrant misuse of magic out of school? I supposeyou’ve forgotten the Hover Charm he used three yearsago -”

“That wasn’t me, it was a house-elf!” said Harry.

“YOU SEE?” roared Fudge, gesturing flamboyantly inHarry’s direction. “A house-elf! In a Muggle house! Iask you —”

“The house-elf in question is currently in the employof Hogwarts School,” said Dumbledore. “I cansummon him here in an instant to give evidence ifyou wish.”

“I — not — I haven’t got time to listen to house-elves!Anyway, that’s not the only — he blew up his aunt,for God’s sake!” Fudge shouted, banging his fist onthe judge’s bench and upsetting a bottle of ink.

“And you very kindly did not press charges on thatoccasion, accepting, I presume, that even the bestwizards cannot always control their emotions,” saidDumbledore calmly, as Fudge attempted to scrub theink off his notes.

“And I haven’t even started on what he gets up to atschool —”

“— but as the Ministry has no authority to punishHogwarts students for misdemeanors at school,

Page | 191Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s behavior there is not relevant to this inquiry,”said Dumbledore, politely as ever, but now with asuggestion of coolness behind his words.

“Oho!” said Fudge. “Not our business what he does atschool, eh? You think so?”

“The Ministry does not have the power to expelHogwarts students, Cornelius, as I reminded you onthe night of the second of August,” said Dumbledore.“Nor does it have the right to confiscate wands untilcharges have been successfully proven, again, as Ireminded you on the night of the second of August. Inyour admirable haste to ensure that the law isupheld, you appear, inadvertently I am sure, to haveoverlooked a few laws yourself.”

“Laws can be changed,” said Fudge savagely.

“Of course they can,” said Dumbledore, inclining hishead. “And you certainly seem to be making manychanges, Cornelius. Why, in the few short weekssince I was asked to leave the Wizengamot, it hasalready become the practice to hold a full criminaltrial to deal with a simple matter of underage magic!”

A few of the wizards above them shifteduncomfortably in their seats. Fudge turned a slightlydeeper shade of puce. The toadlike witch on his right,however, merely gazed at Dumbledore, her face quiteexpressionless.

“As far as I am aware, however,” Dumbledorecontinued, “there is no law yet in place that says thiscourt’s job is to punish Harry for every bit of magic hehas ever performed. He has been charged with aspecific offense and he has presented his defense. Allhe and I can do now is to await your verdict.”

Page | 192Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore put his fingertips together again and saidno more. Fudge glared at him, evidently incensed.Harry glanced sideways at Dumbledore, seekingreassurance; he was not at all sure that Dumbledorewas right in telling the Wizengamot, in effect, that itwas about time they made a decision. Again, however,Dumbledore seemed oblivious to Harry’s attempt tocatch his eye. He continued to look up at the bencheswhere the entire Wizengamot had fallen into urgent,whispered conversations.

Harry looked at his feet. His heart, which seemed tohave swollen to an unnatural size, was thumpingloudly under his ribs. He had expected the hearing tolast longer than this. He was not at all sure that hehad made a good impression. He had not really saidvery much. He ought to have explained more fullyabout the dementors, about how he had fallen over,about how both he and Dudley had nearly beenkissed...

Twice he looked up at Fudge and opened his mouth tospeak, but his swollen heart was now constricting hisair passages and both times he merely took a deepbreath and looked back at his shoes.

Then the whispering stopped. Harry wanted to lookup at the judges, but found that it was really much,much easier to keep examining his laces.

“Those in favor of clearing the accused of allcharges?” said Madam Bones’s booming voice.

Harry’s head jerked upward. There were hands in theair, many of them ... more than half! Breathing veryfast, he tried to count, but before he could finishMadam Bones had said, “And those in favor ofconviction?”

Page | 193Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Fudge raised his hand; so did half a dozen others,including the witch on his right and the heavilymustached wizard and the frizzy-haired witch in thesecond row.

Fudge glanced around at them all, looking as thoughthere was something large stuck in his throat, thenlowered his own hand. He took two deep breaths andthen said, in a voice distorted by suppressed rage,“Very well, very well ... cleared of all charges.”

“Excellent,” said Dumbledore briskly, springing to hisfeet, pulling out his wand, and causing the two chintzarmchairs to vanish. “Well, I must be getting along.Good day to you all.”

And without looking once at Harry, he swept from thedungeon.

Page | 194Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE WOES OF MRS. WEASLEY

Dumbledore’s abrupt departure took Harrycompletely by surprise. He remained sitting where hewas in the chained chair, struggling with his feelingsof shock and relief. The Wizengamot were all gettingto their feet, talking, and gathering up their papersand packing them away. Harry stood up. Nobodyseemed to be paying him the slightest bit of attentionexcept the toadlike witch on Fudge’s right, who wasnow gazing down at him instead of at Dumbledore.Ignoring her, he tried to catch Fudge’s eye, or MadamBones’s, wanting to ask whether he was free to go,but Fudge seemed quite determined not to noticeHarry, and Madam Bones was busy with herbriefcase, so he took a few tentative steps toward theexit and when nobody called him back, broke into avery fast walk.

He took the last few steps at a run, wrenched openthe door, and almost collided with Mr. Weasley, whowas standing right outside, looking pale andapprehensive.

Page | 195Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Dumbledore didn’t say —”

“Cleared,” Harry said, pulling the door closed behindhim, “of all charges!”

Beaming, Mr. Weasley seized Harry by the shoulders.

“Harry, that’s wonderful! Well, of course, they couldn’thave found you guilty, not on the evidence, but evenso, I can’t pretend I wasn’t —”

But Mr. Weasley broke off, because the courtroomdoor had just opened again. The Wizengamot werefiling out.

“Merlin’s beard,” said Mr. Weasley wonderingly,pulling Harry aside to let them all pass, “you weretried by the full court?”

“I think so,” said Harry quietly.

One or two of the passing wizards nodded to Harry asthey passed and a few, including Madam Bones, said,“Morning, Arthur,” to Mr. Weasley, but most avertedtheir eyes. Cornelius Fudge and the toadlike witchwere almost the last to leave the dungeon. Fudgeacted as though Mr. Weasley and Harry were part ofthe wall, but again, the witch looked almostappraisingly at Harry as she passed. Last of all topass was Percy. Like Fudge, he completely ignored hisfather and Harry; he marched past clutching a largeroll of parchment and a handful of spare quills, hisback rigid and his nose in the air. The lines aroundMr. Weasley’s mouth tightened slightly, but otherthan this he gave no sign that he had noticed histhird son.

“I’m going to take you straight back so you can tellthe others the good news,” he said, beckoning Harry

Page | 196Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

forward as Percy’s heels disappeared up the stairs tothe ninth level. I’ll drop you off on the way to thattoilet in Bethnal Green. Come on...”

“So what will you have to do about the toilet?” Harryasked, grinning. Everything suddenly seemed fivetimes funnier than usual. It was starting to sink in:He was cleared, he was going hack to Hogwarts.

“Oh, it’s a simple enough anti-jinx,” said Mr. Weasleyas they mounted the stairs, “but it’s not so muchhaving to repair the damage, it’s more the attitudebehind the vandalism, Harry. Muggle-baiting mightstrike some wizards as funny, but it’s an expressionof something much deeper and nastier, and I for one

Mr. Weasley broke off in mid-sentence. They had justreached the ninth-level corridor, and Cornelius Fudgewas standing a few feet away from them, talkingquietly to a tall man with sleek blond hair and apointed, pale face.

The second man turned at the sound of theirfootsteps. He too broke off in mid-conversation, hiscold gray eyes narrowed and fixed upon Harry’s face.

“Well, well, well ... Patronus Potter,” said LuciusMalfoy coolly.

Harry felt winded, as though he had just walked intosomething heavy. He had last seen those cool grayeyes through slits in a Death Eater’s hood, and lastheard that man’s voice jeering in a dark graveyardwhile Lord Voldemort tortured him. He could notbelieve that Lucius Malfoy dared look him in the face;he could not believe that he was here, in the Ministryof Magic, or that Cornelius Fudge was talking to him,

Page | 197Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

when Harry had told Fudge mere weeks ago thatMalfoy was a Death Eater.

“The Minister was just telling me about your luckyescape, Potter,” drawled Mr. Malfoy. “Quiteastonishing, the way you continue to wriggle out ofvery tight holes... Snakelike, in fact ...”

Mr. Weasley gripped Harry’s shoulder in warning.

“Yeah,” said Harry, “yeah, I’m good at escaping...”

Lucius Malfoy raised his eyes to Mr. Weasley’s face.

“And Arthur Weasley too! What are you doing here,Arthur?”

“I work here,” said Mr. Weasley shortly.

“Not here, surely?” said Mr. Malfoy, raising hiseyebrows and glancing toward the door over Mr.Weasley’s shoulder. “I thought you were up on thesecond floor... Don’t you do something that involvessneaking Muggle artifacts home and bewitchingthem?”

“No,” said Mr. Weasley curtly, his fingers now bitinginto Harry’s shoulder.

“What are you doing here anyway?” Harry askedLucius Malfoy.

“I don’t think private matters between myself and theMinister are any concern of yours, Potter,” saidMalfoy, smoothing the front of his robes; Harrydistinctly heard the gentle clinking of what soundedlike a full pocket of gold. “Really, just because you areDumbledore’s favorite boy, you must not expect the

Page | 198Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

same indulgence from the rest of us... Shall we go upto your office, then, Minister?”

“Certainly,” said Fudge, turning his back on Harryand Mr. Weasley. “This way, Lucius.”

They strode off together, talking in low voices. Mr.Weasley did not let go of Harry’s shoulder until theyhad disappeared into the lift.

“Why wasn’t he waiting outside Fudge’s office ifthey’ve got business to do together?” Harry burst outfuriously. “What was he doing down here?”

“Trying to sneak down to the courtroom, if you askme,” said Mr. Weasley, looking extremely agitated ashe glanced over his shoulder as though making surethey could not be overheard. “Trying to find outwhether you’d been expelled or not. I’ll leave a notefor Dumbledore when I drop you off, he ought toknow Malfoy’s been talking to Fudge again.”

“What private business have they got togetheranyway?”

“Gold, I expect,” said Mr. Weasley angrily. “Malfoy’sbeen giving generously to all sorts of things foryears... Gets him in with the right people ... then hecan ask favors ... delay laws he doesn’t want passed... Oh, he’s very well connected, Lucius Malfoy...”

The lift arrived; it was empty except for a flock ofmemos that flapped around Mr. Weasley’s head as hepressed the button for the Atrium and the doorsclanged shut; he waved them away irritably.

“Mr. Weasley,” said Harry slowly, “if Fudge is meetingDeath Eaters like Malfoy, if he’s seeing them alone,

Page | 199Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

how do we know they haven’t put the Imperius Curseon him?”

“Don’t think it hadn’t occurred to us, Harry,”muttered Mr. Weasley. “But Dumbledore thinksFudge is acting of his own accord at the moment —which, as Dumbledore says, is not a lot of comfort...Best not talk about it anymore just now, Harry...”

The doors slid open and they stepped out into thenow almost-deserted Atrium. Eric the security manwas hidden behind his Daily Prophet again. They hadwalked straight past the golden fountain before Harryremembered.

“Wait...” he told Mr. Weasley, and pulling his moneybag from his pocket, he turned back to the fountain.

He looked up into the handsome wizard’s face, but upclose, Harry thought he looked rather weak andfoolish. The witch was wearing a vapid smile like abeauty contestant, and from what Harry knew ofgoblins and centaurs, they were most unlikely to becaught staring this soppily at humans of anydescription. Only the house-elf’s attitude of creepingservility looked convincing. With a grin at the thoughtof what Hermione would say if she could see thestatue of the elf, Harry turned his money bag upsidedown and emptied not just ten Galleons, but thewhole contents into the pool at the statues’ feet.

“I knew it!” yelled Ron, punching the air. “You alwaysget away with stuff!”

“They were bound to clear you,” said Hermione, whohad looked positively faint with anxiety when Harryhad entered the kitchen and was now holding ashaking hand over her eyes. “There was no caseagainst you, none at all...”

Page | 200Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Everyone seems quite relieved, though, consideringthey all knew I’d get off,” said Harry, smiling.

Mrs. Weasley was wiping her face on her apron, andFred, George, and Ginny were doing a kind of wardance to a chant that went “He got off, he got off hegot off—”

“That’s enough, settle down!” shouted Mr. Weasley,though he too was smiling. “Listen, Sirius, LuciusMalfoy was at the Ministry —”

“What?” said Sirius sharply.

“He got off he got off he got off—”

“Be quiet, you three! Yes, we saw him talking toFudge on level nine, then they went up to Fudge’soffice together. Dumbledore ought to know.”

“Absolutely,” said Sirius. “We’ll tell him, don’t worry.”

“Well, I’d better get going, there’s a vomiting toilet inBethnal Green waiting for me. Molly, I’ll be late, I’mcovering for Tonks, but Kingsley might be dropping infor dinner —”

“He got off he got off he got off—”

“That’s enough — Fred — George — Ginny!” said Mrs.Weasley, as Mr. Weasley left the kitchen. “Harry dear,come and sit down, have some lunch, you hardly atebreakfast...”

Ron and Hermione sat themselves down opposite himlooking happier than they had done since he had firstarrived at number twelve, Grimmauld Place, andHarry’s feeling of giddy relief, which had beensomewhat dented by his encounter with LuciusPage | 201Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy, swelled again. The gloomy house seemedwarmer and more welcoming all of a sudden; evenKreacher looked less ugly as he poked his snoutlikenose into the kitchen to investigate the source of allthe noise.

“ ’Course, once Dumbledore turned up on your side,there was no way they were going to convict you,”said Ron happily, now dishing great mounds ofmashed potatoes onto everyone’s plates.

“Yeah, he swung it for me,” said Harry. He felt that itwould sound highly ungrateful, not to mentionchildish, to say, “I wish he’d talked to me, though. Oreven looked at me.”

And as he thought this, the scar on his foreheadburned so badly that he clapped his hand to it.

“What’s up?” said Hermione, looking alarmed.

“Scar,” Harry mumbled. “But it’s nothing... It happensall the time now...”

None of the others had noticed a thing; all of themwere now helping themselves to food while gloatingover Harry’s narrow escape; Fred, George, and Ginnywere still singing. Hermione looked rather anxious,but before she could say anything, Ron said happily,

“I bet Dumbledore turns up this evening to celebratewith us, you know.”

“I don’t think he’ll be able to, Ron,” said Mrs. Weasley,setting a huge plate of roast chicken down in front ofHarry. “He’s really very busy at the moment.”

“HE GOT OFF, HE GOT OFF, HE GOT OFF—”

“SHUT UP!” roared Mrs. Weasley.

Page | 202Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Over the next few days Harry could not help noticingthat there was one person within number twelve,Grimmauld Place, who did not seem wholly overjoyedthat he would be returning to Hogwarts. Sirius hadput up a very good show of happiness on first hearingthe news, wringing Harry’s hand and beaming justlike the rest of them; soon, however, he was moodierand surlier than before, talking less to everybody,even Harry, and spending increasing amounts of timeshut up in his mother’s room with Buckbeak.

“Don’t you go feeling guilty!” said Hermione sternly,after Harry had confided some of his feelings to herand Ron while they scrubbed out a moldy cupboardon the third floor a few days later. “You belong atHogwarts and Sirius knows it. Personally, I think he’sbeing selfish.”

“That’s a bit harsh, Hermione,” said Ron, frowning ashe attempted to prize off a bit of mold that hadattached itself firmly to his finger, “you wouldn’t wantto be stuck inside this house without company.”

“He’ll have company!” said Hermione. “It’sheadquarters to the Order of the Phoenix, isn’t it? Hejust got his hopes up that Harry would be coming tolive here with him.”

“I don’t think that’s true,” said Harry, wringing outhis cloth. “He wouldn’t give me a straight answerwhen I asked him if I could.”

“He just didn’t want to get his own hopes up evenmore,” said Hermione wisely. “And he probably felt abit guilty himself, because I think a part of him wasreally hoping you’d be expelled. Then you’d both beoutcasts together.”

Page | 203Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Come off it!” said Harry and Ron together, butHermione merely shrugged.

“Suit yourselves. But I sometimes think Ron’s mum’sright, and Sirius gets confused about whether you’reyou or your father, Harry.”

“So you think he’s touched in the head?” said Harryheatedly.

“No, I just think he’s been very lonely for a long time,”said Hermione simply.

At this point Mrs. Weasley entered the bedroombehind them.

“Still not finished?” she said, poking her head into thecupboard.

“I thought you might be here to tell us to have abreak!” said Ron bitterly. “D’you know how muchmold we’ve got rid of since we arrived here?”

“You were so keen to help the Order,” said Mrs.Weasley, “you can do your bit by makingheadquarters fit to live in.”

“I feel like a house-elf,” grumbled Ron.

“Well, now that you understand what dreadful livesthey lead, perhaps you’ll be a bit more active inS.P.E.W.!” said Hermione hopefully, as Mrs. Weasleyleft them to it again. “You know, maybe it wouldn’t bea bad idea to show people exactly how horrible it is toclean all the time — we could do a sponsored scrub ofGryffindor common room, all proceeds to S.P.E.W., itwould raise awareness as well as funds —”

Page | 204Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll sponsor you to shut up about spew,” Ronmuttered irritably, but only so Harry could hear him.

Harry found himself daydreaming about Hogwartsmore and more as the end of the holidaysapproached; he could not wait to see Hagrid again, toplay Quidditch, even to stroll across the vegetablepatches to the Herbology greenhouses. It would be atreat just to leave this dusty, musty house, where halfof the cupboards were still bolted shut and Kreacherwheezed insults out of the shadows as you passed,though Harry was careful not to say any of this withinearshot of Sirius.

The fact was that living at the headquarters of theanti-Voldemort movement was not nearly asinteresting or exciting as Harry would have expectedbefore he’d experienced it. Though members of theOrder of the Phoenix came and went regularly,sometimes staying for meals, sometimes only for a fewminutes’whispered conversation, Mrs. Weasley madesure that Harry and the others were kept well out ofearshot (whether Extendable or normal) and nobody,not even Sirius, seemed to feel that Harry needed toknow anything more than he had heard on the nightof his arrival.

On the very last day of the holidays Harry wassweeping up Hedwig’s owl droppings from the top ofthe wardrobe when Ron entered their bedroomcarrying a couple of envelopes.

“Booklists have arrived,” he said, throwing one of theenvelopes up to Harry, who was standing on a chair.“About time, I thought they’d forgotten, they usuallycome much earlier than this...”

Harry swept the last of the droppings into a rubbishbag and threw the bag over Ron’s head into the

Page | 205Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

wastepaper basket in the corner, which swallowed itand belched loudly. He then opened his letter: Itcontained two pieces of parchment, one the usualreminder that term started on the first of September,the other telling him which books he would need forthe coming year.

“Only two new ones,” he said, reading the list. “TheStandard Book of Spells, Grade 5, by MirandaGoshawk and Defensive Magical Theory, by WilbertSlinkhard.”

Crack.

Fred and George Apparated right beside Harry. Hewas so used to them doing this by now that he didn’teven fall off his chair.

“We were just wondering who assigned the Slinkhardbook,” said Fred conversationally.

“Because it means Dumbledore’s found a newDefense Against the Dark Arts teacher,” said George.

“And about time too,” said Fred.

“What d’you mean?” Harry asked, jumping downbeside them.

“Well, we overheard Mum and Dad talking on theExtendable Ears a few weeks back,” Fred told Harry,“and from what they were saying, Dumbledore washaving real trouble finding anyone to do the job thisyear.”

“Not surprising, is it, when you look at what’shappened to the last four?” said George.

Page | 206Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“One sacked, one dead, one’s memory removed, andone locked in a trunk for nine months,” said Harry,counting them off on his fingers. “Yeah, I see whatyou mean.”

“What’s up with you, Ron?” asked Fred.

Ron did not answer. Harry looked around. Ron wasstanding very still with his mouth slightly open,gaping at his letter from Hogwarts.

“What’s the matter?” said Fred impatiently, movingaround Ron to look over his shoulder at theparchment.

Fred’s mouth fell open too.

“Prefect?” he said, staring incredulously at the letter.“Prefect?”

George leapt forward, seized the envelope in Ron’sother hand, and turned it upside down. Harry sawsomething scarlet and gold fall into George’s palm.

“No way,” said George in a hushed voice.

“There’s been a mistake,” said Fred, snatching theletter out of Ron’s grasp and holding it up to the lightas though checking for a watermark. “No one in theirright mind would make Ron a prefect...”

The twins’ heads turned in unison and both of themstared at Harry.

“We thought you were a cert!” said Fred in a tone thatsuggested Harry had tricked them in some way.

“We thought Dumbledore was bound to pick you!”said George indignantly.

Page | 207Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Winning the Triwizard and everything!” said Fred.

“I suppose all the mad stuff must’ve counted againsthim,” said George to Fred.

“Yeah,” said Fred slowly. “Yeah, you’ve caused toomuch trouble, mate. Well, at least one of you’s gottheir priorities right.”

He strode over to Harry and clapped him on the backwhile giving Ron a scathing look.

“Prefect... ickle Ronnie the prefect ...”

“Oh, Mum’s going to be revolting,” groaned George,thrusting the prefect badge back at Ron as though itmight contaminate him.

Ron, who still had not said a word, took the badge,stared at it for a moment, and then held it out toHarry as though asking mutely for confirmation thatit was genuine. Harry took it. A large P wassuperimposed on the Gryffindor lion. He had seen abadge just like this on Percy’s chest on his very firstday at Hogwarts.

The door banged open. Hermione came tearing intothe room, her cheeks flushed and her hair flying.There was an envelope in her hand.

“Did you — did you get — ?”

She spotted the badge in Harry’s hand and let out ashriek.

“I knew it!” she said excitedly, brandishing her letter.“Me too, Harry, me too!”

Page | 208Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry quickly, pushing the badge back intoRon’s hand. “It’s Ron, not me.”

“It — what?”

“Ron’s prefect, not me,” Harry said.

“Ron?” said Hermione, her jaw dropping. “But ... areyou sure? I mean —”

She turned red as Ron looked around at her with adefiant expression on his face.

“It’s my name on the letter,” he said.

“I ...” said Hermione, looking thoroughly bewildered.

“I ... well ... wow! Well done, Ron! That’s really —”

“Unexpected,” said George, nodding.

“No,” said Hermione, blushing harder than ever, “no,it’s not ... Ron’s done loads of ... he’s really ...”

The door behind her opened a little wider and Mrs.Weasley backed into the room carrying a pile offreshly laundered robes.

“Ginny said the booklists had come at last,” she said,glancing around at all the envelopes as she made herway over to the bed and started sorting the robes intotwo piles. “If you give them to me I’ll take them over toDiagon Alley this afternoon and get your books whileyou’re packing. Ron, I’ll have to get you morepajamas, these are at least six inches too short, Ican’t believe how fast you’re growing ... what colorwould you like?”

“Get him red and gold to match his badge,” saidGeorge, smirking.

Page | 209Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Match his what?” said Mrs. Weasley absently, rollingup a pair of maroon socks and placing them on Ron’spile.

“His badge,” said Fred, with the air of getting theworst over quickly. “His lovely shiny new prefect’sbadge.”

Fred’s words took a moment to penetrate Mrs.Weasley’s preoccupation about pajamas.

“His ... but ... Ron, you’re not... ?”

Ron held up his badge.

Mrs. Weasley let out a shriek just like Hermione’s.

“I don’t believe it! I don’t believe it! Oh, Ron, howwonderful! A prefect! That’s everyone in the family!”

“What are Fred and I, next-door neighbors?” saidGeorge indignantly, as his mother pushed him asideand flung her arms around her youngest son.

“Wait until your father hears! Ron, I’m so proud ofyou, what wonderful news, you could end up HeadBoy just like Bill and Percy, it’s the first step! Oh,what a thing to happen in the middle of all this worry,I’m just thrilled, oh Ronnie —”

Fred and George were both making loud retchingnoises behind her back but Mrs. Weasley did notnotice; arms tight around Ron’s neck, she was kissinghim all over his face, which had turned a brighterscarlet than his badge.

“Mum ... don’t ... Mum, get a grip...” he muttered,trying to push her away.

Page | 210Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She let go of him and said breathlessly, “Well, whatwill it be? We gave Percy an owl, but you’ve alreadygot one, of course.”

“W-what do you mean?” said Ron, looking as thoughhe did not dare believe his ears.

“You’ve got to have a reward for this!” said Mrs.Weasley fondly. “How about a nice new set of dressrobes?”

“We’ve already bought him some,” said Fred sourly,who looked as though he sincerely regretted thisgenerosity.

“Or a new cauldron, Charlie’s old one’s rustingthrough, or a new rat, you always liked Scabbers —”

“Mum,” said Ron hopefully, “can I have a newbroom?”

Mrs. Weasley’s face fell slightly; broomsticks wereexpensive.

“Not a really good one!” Ron hastened to add. “Just —just a new one for a change ...”

Mrs. Weasley hesitated, then smiled.

“Of course you can... Well, I’d better get going if I’vegot a broom to buy too. I’ll see you all later... LittleRonnie, a prefect! And don’t forget to pack yourtrunks... A prefect ... Oh, I’m all of a dither!”

She gave Ron yet another kiss on the cheek, sniffedloudly, and bustled from the room.

Fred and George exchanged looks.

Page | 211Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You don’t mind if we don’t kiss you, do you, Ron?”said Fred in a falsely anxious voice.

“We could curtsy, if you like,” said George.

“Oh, shut up,” said Ron, scowling at them.

“Or what?” said Fred, an evil grin spreading acrosshis face. “Going to put us in detention?”

“I’d love to see him try,” sniggered George.

“He could if you don’t watch out!” said Hermioneangrily, at which Fred and George burst out laughingand Ron muttered, “Drop it, Hermione.”

“We’re going to have to watch our step, George,” saidFred, pretending to tremble, “with these two on ourcase...”

“Yeah, it looks like our law-breaking days are finallyover,” said George, shaking his head.

And with another loud crack, the twins Disapparated.

“Those two!” said Hermione furiously, staring up atthe ceiling, through which they could now hear Fredand George roaring with laughter in the roomupstairs. “Don’t pay any attention to them, Ron,they’re only jealous!”

“I don’t think they are,” said Ron doubtfully, alsolooking up at the ceiling. “They’ve always said onlyprats become prefects... Still,” he added on a happiernote, “they’ve never had new brooms! I wish I could gowith Mum and choose... She’ll never be able to afforda Nimbus, but there’s the new Cleansweep out, that’dbe great... Yeah, I think I’ll go and tell her I like theCleansweep, just so she knows...”

Page | 212Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He dashed from the room, leaving Harry andHermione alone.

For some reason, Harry found that he did not want tolook at Hermione. He turned to his bed, picked up thepile of clean robes Mrs. Weasley had laid upon it, andcrossed the room to his trunk.

“Harry?” said Hermione tentatively.

“Well done,” said Harry, so heartily it did not soundlike his voice at all, and still not looking at her.“Brilliant. Prefect. Great.”

“Thanks,” said Hermione. “Erm — Harry — could Iborrow Hedwig so I can tell Mum and Dad? They’ll bereally pleased — I mean, prefect is something theycan understand —”

“Yeah, no problem,” said Harry, still in the horriblehearty voice that did not belong to him. “Take her!”

He leaned over his trunk, laid the robes on thebottom of it, and pretended to be rummaging forsomething while Hermione crossed to the wardrobeand called Hedwig down. A few moments passed;Harry heard the door close but remained bent double,listening; the only sounds he could hear were theblank picture on the wall sniggering again and thewastepaper basket in the corner coughing up the owldroppings.

He straightened up and looked behind him. Hermioneand Hedwig had gone. Harry returned slowly to hisbed and sank onto it, gazing unseeingly at the foot ofthe wardrobe.

He had forgotten completely about prefects beingchosen in the fifth year. He had been too anxious

Page | 213Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

about the possibility of being expelled to spare athought for the fact that badges must be winging theirway toward certain people. But if he had remembered... if he had thought about it ... what would he haveexpected?

Not this, said a small and truthful voice inside hishead.

Harry screwed up his face and buried it in his hands.He could not lie to himself; if he had known theprefect badge was on its way, he would have expectedit to come to him, not Ron. Did this make him asarrogant as Draco Malfoy? Did he think himselfsuperior to everyone else? Did he really believe he wasbetter than Ron?

No, said the small voice defiantly.

Was that true? Harry wondered, anxiously probinghis own feelings.

I’m better at Quidditch, said the voice. But I’m notbetter at anything else.

That was definitely true, Harry thought; he was nobetter than Ron in lessons. But what about outsidelessons? What about those adventures he, Ron, andHermione had had together since they had started atHogwarts, often risking much worse than expulsion?

Well, Ron and Hermione were with me most of thetime, said the voice in Harry’s head.

Not all the time, though, Harry argued with himself.They didn’t fight Quirrell with me. They didn’t take onRiddle and the basilisk. They didn’t get rid of all thosedementors the night Sirius escaped. They weren’t inthat graveyard with me, the night Voldemort returned...Page | 214Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

And the same feeling of ill usage that hadoverwhelmed him on the night he had arrived roseagain. I’ve definitely done more, Harry thoughtindignantly. I’ve done more than either of them\

But maybe, said the small voice fairly, maybeDumbledore doesn’t choose prefects because they’vegot themselves into a load of dangerous situations...Maybe he chooses them for other reasons... Ron musthave something you don’t...

Harry opened his eyes and stared through his fingersat the wardrobe’s clawed feet, remembering what Fredhad said.

“No one in their right mind would make Ron aprefect...”

Harry gave a small snort of laughter. A second laterhe felt sickened with himself.

Ron had not asked Dumbledore to give him theprefect badge. This was not Ron’s fault. Was he,

Harry, Ron’s best friend in the world, going to sulkbecause he didn’t have a badge, laugh with the twinsbehind Ron’s back, ruin this for Ron when, for thefirst time, he had beaten Harry at something?

At this point Harry heard Ron’s footsteps on the stairsagain. He stood up, straightened his glasses, andhitched a grin onto his face as Ron bounded backthrough the door.

“Just caught her!” he said happily. “She says she’llget the Cleansweep if she can.”

“Cool,” Harry said, and he was relieved to hear thathis voice had stopped sounding hearty. “Listen — Ron— well done, mate.”

Page | 215Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The smile faded off Ron’s face.

“I never thought it would be me!” he said, shaking hishead, “I thought it would be you!”

“Nah, I’ve caused too much trouble,” Harry said,echoing Fred.

“Yeah,” said Ron, “yeah, I suppose... Well, we’d betterget our trunks packed, hadn’t we?”

It was odd how widely their possessions seemed tohave scattered themselves since they had arrived. Ittook them most of the afternoon to retrieve theirbooks and belongings from all over the house andstow them back inside their school trunks. Harrynoticed that Ron kept moving his prefect’s badgearound, first placing it on his bedside table, thenputting it into his jeans pocket, then taking it out andlaying it on his folded robes, as though to see theeffect of the red on the black. Only when Fred andGeorge dropped in and offered to attach it to hisforehead with a Permanent Sticking Charm did hewrap it tenderly in his maroon socks and lock it in histrunk.

Mrs. Weasley returned from Diagon Alley around sixo’clock, laden with books and carrying a long packagewrapped in thick brown paper that Ron took from herwith a moan of longing.

“Never mind unwrapping it now, people are arrivingfor dinner, I want you all downstairs,” she said, butthe moment she was out of sight Ron ripped off thepaper in a frenzy and examined every inch of his newbroom, an ecstatic expression on his face.

Down in the basement Mrs. Weasley had hung ascarlet banner over the heavily laden dinner table,

Page | 216Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

which read CONGRATULATIONS RON ANDHERMIONE — NEW PREFECTS. She looked in abetter mood than Harry had seen her all holiday.

“I thought we’d have a little party, not a sit-downdinner,” she told Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, George,and Ginny as they entered the room. “Your father andBill are on their way, Ron, I’ve sent them both owlsand they’re thrilled,” she added, beaming.

Fred rolled his eyes.

Sirius, Lupin, Tonks, and Kingsley Shacklebolt werealready there and Mad-Eye Moody stumped in shortlyafter Harry had got himself a butterbeer.

“Oh, Alastor, I am glad you’re here,” said Mrs.

Weasley brightly, as Mad-Eye shrugged off histraveling cloak. “We’ve been wanting to ask you forages — could you have a look in the writing desk inthe drawing room and tell us what’s inside it? Wehaven’t wanted to open it just in case it’s somethingreally nasty.”

“No problem, Molly ...”

Moody’s electric-blue eye swiveled upward and staredfixedly through the ceiling of the kitchen.

“Drawing room ...” he growled, as the pupilcontracted. “Desk in the corner? Yeah, I see it... Yeah,it’s a boggart... Want me to go up and get rid of it,Molly?”

“No, no, I’ll do it myself later,” beamed Mrs. Weasley.“You have your drink. We’re having a little bit of acelebration, actually...” She gestured at the scarletbanner. “Fourth prefect in the family!” she saidfondly, ruffling Ron’s hair.

Page | 217Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Prefect, eh?” growled Moody, his normal eye on Ronand his magical eye swiveling around to gaze into theside of his head. Harry had the very uncomfortablefeeling it was looking at him and moved away towardSirius and Lupin.

“Well, congratulations,” said Moody, still glaring atRon with his normal eye, “authority figures alwaysattract trouble, but I suppose Dumbledore thinks youcan withstand most major jinxes or he wouldn’t haveappointed you...”

Ron looked rather startled at this view of the matterbut was saved the trouble of responding by the arrivalof his father and eldest brother. Mrs. Weasley was insuch a good mood she did not even complain thatthey had brought Mundungus with them too; he waswearing a long overcoat that seemed oddly lumpy inunlikely places and declined the offer to remove it andput it with Moody’s traveling cloak.

“Well, I think a toast is in order,” said Mr. Weasley,when everyone had a drink. He raised his goblet. “ToRon and Hermione, the new Gryffindor prefects!”

Ron and Hermione beamed as everyone drank tothem and then applauded.

“I was never a prefect myself,” said Tonks brightlyfrom behind Harry as everybody moved toward thetable to help themselves to food. Her hair was tomato-red and waist length today; she looked like Ginny’solder sister. “My Head of House said I lacked certainnecessary qualities.”

“Like what?” said Ginny, who was choosing a bakedpotato.

“Like the ability to behave myself,” said Tonks.

Page | 218Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Ginny laughed; Hermione looked as though she didnot know whether to smile or not and compromisedby taking an extra large gulp of butterbeer andchoking on it.

“What about you, Sirius?” Ginny asked, thumpingHermione on the back.

Sirius, who was right beside Harry, let out his usualbarklike laugh.

“No one would have made me a prefect, I spent toomuch time in detention with James. Lupin was thegood boy, he got the badge.”

“I think Dumbledore might have hoped that I wouldbe able to exercise some control over my best friends,”said Lupin. “I need scarcely say that I failed dismally.”

Harry’s mood suddenly lifted. His father had not beena prefect either. All at once the party seemed muchmore enjoyable; he loaded up his plate, feelingunusually fond of everyone in the room.

Ron was rhapsodizing about his new broom toanybody who would listen.

"... naught to seventy in ten seconds, not bad, is it?When you think the Comet Two Ninety’s only naughtto sixty and that’s with a decent tailwind according toWhich Broomstick?”

Hermione was talking very earnestly to Lupin abouther view of elf rights.

“I mean, it’s the same kind of nonsense as werewolfsegregation, isn’t it? It all stems from this horriblething wizards have of thinking they’re superior toother creatures...”

Page | 219Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley and Bill were having their usualargument about Bill’s hair.

"... getting really out of hand, and you’re so good-looking, it would look much better shorter, wouldn’tit, Harry?”

“Oh — I dunno —” said Harry, slightly alarmed atbeing asked his opinion; he slid away from them inthe direction of Fred and George, who were huddledin a corner with Mundungus.

Mundungus stopped talking when he saw Harry, butFred winked and beckoned Harry closer.

“It’s okay,” he told Mundungus, “we can trust Harry,he’s our financial backer.”

“Look what Dung’s gotten us,” said George, holdingout his hand to Harry. It was full of what looked likeshriveled black pods. A faint rattling noise wascoming from them, even though they were completelystationary.

“Venomous Tentacula seeds,” said George. “We needthem for the Skiving Snackboxes but they’re a ClassC Non-Tradeable Substance so we’ve been having abit of trouble getting hold of them.”

“Ten Galleons the lot, then, Dung?” said Fred.

“Wiv all the trouble I went to to get ’em?” saidMundungus, his saggy, bloodshot eyes stretchingeven wider. “I’m sorry, lads, but I’m not taking a Knutunder twenty.”

“Dung likes his little joke,” Fred said to Harry.

Page | 220Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, his best one so far has been six Sickles for abag of knarl quills,” said George.

“Be careful,” Harry warned them quietly.

“What?” said Fred. “Mum’s busy cooing over PrefectRon, we’re okay.”

“But Moody could have his eye on you,” Harry pointedout.

Mundungus looked nervously over his shoulder.

“Good point, that,” he grunted. “All right, lads, ten itis, if you’ll take ’em quick.”

“Cheers, Harry!” said Fred delightedly, whenMundungus had emptied his pockets into the twins’outstretched hands and scuttled off toward the food.“We’d better get these upstairs...”

Harry watched them go, feeling slightly uneasy. It hadjust occurred to him that Mr. and Mrs. Weasley wouldwant to know how Fred and George were financingtheir joke shop business when, as was inevitable,they finally found out about it. Giving the twins hisTri-wizard winnings had seemed a simple thing to doat the time, but what if it led to another family rowand a Percy-like estrangement? Would Mrs. Weasleystill feel that Harry was as good as her son if shefound out he had made it possible for Fred andGeorge to start a career she thought quiteunsuitable?

Standing where the twins had left him with nothingbut a guilty weight in the pit of his stomach forcompany, Harry caught the sound of his own name.Kingsley Shacklebolt’s deep voice was audible evenover the surrounding chatter.

Page | 221Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

"... why Dumbledore didn’t make Potter a prefect?”said Kingsley.

“He’ll have had his reasons,” replied Lupin.

“But it would’ve shown confidence in him. It’s whatI’d’ve done,” persisted Kingsley, “ ’specially with theDaily Prophet having a go at him every few days...”

Harry did not look around; he did not want Lupin orKingsley to know he had heard. He followedMundungus back toward the table, though notremotely hungry. His pleasure in the party hadevaporated as quickly as it had come; he wished hewere upstairs in bed.

Mad-Eye Moody was sniffing at a chicken leg withwhat remained of his nose; evidently he could notdetect any trace of poison, because he then tore astrip off it with his teeth.

"... the handle’s made of Spanish oak with anti-jinxvarnish and in-built vibration control —” Ron wassaying to Tonks.

Mrs. Weasley yawned widely.

“Well, I think I’ll sort out that boggart before I turnin... Arthur, I don’t want this lot up too late, all right?’Night, Harry, dear.”

She left the kitchen. Harry set down his plate andwondered whether he could follow her withoutattracting attention.

“You all right, Potter?” grunted Moody.

“Yeah, fine,” lied Harry.

Page | 222Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Moody took a swig from his hip flask, his electric blueeye staring sideways at Harry.

“Come here, I’ve got something that might interestyou,” he said.

From an inner pocket of his robes Moody pulled avery tattered old Wizarding photograph.

“Original Order of the Phoenix,” growled Moody.“Found it last night when I was looking for my spareInvisibility Cloak, seeing as Podmore hasn’t had themanners to return my best one... Thought peoplemight like to see it.”

Harry took the photograph. A small crowd of people,some waving at him, others lifting their glasses,looked back up at him.

“There’s me,” said Moody unnecessarily, pointing athimself. The Moody in the picture was unmistakable,though his hair was slightly less gray and his nosewas intact. “And there’s Dumbledore beside me,Dedalus Diggle on the other side ... That’s MarleneMcKinnon, she was killed two weeks after this wastaken, they got her whole family. That’s Frank andAlice Longbottom —”

Harry’s stomach, already uncomfortable, clenched ashe looked at Alice Longbottom; he knew her round,friendly face very well, even though he had never mether, because she was the image of her son, Neville.

“Poor devils,” growled Moody. “Better dead than whathappened to them ... and that’s Emmeline Vance,you’ve met her, and that there’s Lupin, obviously ...Benjy Fenwick, he copped it too, we only ever foundbits of him ... shift aside there,” he added, poking thepicture, and the little photographic people edgedPage | 223Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

sideways, so that those who were partially obscuredcould move to the front.

“That’s Edgar Bones ... brother of Amelia Bones, theygot him and his family too, he was a great wizard ...Sturgis Podmore, blimey, he looks young ... CaradocDearborn, vanished six months after this, we neverfound his body ... Hagrid, of course, looks exactly thesame as ever ... Elphias Doge, you’ve met him, I’dforgotten he used to wear that stupid hat ... GideonPrewett, it took five Death Eaters to kill him and hisbrother Fabian, they fought like heroes ... budgealong, budge along ...”

The little people in the photograph jostled amongthemselves, and those hidden right at the backappeared at the forefront of the picture.

“That’s Dumbledore’s brother, Aberforth, only time Iever met him, strange bloke ... That’s DorcasMeadowes, Voldemort killed her personally ... Sirius,when he still had short hair ... and ... there you go,thought that would interest you!”

Harry’s heart turned over. His mother and father werebeaming up at him, sitting on either side of a small,watery-eyed man Harry recognized at once asWormtail: He was the one who had betrayed theirwhereabouts to Voldemort and so helped bring abouttheir deaths.

“Eh?” said Moody.

Harry looked up into Moody’s heavily scarred andpitted face. Evidently Moody was under theimpression he had just given Harry a bit of a treat.

“Yeah,” said Harry, attempting to grin again. “Er ...listen, I’ve just remembered, I haven’t packed my ...”

Page | 224Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He was spared the trouble of inventing an object hehad not packed; Sirius had just said, “What’s thatyou’ve got there, Mad-Eye?” and Moody had turnedtoward him. Harry crossed the kitchen, slippedthrough the door and up the stairs before anyonecould call him back.

He did not know why he had received such a shock;he had seen his parents’ pictures before, after all, andhe had met Wormtail ... but to have them sprung onhim like that, when he was least expecting it ... Noone would like that, he thought angrily...

And then, to see them surrounded by all those otherhappy faces ... Benjy Fenwick, who had been found inbits, and Gideon Prewett, who had died like a hero,and the Longbottoms, who had been tortured intomadness ... all waving happily out of the photographforevermore, not knowing that they were doomed...Well, Moody might find that interesting ... he, Harry,found it disturbing...

Harry tiptoed up the stairs in the hall past the stuffedelf heads, glad to be on his own again, but as heapproached the first landing he heard noises.Someone was sobbing in the drawing room.

“Hello?” Harry said.

There was no answer but the sobbing continued. Heclimbed the remaining stairs two at a time, walkedacross the landing, and opened the drawing-roomdoor.

Someone was cowering against the dark wall, herwand in her hand, her whole body shaking with sobs.Sprawled on the dusty old carpet in a patch ofmoonlight, clearly dead, was Ron.

Page | 225Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

All the air seemed to vanish from Harry’s lungs; hefelt as though he were falling through the floor; hisbrain turned icy cold — Ron dead, no, it couldn’t be

But wait a moment, it couldn’t be — Ron wasdownstairs —

“Mrs. Weasley?” Harry croaked.

“R-r-riddikulus\” Mrs. Weasley sobbed, pointing hershaking wand at Ron’s body.

Crack.

Ron’s body turned into Bill’s, spread-eagled on hisback, his eyes wide open and empty. Mrs. Weasleysobbed harder than ever.

“R-riddikulus\” she sobbed again.

Crack.

Mr. Weasley’s body replaced Bill’s, his glasses askew,a trickle of blood running down his face.

“No!” Mrs. Weasley moaned. “No ... riddikulus\Riddikulusl RIDDIKULUSl”

Crack. Dead twins. Crack. Dead Percy. Crack. DeadHarry ...

“Mrs. Weasley, just get out of here!” shouted Harry,staring down at his own dead body on the floor. “Letsomeone else —”

“What’s going on?”

Page | 226Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Lupin had come running into the room, closelyfollowed by Sirius, with Moody stumping along behindthem. Lupin looked from Mrs. Weasley to the deadHarry on the floor and seemed to understand in aninstant. Pulling out his own wand he said, very firmlyand clearly, “RiddikulusV’

Harry’s body vanished. A silvery orb hung in the airover the spot where it had lain. Lupin waved his wandonce more and the orb vanished in a puff of smoke.

“Oh — oh — oh!” gulped Mrs. Weasley, and she brokeinto a storm of crying, her face in her hands.

“Molly,” said Lupin bleakly, walking over to her,

“Molly, don’t ...”

Next second she was sobbing her heart out on Lupin’sshoulder.

“Molly, it was just a boggart,” he said soothingly,patting her on the head. “Just a stupid boggart ...”

“I see them d-d-dead all the time!” Mrs. Weasleymoaned into his shoulder. “All the t-t-time! I d-d-dream about it ...”

Sirius was staring at the patch of carpet where theboggart, pretending to be Harry’s body, had lain.Moody was looking at Harry, who avoided his gaze. Hehad a funny feeling Moody’s magical eye had followedhim all the way out of the kitchen.

“D-d-don’t tell Arthur,” Mrs. Weasley was gulpingnow, mopping her eyes frantically with her cuffs. “I d-d-don’t want him to know... Being silly ...”

Lupin handed her a handkerchief and she blew hernose.

Page | 227Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, I’m so sorry, what must you think of me?” shesaid shakily. “Not even able to get rid of a boggart ...”

“Don’t be stupid,” said Harry, trying to smile.

“I’m just s-s-so worried,” she said, tears spilling out ofher eyes again. “Half the f-f-family’s in the Order, it’llb-b-be a miracle if we all come through this... and P-P-Percy’s not talking to us... What if something d-d-dreadful happens and we had never m-m-made up?And what’s going to happen if Arthur and I get killed,who’s g-g-going to look after Ron and Ginny?”

“Molly, that’s enough,” said Lupin firmly. “This isn’tlike last time. The Order is better prepared, we’ve gota head start, we know what Voldemort’s up to —”

Mrs. Weasley gave a little squeak of fright at thesound of the name.

“Oh, Molly, come on, it’s about time you got used tohearing it — look, I can’t promise no one’s going to gethurt, nobody can promise that, but we’re much betteroff than we were last time, you weren’t in the Orderthen, you don’t understand, last time we wereoutnumbered twenty to one by the Death Eaters andthey were picking us off one by one...”

Harry thought of the photograph again, of his parents’beaming faces. He knew Moody was still watchinghim.

“Don’t worry about Percy,” said Sirius abruptly. “He’llcome round. It’s a matter of time before Voldemortmoves into the open; once he does, the wholeMinistry’s going to be begging us to forgive them. AndI’m not sure I’ll be accepting their apology,” he addedbitterly.

Page | 228Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“And as for who’s going to look after Ron and Ginny ifyou and Arthur died,” said Lupin, smiling slightly,“what do you think we’d do, let them starve?”

Mrs. Weasley smiled tremulously.

“Being silly,” she muttered again, mopping her eyes.

But Harry, closing his bedroom door behind himsome ten minutes later, could not think Mrs. Weasleysilly. He could still see his parents beaming up at himfrom the tattered old photograph, unaware that theirlives, like so many of those around them, weredrawing to a close. The image of the boggart posing asthe corpse of each member of Mrs. Weasley’s family inturn kept flashing before his eyes.

Without warning, the scar on his forehead searedwith pain again and his stomach churned horribly.

“Cut it out,” he said firmly, rubbing the scar as thepain receded again.

“First sign of madness, talking to your own head,”said a sly voice from the empty picture on the wall.

Harry ignored it. He felt older than he had ever felt inhis life, and it seemed extraordinary to him thatbarely an hour ago he had been worried about a jokeshop and who had gotten a prefect’s badge.

Page | 229Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



LUNA LOVEGOOD

Harry had a troubled night’s sleep. His parents wovein and out of his dreams, never speaking; Mrs.Weasley sobbed over Kreacher’s dead body watchedby Ron and Hermione, who were wearing crowns, andyet again Harry found himself walking down acorridor ending in a locked door. He awoke abruptlywith his scar prickling to find Ron already dressedand talking to him.

"... better hurry up, Mum’s going ballistic, she sayswe’re going to miss the train...”

There was a lot of commotion in the house. Fromwhat he heard as he dressed at top speed, Harrygathered that Fred and George had bewitched theirtrunks to fly downstairs to save the bother of carryingthem, with the result that they had hurtled straightinto Ginny and knocked her down two flights of stairsinto the hall; Mrs. Black and Mrs. Weasley were bothscreaming at the top of their voices.

Page | 230Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

COULD HAVE DONE HER A SERIOUS INJURY,YOU IDIOTS —”

FILTHY HALF-BREEDS, BESMIRCHING THEHOUSE OF MY FATHERS —”

Hermione came hurrying into the room lookingflustered just as Harry was putting on his trainers;Hedwig was swaying on her shoulder, and she wascarrying a squirming Crookshanks in her arms.

“Mum and Dad just sent Hedwig back” — the owlfluttered obligingly over and perched on top of hercage — “are you ready yet?”

“Nearly — Ginny all right?” Harry asked, shoving onhis glasses.

“Mrs. Weasley’s patched her up,” said Hermione. “Butnow Mad-Eye’s complaining that we can’t leave unlessSturgis Podmore’s here, otherwise the guard will beone short.”

“Guard?” said Harry. “We have to go to King’s Crosswith a guard?”

“ You have to go to King’s Cross with a guard,”Hermione corrected him.

“Why?” said Harry irritably. “I thought Voldemort wassupposed to be lying low, or are you telling me he’sgoing to jump out from behind a dustbin to try and dome in?”

“I don’t know, it’s just what Mad-Eye says,” saidHermione distractedly, looking at her watch. “But ifwe don’t leave soon we’re definitely going to miss thetrain...”

Page | 231Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“WILL YOU LOT GET DOWN HERE NOW, PLEASE!”Mrs. Weasley bellowed and Hermione jumped asthough scalded and hurried out of the room. Harryseized Hedwig, stuffed her unceremoniously into hercage, and set off downstairs after Hermione, dragginghis trunk.

Mrs. Black’s portrait was howling with rage butnobody was bothering to close the curtains over her;all the noise in the hall was bound to rouse her againanyway.

“Harry, you’re to come with me and Tonks,” shoutedMrs. Weasley over the repeated screeches of“MUDBLOODSl SCUM CREATURES OF DIRV.” “Leaveyour trunk and your owl, Alastor’s going to deal withthe luggage... Oh, for heaven’s sake, Sirius,Dumbledore said no!”

A bearlike black dog had appeared at Harry’s side asHarry clambered over the various trunks clutteringthe hall to get to Mrs. Weasley.

“Oh honestly ...” said Mrs. Weasley despairingly,“well, on your own head be it!”

She wrenched open the front door and stepped outinto the weak September sunlight. Harry and the dogfollowed her. The door slammed behind them andMrs. Black’s screeches were cut off instantly.

“Where’s Tonks?” Harry said, looking around as theywent down the stone steps of number twelve, whichvanished the moment they reached the pavement.

“She’s waiting for us just up here,” said Mrs. Weasleystiffly, averting her eyes from the lolloping black dogbeside Harry.

Page | 232Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

An old woman greeted them on the corner. She hadtightly curled gray hair and wore a purple hat shapedlike a porkpie.

“Wotcher, Harry,” she said, winking. “Better hurry up,hadn’t we, Molly?” she added, checking her watch.

“I know, I know,” moaned Mrs. Weasley, lengtheningher stride, “but Mad-Eye wanted to wait for Sturgis...If only Arthur could have got us cars from theMinistry again ... but Fudge wouldn’t let him borrowso much as an empty ink bottle these days... HowMuggles can stand traveling without magic ...”

But the great black dog gave a joyful bark andgamboled around them, snapping at pigeons, andchasing its own tail. Harry couldn’t help laughing.Sirius had been trapped inside for a very long time.Mrs. Weasley pursed her lips in an almost AuntPetunia-ish way.

It took them twenty minutes to reach King’s Cross byfoot and nothing more eventful happened during thattime than Sirius scaring a couple of cats for Harry’sentertainment. Once inside the station they lingeredcasually beside the barrier between platforms nineand ten until the coast was clear, then each of themleaned against it in turn and fell easily through ontoplatform nine and three quarters, where the HogwartsExpress stood belching sooty steam over a platformpacked with departing students and their families.Harry inhaled the familiar smell and felt his spiritssoar... He was really going back...

“I hope the others make it in time,” said Mrs. Weasleyanxiously, staring behind her at the wrought-ironarch spanning the platform, through which newarrivals would come.

Page | 233Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Nice dog, Harry!” called a tall boy with dreadlocks.

“Thanks, Lee,” said Harry, grinning, as Sirius waggedhis tail frantically.

“Oh good,” said Mrs. Weasley, sounding relieved,“here’s Alas tor with the luggage, look ...”

A porter’s cap pulled low over his mismatched eyes,Moody came limping through the archway pushing acart full of their trunks.

“All okay,” he muttered to Mrs. Weasley and Tonks.“Don’t think we were followed...”

Seconds later, Mr. Weasley emerged onto the platformwith Ron and Hermione. They had almost unloadedMoody’s luggage cart when Fred, George, and Ginnyturned up with Lupin.

“No trouble?” growled Moody.

“Nothing,” said Lupin.

“I’ll still be reporting Sturgis to Dumbledore,” saidMoody. “That’s the second time he’s not turned up ina week. Getting as unreliable as Mundungus.”

“Well, look after yourselves,” said Lupin, shakinghands all round. He reached Harry last and gave hima clap on the shoulder. “You too, Harry. Be careful.”

“Yeah, keep your head down and your eyes peeled,”said Moody, shaking Harry’s hand too. “And don’tforget, all of you — careful what you put in writing. Ifin doubt, don’t put it in a letter at all.”

Page | 234Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It’s been great meeting all of you,” said Tonks,hugging Hermione and Ginny. “We’ll see you soon, Iexpect.”

A warning whistle sounded; the students still on theplatform started hurrying onto the train.

“Quick, quick,” said Mrs. Weasley distractedly,hugging them at random and catching Harry twice.“Write... Be good... If you’ve forgotten anything we’llsend it on... Onto the train, now, hurry...”

For one brief moment, the great black dog reared ontoits hind legs and placed its front paws on Harry’sshoulders, but Mrs. Weasley shoved Harry awaytoward the train door hissing, “For heaven’s sake actmore like a dog, Sirius!”

“See you!” Harry called out of the open window as thetrain began to move, while Ron, Hermione, and Ginnywaved beside him. The figures of Tonks, Lupin,

Moody, and Mr. and Mrs. Weasley shrank rapidly butthe black dog was bounding alongside the window,wagging its tail; blurred people on the platform werelaughing to see it chasing the train, and then theyturned the corner, and Sirius was gone.

“He shouldn’t have come with us,” said Hermione in aworried voice.

“Oh lighten up,” said Ron, “he hasn’t seen daylight formonths, poor bloke.”

“Well,” said Fred, clapping his hands together, “can’tstand around chatting all day, we’ve got business todiscuss with Lee. See you later,” and he and Georgedisappeared down the corridor to the right.

Page | 235Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The train was gathering still more speed, so that thehouses outside the window flashed past and theyswayed where they stood.

“Shall we go and find a compartment, then?” Harryasked Ron and Hermione.

Ron and Hermione exchanged looks.

“Er,” said Ron.

“We’re — well — Ron and I are supposed to go intothe prefect carriage,” Hermione said awkwardly.

Ron wasn’t looking at Harry; he seemed to havebecome intensely interested in the fingernails on hisleft hand.

“Oh,” said Harry. “Right. Fine.”

“I don’t think we’ll have to stay there all journey,” saidHermione quickly. “Our letters said we just getinstructions from the Head Boy and Girl and thenpatrol the corridors from time to time.”

“Fine,” said Harry again. “Well, I-I might see you later,then.”

“Yeah, definitely,” said Ron, casting a shifty, anxiouslook at Harry. “It’s a pain having to go down there, I’drather — but we have to — I mean, I’m not enjoyingit, I’m not Percy,” he finished defiantly.

“I know you’re not,” said Harry and he grinned. Butas Hermione and Ron dragged their trunks,Crookshanks, and a caged Pigwidgeon off toward theengine end of the train, Harry felt an odd sense ofloss. He had never traveled on the Hogwarts Expresswithout Ron.

Page | 236Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Come on,” Ginny told him, “if we get a move on we’llbe able to save them places.”

“Right,” said Harry, picking up Hedwig’s cage in onehand and the handle of his trunk in the other. Theystruggled off down the corridor, peering through theglass-paneled doors into the compartments theypassed, which were already full. Harry could not helpnoticing that a lot of people stared back at him withgreat interest and that several of them nudged theirneighbors and pointed him out. After he had met thisbehavior in five consecutive carriages he rememberedthat the Daily Prophet had been telling its readers allsummer what a lying show-off he was. He wonderedbleakly whether the people now staring andwhispering believed the stories.

In the very last carriage they met Neville Longbottom,Harry’s fellow fifth-year Gryffindor, his round faceshining with the effort of pulling his trunk along andmaintaining a one-handed grip on his struggling toad,Trevor.

“Hi, Harry,” he panted. “Hi, Ginny... Everywhere’sfull... I can’t find a seat...”

“What are you talking about?” said Ginny, who hadsqueezed past Neville to peer into the compartmentbehind him. “There’s room in this one, there’s onlyLoony Lovegood in here —”

Neville mumbled something about not wanting todisturb anyone.

“Don’t be silly,” said Ginny, laughing, “she’s all right.”

She slid the door open and pulled her trunk inside it.Harry and Neville followed.

Page | 237Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Hi, Luna,” said Ginny. “Is it okay if we take theseseats?”

The girl beside the window looked up. She hadstraggly, waist-length, dirty-blond hair, very paleeyebrows, and protuberant eyes that gave her apermanently surprised look. Harry knew at once whyNeville had chosen to pass this compartment by. Thegirl gave off an aura of distinct dottiness. Perhaps itwas the fact that she had stuck her wand behind herleft ear for safekeeping, or that she had chosen towear a necklace of butterbeer caps, or that she wasreading a magazine upside down. Her eyes rangedover Neville and came to rest on Harry. She nodded.

“Thanks,” said Ginny, smiling at her.

Harry and Neville stowed the three trunks andHedwig’s cage in the luggage rack and sat down. Thegirl called Luna watched them over her upside-downmagazine, which was called The Quibbler. She did notseem to need to blink as much as normal humans.

She stared and stared at Harry, who had taken theseat opposite her and now wished he had not.

“Had a good summer, Luna?” Ginny asked.

“Yes,” said Luna dreamily, without taking her eyes offHarry. “Yes, it was quite enjoyable, you know. You’reHarry Potter,” she added.

“I know I am,” said Harry.

Neville chuckled. Luna turned her pale eyes upon himinstead.

“And I don’t know who you are.”

“I’m nobody,” said Neville hurriedly.

Page | 238Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No you’re not,” said Ginny sharply. “NevilleLongbottom — Luna Lovegood. Luna’s in my year, butin Ravenclaw.”

“ Wit beyond measure is man’s greatest treasure,” saidLuna in a singsong voice.

She raised her upside-down magazine high enough tohide her face and fell silent. Harry and Neville lookedat each other with their eyebrows raised. Ginnysuppressed a giggle.

The train rattled onward, speeding them out intoopen country. It was an odd, unsettled sort of day;one moment the carriage was full of sunlight and thenext they were passing beneath ominously grayclouds.

“Guess what I got for my birthday?” said Neville.

“Another Remembrall?” said Harry, remembering themarblelike device Neville’s grandmother had sent himin an effort to improve his abysmal memory.

“No,” said Neville, “I could do with one, though, I lostthe old one ages ago... No, look at this...”

He dug the hand that was not keeping a firm grip onTrevor into his schoolbag and after a little bit ofrummaging pulled out what appeared to be a smallgray cactus in a pot, except that it was covered withwhat looked like boils rather than spines.

“Mimbulus mimbletonia,” he said proudly.

Harry stared at the thing. It was pulsating slightly,giving it the rather sinister look of some diseasedinternal organ.

Page | 239Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It’s really, really rare,” said Neville, beaming. “I don’tknow if there’s one in the greenhouse at Hogwarts,even. I can’t wait to show it to Professor Sprout. Mygreat-uncle Algie got it for me in Assyria. I’m going tosee if I can breed from it.”

Harry knew that Neville’s favorite subject wasHerbology, but for the life of him he could not seewhat he would want with this stunted little plant.

“Does it — er — do anything?” he asked.

“Loads of stuff!” said Neville proudly. “It’s got anamazing defensive mechanism — hold Trevor forme...”

He dumped the toad into Harry’s lap and took a quillfrom his schoolbag. Luna Lovegood’s popping eyesappeared over the top of her upside-down magazineagain, watching what Neville was doing. Neville heldthe Mimbulus mimbletonia up to his eyes, his tonguebetween his teeth, chose his spot, and gave the planta sharp prod with the tip of his quill.

Liquid squirted from every boil on the plant, thick,stinking, dark-green jets of it; they hit the ceiling, thewindows, and spattered Luna Lovegood’s magazine.Ginny, who had flung her arms up in front of her facejust in time, merely looked as though she waswearing a slimy green hat, but Harry, whose handshad been busy preventing the escape of Trevor,received a face full. It smelled like rancid manure.

Neville, whose face and torso were also drenched,shook his head to get the worst out of his eyes.

“S-sorry,” he gasped. “I haven’t tried that before...Didn’t realize it would be quite so ... Don’t worry,

Page | 240Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

though, Stinksap’s not poisonous,” he addednervously, as Harry spat a mouthful onto the floor.

At that precise moment the door of their compartmentslid open.

“Oh ... hello, Harry,” said a nervous voice. “Um ... badtime?”

Harry wiped the lenses of his glasses with his Trevor-free hand. A very pretty girl with long, shiny blackhair was standing in the doorway smiling at him: ChoChang, the Seeker on the Ravenclaw Quidditch team.

“Oh ... hi,” said Harry blankly.

“Um ...” said Cho. “Well ... just thought I’d say hello... ’bye then.”

She closed the door again, rather pink in the face,and departed. Harry slumped back in his seat andgroaned. He would have liked Cho to discover himsitting with a group of very cool people laughing theirheads off at a joke he had just told; he would nothave chosen to be sitting with Neville and LoonyLovegood, clutching a toad and dripping in Stinksap.

“Never mind,” said Ginny bracingly. “Look, we can getrid of all this easily.” She pulled out her wand.

“ Scour gifyY’

The Stinksap vanished.

“Sorry,” said Neville again, in a small voice.

Ron and Hermione did not turn up for nearly anhour, by which time the food trolley had already goneby. Harry, Ginny, and Neville had finished theirPumpkin Pasties and were busy swapping Chocolate

Page | 241Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Frog cards when the compartment door slid open andthey walked in, accompanied by Crookshanks and ashrilly hooting Pigwidgeon in his cage.

“I’m starving,” said Ron, stowing Pigwidgeon next toHedwig, grabbing a Chocolate Frog from Harry andthrowing himself into the seat next to him. He rippedopen the wrapper, bit off the Frog’s head, and leanedback with his eyes closed as though he had had avery exhausting morning.

“Well, there are two fifth-year prefects from eachHouse,” said Hermione, looking thoroughlydisgruntled as she took her seat. “Boy and girl fromeach.”

“And guess who’s a Slytherin prefect?” said Ron, stillwith his eyes closed.

“Malfoy,” replied Harry at once, his worst fearconfirmed.

“ ’Course,” said Ron bitterly, stuffing the rest of theFrog into his mouth and taking another.

“And that complete cow Pansy Parkinson,” saidHermione viciously. “How she got to be a prefect whenshe’s thicker than a concussed troll ...”

“Who’s Hufflepuff?” Harry asked.

“Ernie Macmillan and Hannah Abbott,” said Ronthickly.

“And Anthony Goldstein and Padma Patil forRavenclaw,” said Hermione.

“You went to the Yule Ball with Padma Patil,” said avague voice.

Page | 242Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Everyone turned to look at Luna Lovegood, who wasgazing un-blinkingly at Ron over the top of TheQuibbler. He swallowed his mouthful of Frog.

“Yeah, I know I did,” he said, looking mildlysurprised.

“She didn’t enjoy it very much,” Luna informed him.“She doesn’t think you treated her very well, becauseyou wouldn’t dance with her. I don’t think I’d haveminded,” she added thoughtfully, “I don’t like dancingvery much.”

She retreated behind The Quibbler again. Ron staredat the cover with his mouth hanging open for a fewseconds, then looked around at Ginny for some kindof explanation, but Ginny had stuffed her knuckles inher mouth to stop herself giggling. Ron shook hishead, bemused, then checked his watch.

“We’re supposed to patrol the corridors every sooften,” he told Harry and Neville, “and we can give outpunishments if people are misbehaving. I can’t wait toget Crabbe and Goyle for something...”

“You’re not supposed to abuse your position, Ron!”said Hermione sharply.

“Yeah, right, because Malfoy won’t abuse it at all,”said Ron sarcastically.

“So you’re going to descend to his level?”

“No, I’m just going to make sure I get his mates beforehe gets mine.”

“For heaven’s sake, Ron —”

Page | 243Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll make Goyle do lines, it’ll kill him, he hateswriting,” said Ron happily. He lowered his voice toGoyle’s low grunt and, screwing up his face in a lookof pained concentration, mimed writing in midair. “I... must... not... look ... like ... a ... baboon’s ...backside...”

Everyone laughed, but nobody laughed harder thanLuna Lovegood. She let out a scream of mirth thatcaused Hedwig to wake up and flap her wingsindignantly and Crookshanks to leap up into theluggage rack, hissing. She laughed so hard that hermagazine slipped out of her grasp, slid down her legs,and onto the floor.

“That was funny\”

Her prominent eyes swam with tears as she gaspedfor breath, staring at Ron. Utterly nonplussed, helooked around at the others, who were now laughingat the expression on Ron’s face and at the ludicrouslyprolonged laughter of Luna Lovegood, who wasrocking backward and forward, clutching her sides.

“Are you taking the mickey?” said Ron, frowning ather.

“Baboon’s ... backside!” she choked, holding her ribs.

Everyone else was watching Luna laughing, butHarry, glancing at the magazine on the floor, noticedsomething that made him dive for it. Upside down ithad been hard to tell what the picture on the frontwas, but Harry now realized it was a fairly badcartoon of Cornelius Fudge; Harry only recognizedhim because of the lime-green bowler hat. One ofFudge’s hands was clenched around a bag of gold; theother hand was throttling a goblin. The cartoon wascaptioned: How Far Will Fudge Go to Gain Gringotts?Page | 244Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Beneath this were listed the titles of other articlesinside the magazine.

CORRUPTION IN THE QUIDDITCH LEAGUE:

How the Tornados Are Taking ControlSECRETS OF THE ANCIENT RUNES REVEALEDSIRIUS BLACK: Villain or Victim?

“Can I have a look at this?” Harry asked Luna eagerly.

She nodded, still gazing at Ron, breathless withlaughter.

Harry opened the magazine and scanned the index;until this moment he had completely forgotten themagazine Kingsley had handed Mr. Weasley to give toSirius, but it must have been this edition of TheQuibbler. He found the page and turned excitedly tothe article.

This too was illustrated by a rather bad cartoon; infact, Harry would not have known it was supposed tobe Sirius if it hadn’t been captioned. Sirius wasstanding on a pile of human bones with his wand out.The headline on the article read:

SIRIUS - Black As He’s Painted?

Notorious Mass Murderer OR Innocent SingingSensation?

Harry had to read this sentence several times beforehe was convinced that he had not misunderstood it.Since when had Sirius been a singing sensation?

Page | 245Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

For fourteen years Sirius Black has been believedguilty of the mass murder of twelve innocent Mugglesand one wizard. Black’s audacious escape fromAzkaban two years ago has led to the widest manhuntever conducted by the Ministry of Magic. None of ushas ever questioned that he deserves to be recapturedand handed back to the dementors.

BUT DOES HE?

Startling new evidence has recently come to light thatSirius Black may not have committed the crimes forwhich he was sent to Azkaban. In fact, says DorisPurkiss, of 18 Acanthia Way, Little Norton, Black maynot even have been present at the killings.

“What people don’t realize is that Sirius Black is afalse name, ” says Mrs. Purkiss. “The man peoplebelieve to be Sirius Black is actually StubbyBoardman, lead singer of the popular singing groupThe Hobgoblins, who retired from public life after beingstruck in the ear by a turnip at a concert in LittleNorton Church Hall nearly fifteen years ago. Irecognized him the moment I saw his picture in thepaper. Now, Stubby couldn’t possibly have committedthose crimes, because on the day in question hehappened to be enjoying a romantic candlelit dinnerwith me. I have written to the Minister of Magic and amexpecting him to give Stubby, alias Sirius, a full pardonany day now. ”

Harry finished reading and stared at the page indisbelief. Perhaps it was a joke, he thought, perhapsthe magazine often printed spoof items. He flickedback a few pages and found the piece on Fudge.

Cornelius Fudge, the Minister of Magic, denied thathe had any plans to take over the running of theWizarding Bank, Gringotts, when he was elected

Page | 246Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Minister of Magic five years ago. Fudge has alwaysinsisted that he wants nothing more than to“cooperate peacefully” with the guardians of our gold.

BUT DOES HE?

Sources close to the Minister have recently disclosedthat Fudge’s dearest ambition is to seize control of thegoblin gold supplies and that he will not hesitate touse force if need be.

“It wouldn’t be the first time, either,” said a Ministryinsider. “Cornelius ‘Goblin-Crusher’ Fudge, that’s whathis friends call him, if you could hear him when hethinks no one’s listening, oh, he’s always talking aboutthe goblins he’s had done in; he’s had them drowned,he’s had them dropped off buildings, he’s had thempoisoned, he’s had them cooked in pies...”

Harry did not read any further. Fudge might havemany faults but Harry found it extremely hard toimagine him ordering goblins to be cooked in pies. Heflicked through the rest of the magazine. Pausingevery few pages he read an accusation that theTutshill Tornados were winning the Quidditch Leagueby a combination of blackmail, illegal broom-tampering, and torture; an interview with a wizardwho claimed to have flown to the moon on aCleansweep Six and brought back a bag of moon frogsto prove it; and an article on ancient runes, which atleast explained why Luna had been reading TheQuibbler upside down. According to the magazine, ifyou turned the runes on their heads they revealed aspell to make your enemy’s ears turn into kumquats.In fact, compared to the rest of the articles in TheQuibbler, the suggestion that Sirius might really bethe lead singer of The Hobgoblins was quite sensible.Page | 247Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Anything good in there?” asked Ron as Harry closedthe magazine.

“Of course not,” said Hermione scathingly, beforeHarry could answer, “The Quibbler’s rubbish,everyone knows that.”

“Excuse me,” said Luna; her voice had suddenly lostits dreamy quality. “My father’s the editor.”

“I — oh,” said Hermione, looking embarrassed. “Well... it’s got some interesting ... I mean, it’s quite ...”

“I’ll have it back, thank you,” said Luna coldly, andleaning forward she snatched it out of Harry’s hands.Rifling through it to page fifty-seven, she turned itresolutely upside down again and disappeared behindit, just as the compartment door opened for the thirdtime. Harry looked around; he had expected this, butthat did not make the sight of Draco Malfoy smirkingat him from between his cronies Crabbe and Goyleany more enjoyable.

“What?” he said aggressively, before Malfoy couldopen his mouth.

“Manners, Potter, or I’ll have to give you a detention,”drawled Malfoy, whose sleek blond hair and pointedchin were just like his father’s. “You see, I, unlikeyou, have been made a prefect, which means that I,unlike you, have the power to hand outpunishments.”

“Yeah,” said Harry, “but you, unlike me, are a git, soget out and leave us alone.”

Ron, Hermione, Ginny, and Neville laughed. Malfoy’slip curled.

Page | 248Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Tell me, how does it feel being second-best toWeasley, Potter?” he asked.

“Shut up, Malfoy,” said Hermione sharply.

“I seem to have touched a nerve,” said Malfoy,smirking. “Well, just watch yourself, Potter, becauseI’ll be dogging your footsteps in case you step out ofline.”

“Get out!” said Hermione, standing up.

Sniggering, Malfoy gave Harry a last malicious lookand departed, Crabbe and Goyle lumbering in hiswake. Hermione slammed the compartment doorbehind them and turned to look at Harry, who knewat once that she, like him, had registered what Malfoyhad said and been just as unnerved by it.

“Chuck us another Frog,” said Ron, who had clearlynoticed nothing.

Harry could not talk freely in front of Neville andLuna. He exchanged another nervous look withHermione and then stared out of the window.

He had thought Sirius coming with him to the stationwas a bit of a laugh, but suddenly it seemed reckless,if not downright dangerous... Hermione had beenright... Sirius should not have come. What if Mr.Malfoy had noticed the black dog and told Draco,what if he had deduced that the Weasleys, Lupin,Tonks, and Moody knew where Sirius was hiding? Orhad Malfoy’s use of the word “dogging” been acoincidence?

The weather remained undecided as they traveledfarther and farther north. Rain spattered the windowsin a halfhearted way, then the sun put in a feeble

Page | 249Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

appearance before clouds drifted over it once more.When darkness fell and lamps came on inside thecarriages, Luna rolled up The Quibbler, put itcarefully away in her bag, and took to staring ateveryone in the compartment instead.

Harry was sitting with his forehead pressed againstthe train window, trying to get a first distant glimpseof Hogwarts, but it was a moonless night and therain-streaked window was grimy.

“We’d better change,” said Hermione at last. She andRon pinned their prefect badges carefully to theirchests. Harry saw Ron checking how it looked in theblack window.

At last the train began to slow down and they heardthe usual racket up and down it as everybodyscrambled to get their luggage and pets assembled,ready for departure. Ron and Hermione weresupposed to supervise all this; they disappeared fromthe carriage again, leaving Harry and the others tolook after Crookshanks and Pigwidgeon.

“I’ll carry that owl, if you like,” said Luna to Harry,reaching out for Pigwidgeon as Neville stowed Trevorcarefully in an inside pocket.

“Oh — er — thanks,” said Harry, handing her thecage and hoisting Hedwig’s more securely into hisarms.

They shuffled out of the compartment feeling the firststing of the night air on their faces as they joined thecrowd in the corridor. Slowly they moved toward thedoors. Harry could smell the pine trees that lined thepath down to the lake. He stepped down onto theplatform and looked around, listening for the familiarcall of “Firs’years over here ... firs’years ...”

Page | 250Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But it did not come. Instead a quite different voice, abrisk female one, was calling, “First years line up overhere, please! All first years to me!”

A lantern came swinging toward Harry and by its lighthe saw the prominent chin and severe haircut ofProfessor Grubbly-Plank, the witch who had takenover Hagrid’s Care of Magical Creatures lessons for awhile the previous year.

“Where’s Hagrid?” he said out loud.

“I don’t know,” said Ginny, “but we’d better get out ofthe way, we’re blocking the door.”

“Ohyeah ...”

Harry and Ginny became separated as they moved offalong the platform and out through the station.Jostled by the crowd, Harry squinted through thedarkness for a glimpse of Hagrid; he had to be here,Harry had been relying on it — seeing Hagrid againhad been one of the things to which he had beenlooking forward most. But there was no sign of him atall.

He can’t have left, Harry told himself as he shuffledslowly through a narrow doorway onto the roadoutside with the rest of the crowd. He’s just got a coldor something...

He looked around for Ron or Hermione, wanting toknow what they thought about the reappearance ofProfessor Grubbly-Plank, but neither of them wasanywhere near him, so he allowed himself to beshunted forward onto the dark rain-washed roadoutside Hogsmeade station.

Page | 251Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Here stood the hundred or so horseless stagecoachesthat always took the students above first year up tothe castle. Harry glanced quickly at them, turnedaway to keep a lookout for Ron and Hermione, thendid a double take.

The coaches were no longer horseless. There werecreatures standing between the carriage shafts; if hehad had to give them a name, he supposed he wouldhave called them horses, though there was somethingreptilian about them, too. They were completelyfleshless, their black coats clinging to their skeletons,of which every bone was visible. Their heads weredragonish, and their pupil-less eyes white andstaring. Wings sprouted from each wither — vast,black leathery wings that looked as though theyought to belong to giant bats. Standing still and quietin the gloom, the creatures looked eerie and sinister.Harry could not understand why the coaches werebeing pulled by these horrible horses when they werequite capable of moving along by themselves.

“Where’s Pig?” said Ron’s voice, right behind Harry.

“That Luna girl was carrying him,” said Harry,turning quickly, eager to consult Ron about Hagrid.“Where d’you reckon —”

“— Hagrid is? I dunno,” said Ron, sounding worried.“He’d better be okay...”

A short distance away, Draco Malfoy, followed by asmall gang of cronies including Crabbe, Goyle, andPansy Parkinson, was pushing some timid-lookingsecond years out of the way so that they could get acoach to themselves. Seconds later Hermione emergedpanting from the crowd.

Page | 252Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Malfoy was being absolutely foul to a first year backthere, I swear I’m going to report him, he’s only hadhis badge three minutes and he’s using it to bullypeople worse than ever... Where’s Crookshanks?”

“Ginny’s got him,” said Harry. “There she is...”

Ginny had just emerged from the crowd, clutching asquirming Crookshanks.

“Thanks,” said Hermione, relieving Ginny of the cat.“Come on, let’s get a carriage together before they allfillup...”

“I haven’t got Pig yet!” Ron said, but Hermione wasalready heading off toward the nearest unoccupiedcoach. Harry remained behind with Ron.

“What are those things, d’you reckon?” he asked Ron,nodding at the horrible horses as the other studentssurged past them.

“What things?”

“Those horse —”

Luna appeared holding Pigwidgeon’s cage in herarms; the tiny owl was twittering excitedly as usual.

“Here you are,” she said. “He’s a sweet little owl, isn’the?”

“Er ... yeah ... He’s all right,” said Ron gruffly. “Well,come on then, let’s get in... what were you saying,Harry?”

“I was saying, what are those horse things?” Harrysaid, as he, Ron, and Luna made for the carriage inwhich Hermione and Ginny were already sitting.

Page | 253Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What horse things?”

“The horse things pulling the carriages!” said Harryimpatiently; they were, after all, about three feet fromthe nearest one; it was watching them with emptywhite eyes. Ron, however, gave Harry a perplexedlook.

“What are you talking about?”

“I’m talking about — look!”

Harry grabbed Ron’s arm and wheeled him about sothat he was face-to-face with the winged horse. Ronstared straight at it for a second, then looked back atHarry.

“What am I supposed to be looking at?”

“At the — there, between the shafts! Harnessed to thecoach! It’s right there in front —”

But as Ron continued to look bemused, a strangethought occurred to Harry.

“Can’t ... can’t you see them?”

“See what?”

“Can’t you see what’s pulling the carriages?”

Ron looked seriously alarmed now.

“Are you feeling all right, Harry?”

“I ... yeah ...”

Harry felt utterly bewildered. The horse was there infront of him, gleaming solidly in the dim light issuing

Page | 254Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

from the station windows behind them, vapor risingfrom its nostrils in the chilly night air. Yet unless Ronwas faking — and it was a very feeble joke if he was —Ron could not see it at all.

“Shall we get in, then?” said Ron uncertainly, lookingat Harry as though worried about him.

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Yeah, go on ...”

“It’s all right,” said a dreamy voice from beside Harryas Ron vanished into the coach’s dark interior.

“You’re not going mad or anything. I can see themtoo.”

“Can you?” said Harry desperately, turning to Luna.He could see the bat-winged horses reflected in herwide, silvery eyes.

“Oh yes,” said Luna, “I’ve been able to see them eversince my first day here. They’ve always pulled thecarriages. Don’t worry. You’re just as sane as I am.”

Smiling faintly, she climbed into the musty interior ofthe carriage after Ron. Not altogether reassured,

Harry followed her.

Page | 255Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE SORTING HAT’S NEW SONG

Harry did not want to tell the others that he and Lunawere having the same hallucination, if that was whatit was, so he said nothing about the horses as he satdown inside the carriage and slammed the doorbehind him. Nevertheless, he could not help watchingthe silhouettes of the horses moving beyond thewindow.

“Did everyone see that Grubbly-Plank woman?” askedGinny. “What’s she doing back here? Hagrid can’thave left, can he?”

“I’ll be quite glad if he has,” said Luna. “He isn’t avery good teacher, is he?”

“Yes, he is!” said Harry, Ron, and Ginny angrily.

Harry glared at Hermione; she cleared her throat andquickly said, “Erm ... yes ... he’s very good.”

“Well, we think he’s a bit of a joke in Ravenclaw,” saidLuna, unfazed.

Page | 256Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



“You’ve got a rubbish sense of humor then,” Ronsnapped, as the wheels below them creaked intomotion.

Luna did not seem perturbed by Ron’s rudeness; onthe contrary, she simply watched him for a while asthough he were a mildly interesting televisionprogram.

Rattling and swaying, the carriages moved in convoyup the road. When they passed between the tall stonepillars topped with winged boars on either side of thegates to the school grounds, Harry leaned forward totry and see whether there were any lights on inHagrid’s cabin by the Forbidden Forest, but thegrounds were in complete darkness. Hogwarts Castle,however, loomed ever closer: a towering mass ofturrets, jet-black against the dark sky, here and therea window blazing fiery bright above them.

The carriages jingled to a halt near the stone stepsleading up to the oak front doors and Harry got out ofthe carriage first. He turned again to look for litwindows down by the forest, but there was definitelyno sign of life within Hagrid’s cabin. Unwillingly,because he had half hoped they would have vanished,he turned his eyes instead upon the strange, skeletalcreatures standing quietly in the chill night air, theirblank white eyes gleaming.

Harry had once before had the experience of seeingsomething that Ron could not, but that had been areflection in a mirror, something much moreinsubstantial than a hundred very solid-lookingbeasts strong enough to pull a fleet of carriages. IfLuna was to be believed, the beasts had always beenthere but invisible; why, then, could Harry suddenlysee them, and why could Ron not?

Page | 257Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Are you coming or what?” said Ron beside him.

“Oh ... yeah,” said Harry quickly, and they joined thecrowd hurrying up the stone steps into the castle.

The entrance hall was ablaze with torches andechoing with footsteps as the students crossed theflagged stone floor for the double doors to the right,leading to the Great Hall and the start-of-term feast.

The four long House tables in the Great Hall werefilling up under the starless black ceiling, which wasjust like the sky they could glimpse through the highwindows. Candles floated in midair all along thetables, illuminating the silvery ghosts who weredotted about the Hall and the faces of the studentstalking eagerly to one another, exchanging summernews, shouting greetings at friends from otherHouses, eyeing one another’s new haircuts and robes.Again Harry noticed people putting their headstogether to whisper as he passed; he gritted his teethand tried to act as though he neither noticed norcared.

Luna drifted away from them at the Ravenclaw table.The moment they reached Gryffindor’s, Ginny washailed by some fellow fourth years and left to sit withthem; Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Neville found seatstogether about halfway down the table between NearlyHeadless Nick, the Gryffindor House ghost, andParvati Patil and Lavender Brown, the last two ofwhom gave Harry airy, overly friendly greetings thatmade him quite sure they had stopped talking abouthim a split second before. He had more importantthings to worry about, however: He was looking overthe students’ heads to the staff table that ran alongthe top wall of the Hall.

“He’s not there.”

Page | 258Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Ron and Hermione scanned the staff table too, thoughthere was no real need; Hagrid’s size made himinstantly obvious in any lineup.

“He can’t have left,” said Ron, sounding slightlyanxious.

“Of course he hasn’t,” said Harry firmly.

“You don’t think he’s ... hurt, or anything, do you?”said Hermione uneasily.

“No,” said Harry at once.

“But where is he, then?”

There was a pause, then Harry said very quietly, sothat Neville, Parvati, and Lavender could not hear,“Maybe he’s not back yet. You know — from hismission — the thing he was doing over the summerfor Dumbledore.”

“Yeah ... yeah, that’ll be it,” said Ron, soundingreassured, but Hermione bit her lip, looking up anddown the staff table as though hoping for someconclusive explanation of Hagrid’s absence.

“Who’s that?” she said sharply, pointing toward themiddle of the staff table.

Harry’s eyes followed hers. They lit first uponProfessor Dumbledore, sitting in his high-backedgolden chair at the center of the long staff table,wearing deep-purple robes scattered with silvery starsand a matching hat. Dumbledore’s head was inclinedtoward the woman sitting next to him, who wastalking into his ear. She looked, Harry thought, likesomebody’s maiden aunt: squat, with short, curly,mouse-brown hair in which she had placed a horriblePage | 259Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

pink Alice band that matched the fluffy pink cardiganshe wore over her robes. Then she turned her faceslightly to take a sip from her goblet and he saw, witha shock of recognition, a pallid, toadlike face and apair of prominent, pouchy eyes.

“It’s that Umbridge woman!”

“Who?” said Hermione.

“She was at my hearing, she works for Fudge!”

“Nice cardigan,” said Ron, smirking.

“She works for Fudge?” Hermione repeated, frowning.“What on earth’s she doing here, then?”

“Dunno ...”

Hermione scanned the staff table, her eyes narrowed.

“No,” she muttered, “no, surely not ...”

Harry did not understand what she was talking aboutbut did not ask; his attention had just been caught byProfessor Grubbly-Plank who had just appearedbehind the staff table; she worked her way along tothe very end and took the seat that ought to havebeen Hagrid’s. That meant that the first years musthave crossed the lake and reached the castle, andsure enough, a few seconds later, the doors from theentrance hall opened. A long line of scared-lookingfirst years entered, led by Professor McGonagall, whowas carrying a stool on which sat an ancient wizard’shat, heavily patched and darned with a wide rip nearthe frayed brim.

The buzz of talk in the Great Hall faded away. Thefirst years lined up in front of the staff table facing the

Page | 260Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

rest of the students, and Professor McGonagall placedthe stool carefully in front of them, then stood back.

The first years’ faces glowed palely in the candlelight.A small boy right in the middle of the row looked asthough he was trembling. Harry recalled, fleetingly,how terrified he had felt when he had stood there,waiting for the unknown test that would determine towhich House he belonged.

The whole school waited with bated breath. Then therip near the hat’s brim opened wide like a mouth andthe Sorting Hat burst into song:

In times of old when I was newAnd Hogwarts barely startedThe founders of our noble schoolThought never to be parted:

United by a common goal,

They had the selfsame yearning,

To make the world’s best magic schoolAnd pass along their learning.

“Together we will build and teach!”

The four good friends decidedAnd never did they dream that theyMight someday be divided,

For were there such friends anywhereAs Slytherin and Gryffndor?

Unless it was the second pairOf Huffepuff and Ravenclaw?

So how could it have gone so wrong?

How could such friendships fail?

Why, I was there and so can tellThe whole sad, sorry tale.

Said Slytherin, “We’ll teach just thoseWhose ancestry is purest.”

Said Ravenclaw, “We’ll teach those whoseIntelligence is surest.”

Said Gryffindor, “We’ll teach all those

Page | 261Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

With brave deeds to their name,”

Said Hufflepuff, “111 teach the lot,

And treat them just the same.”

These differences caused little strifeWhen first they came to light,

For each of the four founders hadA House in which they mightTake only those they wanted, so,

For instance, SlytherinTook only pure-blood wizardsOf great cunning, just like him,

And only those of sharpest mindWere taught by RavenclawWhile the bravest and the boldestWent to daring Gryffindor.

Good Hufflepuff she took the rest,

And taught them all she knew,

Thus the Houses and their foundersRetained friendships firm and true.

So Hogwarts worked in harmonyFor several happy years,

But then discord crept among usFeeding on our faults and fears.

The Houses that, like pillars four,

Had once held up our school,

Now turned upon each other and,

Divided, sought to rule.

And for a while it seemed the schoolMust meet an early end,

What with dueling and with fightingAnd the clash of friend on friendAnd at last there came a morningWhen old Slytherin departedAnd though the fighting then died outHe left us quite downhearted.

And never since the founders fourWere whittled down to threeHave the Houses been unitedAs they once were meant to be.

Page | 262Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

And now the Sorting Hat is hereAnd you all know the score:

I sort you into HousesBecause that is what I’m for,

But this year I’ll go further,

Listen closely to my song:

Though condemned I am to split youStill I worry that it’s wrong,

Though I must fulfill my dutyAnd must quarter every yearStill I wonder whether sortingMay not bring the end I fear.

Oh, know the perils, read the signs,

The warning history shows,

For our Hogwarts is in dangerFrom external, deadly foesAnd we must unite inside herOr we’ll crumble from within.

I have told you, I have warned you...

Let the Sorting now begin.

The hat became motionless once more; applausebroke out, though it was punctured, for the first timein Harry’s memory, with muttering and whispers. Allacross the Great Hall students were exchangingremarks with their neighbors and Harry, clappingalong with everyone else, knew exactly what they weretalking about.

“Branched out a bit this year, hasn’t it?” said Ron, hiseyebrows raised.

“Too right it has,” said Harry.

The Sorting Hat usually confined itself to describingthe different qualities looked for by each of the fourHogwarts Houses and its own role in sorting them;Harry could not remember it ever trying to give theschool advice before.

Page | 263Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I wonder if it’s ever given warnings before?” saidHermione, sounding slightly anxious.

“Yes, indeed,” said Nearly Headless Nickknowledgeably, leaning across Neville toward her(Neville winced, it was very uncomfortable to have aghost lean through you). “The hat feels itself honor-bound to give the school due warning whenever itfeels —”

But Professor McGonagall, who was waiting to readout the list of first years’ names, was giving thewhispering students the sort of look that scorches.Nearly Headless Nick placed a see-through finger tohis lips and sat primly upright again as the mutteringcame to an abrupt end. With a last frowning look thatswept the four House tables, Professor McGonagalllowered her eyes to her long piece of parchment andcalled out,

“Abercrombie, Euan.”

The terrified-looking boy Harry had noticed earlierstumbled forward and put the hat on his head; it wasonly prevented from falling right down to hisshoulders by his very prominent ears. The hatconsidered for a moment, then the rip near the brimopened again and shouted, “ GRYFFINDOR!”

Harry clapped loudly with the rest of GryffindorHouse as Euan Abercrombie staggered to their tableand sat down, looking as though he would like verymuch to sink through the floor and never be looked atagain.

Slowly the long line of first years thinned; in thepauses between the names and the Sorting Hat’sdecisions, Harry could hear Ron’s stomach rumblingloudly. Finally, “Zeller, Rose” was sorted into

Page | 264Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hufflepuff, and Professor McGonagall picked up thehat and stool and marched them away as ProfessorDumbledore rose to his feet.

Harry was somehow soothed to see Dumbledorestanding before them all, whatever his recent bitterfeelings toward his headmaster. Between the absenceof Hagrid and the presence of those dragonish horses,he had felt that his return to Hogwarts, so longanticipated, was full of unexpected surprises likejarring notes in a familiar song. But this, at least, washow it was supposed to be: their headmaster rising togreet them all before the start-of-term feast.

“To our newcomers,” said Dumbledore in a ringingvoice, his arms stretched wide and a beaming smileon his lips, “welcome! To our old hands — welcomeback! There is a time for speech making, but this isnot it. Tuck in!”

There was an appreciative laugh and an outbreak ofapplause as Dumbledore sat down neatly and threwhis long beard over his shoulder so as to keep it out ofthe way of his plate — for food had appeared out ofnowhere, so that the five long tables were groaningunder joints and pies and dishes of vegetables, bread,sauces, and flagons of pumpkin juice.

“Excellent,” said Ron, with a kind of groan of longing,and he seized the nearest plate of chops and beganpiling them onto his plate, watched wistfully byNearly Headless Nick.

“What were you saying before the Sorting?” Hermioneasked the ghost. “About the hat giving warnings?”

“Oh yes,” said Nick, who seemed glad of a reason toturn away from Ron, who was now eating roastpotatoes with almost indecent enthusiasm. “Yes, I

Page | 265Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

have heard the hat give several warnings before,always at times when it detects periods of greatdanger for the school. And always, of course, itsadvice is the same: Stand together, be strong fromwithin.”

“Ow kunnit nofe skusin danger ifzat?” said Ron.

His mouth was so full Harry thought it was quite anachievement for him to make any noise at all.

“I beg your pardon?” said Nearly Headless Nickpolitely, while Hermione looked revolted. Ron gave anenormous swallow and said, “How can it know if theschool’s in danger if it’s a hat?”

“I have no idea,” said Nearly Headless Nick. “Ofcourse, it lives in Dumbledore’s office, so I daresay itpicks things up there.”

“And it wants all the Houses to be friends?” saidHarry, looking over at the Slytherin table, whereDraco Malfoy was holding court. “Fat chance.”

“Well, now, you shouldn’t take that attitude,” saidNick reprovingly. “Peaceful cooperation, that’s thekey. We ghosts, though we belong to separate Houses,maintain links of friendship. In spite of thecompetitiveness between Gryffindor and Slytherin, Iwould never dream of seeking an argument with theBloody Baron.”

“Only because you’re terrified of him,” said Ron.

Nearly Headless Nick looked highly affronted.

“Terrified? I hope I, Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington, have never been guilty of cowardice in mylife! The noble blood that runs in my veins —”

Page | 266Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What blood?” asked Ron. “Surely you haven’t still got— ?”

“It’s a figure of speech!” said Nearly Headless Nick,now so annoyed his head was trembling ominously onhis partially severed neck. “I assume I am still allowedto enjoy the use of whichever words I like, even if thepleasures of eating and drinking are denied me! But Iam quite used to students poking fun at my death, Iassure you!”

“Nick, he wasn’t really laughing at you!” saidHermione, throwing a furious look at Ron.

Unfortunately, Ron’s mouth was packed to explodingpoint again and all he could manage was “nodeiddum eentup sechew,” which Nick did not seem tothink constituted an adequate apology. Rising intothe air, he straightened his feathered hat and sweptaway from them to the other end of the table, comingto rest between the Creevey brothers, Colin andDennis.

“Well done, Ron,” snapped Hermione.

“What?” said Ron indignantly, having managed,finally, to swallow his food. “I’m not allowed to ask asimple question?”

“Oh forget it,” said Hermione irritably, and the pair ofthem spent the rest of the meal in huffy silence.

Harry was too used to their bickering to bother tryingto reconcile them; he felt it was a better use of histime to eat his way steadily through his steak-and-kidney pie, then a large plateful of his favorite treacletart.

Page | 267Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

When all the students had finished eating and thenoise level in the hall was starting to creep upwardagain, Dumbledore got to his feet once more. Talkingceased immediately as all turned to face theheadmaster. Harry was feeling pleasantly drowsynow. His four-poster bed was waiting somewhereabove, wonderfully warm and soft...

“Well, now that we are all digesting anothermagnificent feast, I beg a few moments of yourattention for the usual start-of-term notices,” saidDumbledore. “First years ought to know that theforest in the grounds is out of bounds to students —and a few of our older students ought to know by nowtoo.” (Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchanged smirks.)

“Mr. Filch, the caretaker, has asked me, for what hetells me is the four hundred and sixty-second time, toremind you all that magic is not permitted incorridors between classes, nor are a number of otherthings, all of which can be checked on the extensivelist now fastened to Mr. Filch’s office door.

“We have had two changes in staffing this year. Weare very pleased to welcome back Professor Grubbly-Plank, who will be taking Care of Magical Creatureslessons; we are also delighted to introduce ProfessorUmbridge, our new Defense Against the Dark Artsteacher.”

There was a round of polite but fairly unenthusiasticapplause during which Harry, Ron, and Hermioneexchanged slightly panicked looks; Dumbledore hadnot said for how long Grubbly-Plank would beteaching.

Dumbledore continued, “Tryouts for the HouseQuidditch teams will take place on the —”

Page | 268Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He broke off, looking inquiringly at ProfessorUmbridge. As she was not much taller standing thansitting, there was a moment when nobody understoodwhy Dumbledore had stopped talking, but thenProfessor Umbridge said, “Hem, hem,” and it becameclear that she had got to her feet and was intending tomake a speech.

Dumbledore only looked taken aback for a moment,then he sat back down smartly and looked alertly atProfessor Umbridge as though he desired nothingbetter than to listen to her talk. Other members ofstaff were not as adept at hiding their surprise.Professor Sprout’s eyebrows had disappeared into herflyaway hair, and Professor McGonagall’s mouth wasas thin as Harry had ever seen it. No new teacher hadever interrupted Dumbledore before. Many of thestudents were smirking; this woman obviously did notknow how things were done at Hogwarts.

“Thank you, Headmaster,” Professor Umbridgesimpered, “for those kind words of welcome.”

Her voice was high-pitched, breathy, and little-girlishand again, Harry felt a powerful rush of dislike thathe could not explain to himself; all he knew was thathe loathed everything about her, from her stupidvoice to her fluffy pink cardigan. She gave anotherlittle throat-clearing cough (“Hem, hem”) andcontinued: “Well, it is lovely to be back at Hogwarts, Imust say!” She smiled, revealing very pointed teeth.“And to see such happy little faces looking back atme!”

Harry glanced around. None of the faces he could seelooked happy; on the contrary, they all looked rathertaken aback at being addressed as though they werefive years old.

Page | 269Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I am very much looking forward to getting to knowyou all, and I’m sure well be very good friends!”

Students exchanged looks at this; some of them werebarely concealing grins.

“I’ll be her friend as long as I don’t have to borrowthat cardigan,” Parvati whispered to Lavender, andboth of them lapsed into silent giggles.

Professor Umbridge cleared her throat again (“Hem,hem”), but when she continued, some of thebreathiness had vanished from her voice. Shesounded much more businesslike and now her wordshad a dull learned-by-heart sound to them.

“The Ministry of Magic has always considered theeducation of young witches and wizards to be of vitalimportance. The rare gifts with which you were bornmay come to nothing if not nurtured and honed bycareful instruction. The ancient skills unique to theWizarding community must be passed down throughthe generations lest we lose them forever. Thetreasure trove of magical knowledge amassed by ourancestors must be guarded, replenished, and polishedby those who have been called to the noble professionof teaching.”

Professor Umbridge paused here and made a littlebow to her fellow staff members, none of whom bowedback. Professor McGonagall’s dark eyebrows hadcontracted so that she looked positively hawklike, andHarry distinctly saw her exchange a significant glancewith Professor Sprout as Umbridge gave another little“Hem, hem” and went on with her speech.

“Every headmaster and headmistress of Hogwarts hasbrought something new to the weighty task ofgoverning this historic school, and that is as it should

Page | 270Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

be, for without progress there will be stagnation anddecay. There again, progress for progress’s sake mustbe discouraged, for our tried and tested traditionsoften require no tinkering. A balance, then, betweenold and new, between permanence and change,between tradition and innovation ...”

Harry found his attentiveness ebbing, as though hisbrain was slipping in and out of tune. The quiet thatalways filled the Hall when Dumbledore was speakingwas breaking up as students put their headstogether, whispering and giggling. Over at theRavenclaw table, Cho Chang was chatting animatedlywith her friends. A few seats along from Cho, LunaLovegood had got out The Quibbler again. Meanwhileat the Hufflepuff table, Ernie Macmillan was one ofthe few still staring at Professor Umbridge, but he wasglassy-eyed and Harry was sure he was onlypretending to listen in an attempt to live up to thenew prefect’s badge gleaming on his chest.

Professor Umbridge did not seem to notice therestlessness of her audience. Harry had theimpression that a full-scale riot could have brokenout under her nose and she would have plowed onwith her speech. The teachers, however, were stilllistening very attentively, and Hermione seemed to bedrinking in every word Umbridge spoke, thoughjudging by her expression, they were not at all to hertaste.

"... because some changes will be for the better, whileothers will come, in the fullness of time, to berecognized as errors of judgment. Meanwhile, someold habits will be retained, and rightly so, whereasothers, outmoded and outworn, must be abandoned.Let us move forward, then, into a new era ofopenness, effectiveness, and accountability, intent onpreserving what ought to be preserved, perfectingPage | 271Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

what needs to be perfected, and pruning wherever wefind practices that ought to be prohibited.”

She sat down. Dumbledore clapped. The staff followedhis lead, though Harry noticed that several of thembrought their hands together only once or twicebefore stopping. A few students joined in, but mosthad been taken unawares by the end of the speech,not having listened to more than a few words of it,and before they could start applauding properly,Dumbledore had stood up again.

“Thank you very much, Professor Umbridge, that wasmost illuminating,” he said, bowing to her. “Now — asI was saying, Quidditch tryouts will be held ...”

“Yes, it certainly was illuminating,” said Hermione ina low voice.

“You’re not telling me you enjoyed it?” Ron saidquietly, turning a glazed face upon Hermione. “Thatwas about the dullest speech I’ve ever heard, and Igrew up with Percy.”

“I said illuminating, not enjoyable,” said Hermione. “Itexplained a lot.”

“Did it?” said Harry in surprise. “Sounded like a loadof waffle to me.”

“There was some important stuff hidden in thewaffle,” said Hermione grimly.

“Was there?” said Ron blankly.

“How about ‘progress for progress’s sake must bediscouraged’? How about ‘pruning wherever we findpractices that ought to be prohibited’?”

Page | 272Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, what does that mean?” said Ron impatiently.

“Ill tell you what it means,” said Hermione ominously.“It means the Ministry’s interfering at Hogwarts.”

There was a great clattering and banging all aroundthem; Dumbledore had obviously just dismissed theschool, because everyone was standing up ready toleave the Hall. Hermione jumped up, lookingflustered.

“Ron, we’re supposed to show the first years where togo!”

“Oh yeah,” said Ron, who had obviously forgotten.“Hey — hey you lot! Midgets!”

“Ron\”

“Well, they are, they’re titchy...”

“I know, but you can’t call them midgets... Firstyears!” Hermione called commandingly along thetable. “This way, please!”

A group of new students walked shyly up the gapbetween the Gryffindor and Hufflepuff tables, all ofthem trying hard not to lead the group. They didindeed seem very small; Harry was sure he had notappeared that young when he had arrived here. Hegrinned at them. A blond boy next to EuanAbercrombie looked petrified, nudged Euan, andwhispered something in his ear. Euan Abercrombielooked equally frightened and stole a horrified look atHarry, who felt the grin slide off his face likeStinksap.

“See you later,” he said to Ron and Hermione and hemade his way out of the Great Hall alone, doing

Page | 273Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

everything he could to ignore more whispering,staring, and pointing as he passed. He kept his eyesfixed ahead as he wove his way through the crowd inthe entrance hall, then he hurried up the marblestaircase, took a couple of concealed shortcuts, andhad soon left most of the crowds behind.

He had been stupid not to expect this, he thoughtangrily, as he walked through much emptier upstairscorridors. Of course everyone was staring at him: Hehad emerged from the Triwizard maze two months agoclutching the dead body of a fellow student andclaiming to have seen Lord Voldemort return topower. There had not been time last term to explainhimself before everyone went home, even if he had feltup to giving the whole school a detailed account of theterrible events in that graveyard.

He had reached the end of the corridor to theGryffindor common room and had come to a halt infront of the portrait of the Fat Lady before he realizedthat he did not know the new password.

“Er ...” he said glumly, staring up at the Fat Lady,who smoothed the folds of her pink satin dress andlooked sternly back at him.

“No password, no entrance,” she said loftily.

“Harry, I know it!” someone panted from behind him,and he turned to see Neville jogging toward him.“Guess what it is? I’m actually going to be able toremember it for once —” He waved the stunted littlecactus he had shown them on the train. “Mimbulusmimbletonio1”

“Correct,” said the Fat Lady, and her portrait swungopen toward them like a door, revealing a circular

Page | 274Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

hole in the wall behind, through which Harry andNeville now climbed.

The Gryffindor common room looked as welcoming asever, a cozy circular tower room full of dilapidatedsquashy armchairs and rickety old tables. A fire wascrackling merrily in the grate and a few people werewarming their hands before going up to theirdormitories; on the other side of the room Fred andGeorge Weasley were pinning something up on thenotice board. Harry waved good night to them andheaded straight for the door to the boys’ dormitories;he was not in much of a mood for talking at themoment. Neville followed him.

Dean Thomas and Seamus Finnigan had reached thedormitory first and were in the process of covering thewalls beside their beds with posters and photographs.They had been talking as Harry pushed open the doorbut stopped abruptly the moment they saw him.

Harry wondered whether they had been talking abouthim, then whether he was being paranoid.

“Hi,” he said, moving across to his own trunk andopening it.

“Hey, Harry,” said Dean, who was putting on a pair ofpajamas in the West Ham colors. “Good holiday?”

“Not bad,” muttered Harry, as a true account of hisholiday would have taken most of the night to relateand he could not face it. “You?”

“Yeah, it was okay,” chuckled Dean. “Better thanSeamus’s anyway, he was just telling me.”

“Why, what happened, Seamus?” Neville asked as heplaced his Mimbulus mimbletonia tenderly on hisbedside cabinet.

Page | 275Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Seamus did not answer immediately; he was makingrather a meal of ensuring that his poster of theKenmare Kestrels Quidditch team was quite straight.Then he said, with his back still turned to Harry, “Memam didn’t want me to come back.”

“What?” said Harry, pausing in the act of pulling offhis robes.

“She didn’t want me to come back to Hogwarts.”

Seamus turned away from his poster and pulled hisown pajamas out of his trunk, still not looking atHarry.

“But — why?” said Harry, astonished. He knew thatSeamus’s mother was a witch and could notunderstand, therefore, why she should have comeover so Dursley-ish.

Seamus did not answer until he had finishedbuttoning his pajamas.

“Well,” he said in a measured voice, “I suppose ...because of you.”

“What d’you mean?” said Harry quickly. His heart wasbeating rather fast. He felt vaguely as thoughsomething was closing in on him.

“Well,” said Seamus again, still avoiding Harry’s eyes,“she ... er ... well, it’s not just you, it’s Dumbledoretoo ...”

“She believes the Daily Prophet?” said Harry. “Shethinks I’m a liar and Dumbledore’s an old fool?”

Seamus looked up at him. “Yeah, something likethat.”

Page | 276Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry said nothing. He threw his wand down onto hisbedside table, pulled off his robes, stuffed themangrily into his trunk, and pulled on his pajamas. Hewas sick of it; sick of being the person who was staredat and talked about all the time. If any of them knew,if any of them had the faintest idea what it felt like tobe the one all these things had happened to ... Mrs.Finnigan had no idea, the stupid woman, he thoughtsavagely.

He got into bed and made to pull the hangings closedaround him, but before he could do so, Seamus said,“Look ... what did happen that night when ... youknow, when ... with Cedric Diggory and all?”

Seamus sounded nervous and eager at the same time.Dean, who had been bending over his trunk, trying toretrieve a slipper, went oddly still and Harry knew hewas listening hard.

“What are you asking me for?” Harry retorted. “Justread the Daily Prophet like your mother, why don’tyou? That’ll tell you all you need to know.”

“Don’t you have a go at my mother,” snappedSeamus.

“I’ll have a go at anyone who calls me a liar,” saidHarry.

“Don’t talk to me like that!”

“I’ll talk to you how I want,” said Harry, his temperrising so fast he snatched his wand back from hisbedside table. “If you’ve got a problem sharing adormitory with me, go and ask McGonagall if you canbe moved, stop your mummy worrying —”

“Leave my mother out of this, Potter!”

Page | 277Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What’s going on?”

Ron had appeared in the doorway. His wide eyestraveled from Harry, who was kneeling on his bedwith his wand pointing at Seamus, to Seamus, whowas standing there with his fists raised.

“He’s having a go at my mother!” Seamus yelled.

“What?” said Ron. “Harry wouldn’t do that — we metyour mother, we liked her...”

“That’s before she started believing every word thestinking Daily Prophet writes about me!” said Harry atthe top of his voice.

“Oh,” said Ron, comprehension dawning across hisfreckled face. “Oh ... right.”

“You know what?” said Seamus heatedly, castingHarry a venomous look. “He’s right, I don’t want toshare a dormitory with him anymore, he’s amadman.”

“That’s out of order, Seamus,” said Ron, whose earswere starting to glow red, always a danger sign.

“Out of order, am I?” shouted Seamus, who incontrast with Ron was turning paler. “You believe allthe rubbish he’s come out with about You-Know-Who,do you, you reckon he’s telling the truth?”

“Yeah, I do!” said Ron angrily.

“Then you’re mad too,” said Seamus in disgust.

“Yeah? Well unfortunately for you, pal, I’m also aprefect!” said Ron, jabbing himself in the chest with a

Page | 278Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

finger. “So unless you want detention, watch yourmouth!”

Seamus looked for a few seconds as though detentionwould be a reasonable price to pay to say what wasgoing through his mind; but with a noise of contempthe turned on his heel, vaulted into bed, and pulledthe hangings shut with such violence that they wereripped from the bed and fell in a dusty pile to thefloor. Ron glared at Seamus, then looked at Dean andNeville.

“Anyone else’s parents got a problem with Harry?” hesaid aggressively.

“My parents are Muggles, mate,” said Dean,shrugging. “They don’t know nothing about no deathsat Hogwarts, because I’m not stupid enough to tellthem.”

“You don’t know my mother, she’ll weasel anythingout of anyone!” Seamus snapped at him. “Anyway,your parents don’t get the Daily Prophet, they don’tknow our headmaster’s been sacked from theWizengamot and the International Confederation ofWizards because he’s losing his marbles —”

“My gran says that’s rubbish,” piped up Neville. “Shesays it’s the Daily Prophet that’s going downhill, notDumbledore. She’s canceled our subscription. Webelieve Harry,” he said simply. He climbed into bedand pulled the covers up to his chin, looking owlishlyover them at Seamus. “My gran’s always said You-Know-Who would come back one day. She says ifDumbledore says he’s back, he’s back.”

Harry felt a rush of gratitude toward Neville. Nobodyelse said anything. Seamus got out his wand, repairedthe bed hangings, and vanished behind them. Dean

Page | 279Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

got into bed, rolled over, and fell silent. Neville, whoappeared to have nothing more to say either, wasgazing fondly at his moonlit cactus.

Harry lay back on his pillows while Ron bustledaround the next bed, putting his things away. He feltshaken by the argument with Seamus, whom he hadalways liked very much. How many more people weregoing to suggest that he was lying or unhinged?

Had Dumbledore suffered like this all summer, asfirst the Wizengamot, then the InternationalConfederation of Wizards had thrown him from theirranks? Was it anger at Harry, perhaps, that hadstopped Dumbledore getting in touch with him formonths? The two of them were in this together, afterall; Dumbledore had believed Harry, announced hisversion of events to the whole school and then to thewider Wizarding community. Anyone who thoughtHarry was a liar had to think that Dumbledore wastoo or else that Dumbledore had been hoodwinked...

They’ll know we’re right in the end, thought Harrymiserably, as Ron got into bed and extinguished thelast candle in the dormitory. But he wondered howmany attacks like Seamus’s he would have to endurebefore that time came.

Page | 280Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





PROFESSOR UMBRIDGE

Seamus dressed at top speed next morning and leftthe dormitory before Harry had even put on his socks.

“Does he think hell turn into a nutter if he stays in aroom with me too long?” asked Harry loudly, as thehem of Seamus’s robes whipped out of sight.

“Don’t worry about it, Harry,” Dean muttered,hoisting his school-bag onto his shoulder. “He’s just...” But apparently he was unable to say exactly whatSeamus was, and after a slightly awkward pausefollowed him out of the room.

Neville and Ron both gave Harry it’s-his-problem-not-yours looks, but Harry was not much consoled. Howmuch more of this was he going to have to take?

“What’s the matter?” asked Hermione five minuteslater, catching up with Harry and Ron halfway acrossthe common room as they all headed toward

Page | 281Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

breakfast. “You look absolutely — oh for heaven’ssake.”

She was staring at the common room notice board,where a large new sign had been put up.

GALLONS OF GALLEONS!

Pocket money failing to keep pace with youroutgoings?

Like to earn a little extra gold?

Contact Fred and George Weasley,

Gryffindor common room,

for simple, part-time, virtually painless jobs

(WE REGRET THAT ALL WORK IS UNDERTAKEN ATAPPLICANT’S OWN RISK)

“They are the limit,” said Hermione grimly, takingdown the sign, which Fred and George had pinned upover a poster giving the date of the first Hogsmeadeweekend in October. “We’ll have to talk to them, Ron.”

Ron looked positively alarmed.

“Why?”

“Because we’re prefects!” said Hermione, as theyclimbed out through the portrait hole. “It’s up to us tostop this kind of thing!”

Ron said nothing; Harry could tell from his glumexpression that the prospect of stopping Fred and

Page | 282Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

George doing exactly what they liked was not one thathe found inviting.

“Anyway, what’s up, Harry?” Hermione continued, asthey walked down a flight of stairs lined with portraitsof old witches and wizards, all of whom ignored them,being engrossed in their own conversation. “You lookreally angry about something.”

“Seamus reckons Harry’s lying about You-Know-Who,” said Ron succinctly, when Harry did notrespond.

Hermione, whom Harry had expected to react angrilyon his behalf, sighed.

“Yes, Lavender thinks so too,” she said gloomily.

“Been having a nice little chat with her about whetheror not I’m a lying, attention-seeking prat, have you?”Harry said loudly.

“No,” said Hermione calmly, “I told her to keep her bigfat mouth shut about you, actually. And it would bequite nice if you stopped jumping down Ron’s and mythroats, Harry, because if you haven’t noticed, we’reon your side.”

There was a short pause.

“Sorry,” said Harry in a low voice.

“That’s quite all right,” said Hermione with dignity.Then she shook her head. “Don’t you remember whatDumbledore said at the end-of-term feast last year?”

Harry and Ron both looked at her blankly, andHermione sighed again.

Page | 283Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“About You-Know-Who. He said, ‘His gift for spreadingdiscord and enmity is very great. We can fight it onlyby showing an equally strong bond of friendship andtrust —’ ”

“How do you remember stuff like that?” asked Ron,looking at her in admiration.

“I listen, Ron,” said Hermione with a touch ofasperity.

“So do I, but I still couldn’t tell you exactly what —”

“The point,” Hermione pressed on loudly, “is that thissort of thing is exactly what Dumbledore was talkingabout. You-Know-Who’s only been back two months,and we’ve started fighting among ourselves. And theSorting Hat’s warning was the same — standtogether, be united —”

“And Harry said it last night,” retorted Ron, “if thatmeans we’re supposed to get matey with theSlytherins, fat chance.”

“Well, I think it’s a pity we’re not trying for a bit ofinter-House unity,” said Hermione crossly.

They had reached the foot of the marble staircase. Aline of fourth-year Ravenclaws was crossing theentrance hall; they caught sight of Harry and hurriedto form a tighter group, as though frightened hemight attack stragglers.

“Yeah, we really ought to be trying to make friendswith people like that,” said Harry sarcastically.

They followed the Ravenclaws into the Great Hall,looking instinctively at the staff table as they entered.Professor Grubbly-Plank was chatting to Professor

Page | 284Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Sinistra, the Astronomy teacher, and Hagrid was onceagain conspicuous only by his absence. Theenchanted ceiling above them echoed Harry’s mood; itwas a miserable rain-cloud gray.

“Dumbledore didn’t even mention how long thatGrubbly-Plank woman’s staying,” he said, as theymade their way across to the Gryffindor table.

“Maybe ...” said Hermione thoughtfully.

“What?” said both Harry and Ron together.

“Well ... maybe he didn’t want to draw attention toHagrid not being here.”

“What d’you mean, draw attention to it?” said Ron,half laughing. “How could we not notice?”

Before Hermione could answer, a tall black girl withlong, braided hair had marched up to Harry.

“Hi, Angelina.”

“Hi,” she said briskly, “good summer?” And withoutwaiting for an answer, “Listen, I’ve been madeGryffindor Quidditch Captain.”

“Nice one,” said Harry, grinning at her; he suspectedAngelina’s pep talks might not be as long-winded asOliver Wood’s had been, which could only be animprovement.

“Yeah, well, we need a new Keeper now Oliver’s left.Tryouts are on Friday at five o’clock and I want thewhole team there, all right? Then we can see how thenew person’ll fit in.”

Page | 285Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Okay,” said Harry, and she smiled at him anddeparted.

“I’d forgotten Wood had left,” said Hermione vaguely,sitting down beside Ron and pulling a plate of toasttoward her. “I suppose that will make quite adifference to the team?”

“I s’pose,” said Harry, taking the bench opposite. “Hewas a good Keeper...”

“Still, it won’t hurt to have some new blood, will it?”said Ron.

With a whoosh and a clatter, hundreds of owls camesoaring in through the upper windows. Theydescended all over the Hall, bringing letters andpackages to their owners and showering thebreakfasters with droplets of water; it was clearlyraining hard outside. Hedwig was nowhere to be seen,but Harry was hardly surprised; his onlycorrespondent was Sirius, and he doubted Siriuswould have anything new to tell him after onlytwenty-four hours apart. Hermione, however, had tomove her orange juice aside quickly to make way for alarge damp barn owl bearing a sodden Daily Prophetin its beak.

“What are you still getting that for?” said Harryirritably, thinking of Seamus, as Hermione placed aKnut in the leather pouch on the owl’s leg and it tookoff again. “I’m not bothering ... load of rubbish.”

“It’s best to know what the enemy are saying,” saidHermione darkly, and she unfurled the newspaperand disappeared behind it, not emerging until Harryand Ron had finished eating.

Page | 286Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Nothing,” she said simply, rolling up the newspaperand laying it down by her plate. “Nothing about youor Dumbledore or anything.”

Professor McGonagall was now moving along the tablehanding out schedules.

“Look at today!” groaned Ron. “History of Magic,double Potions, Divination, and double DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts ... Binns, Snape, Trelawney,and that Umbridge woman all in one day! I wish Fredand George’d hurry up and get those SkivingSnackboxes sorted...”

“Do mine ears deceive me?” said Fred, arriving withGeorge and squeezing onto the bench beside Harry.“Hogwarts prefects surely don’t wish to skive offlessons?”

“Look what we’ve got today,” said Ron grumpily,shoving his schedule under Fred’s nose. “That’s theworst Monday I’ve ever seen.”

“Fair point, little bro,” said Fred, scanning thecolumn. “You can have a bit of Nosebleed Nougatcheap if you like.”

“Why’s it cheap?” said Ron suspiciously.

“Because you’ll keep bleeding till you shrivel up, wehaven’t got an antidote yet,” said George, helpinghimself to a kipper.

“Cheers,” said Ron moodily, pocketing his schedule,“but I think I’ll take the lessons.”

“And speaking of your Skiving Snackboxes,” saidHermione, eyeing Fred and George beadily, “you can’tadvertise for testers on the Gryffindor notice board.”

Page | 287Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Says who?” said George, looking astonished.

“Says me,” said Hermione. “And Ron.”

“Leave me out of it,” said Ron hastily.

Hermione glared at him. Fred and George sniggered.

“You’ll be singing a different tune soon enough,Hermione,” said Fred, thickly buttering a crumpet.“You’re starting your fifth year, you’ll be begging usfor a Snackbox before long.”

“And why would starting fifth year mean I want aSkiving Snackbox?” asked Hermione.

“Fifth year’s O.W.L. year,” said George.

“So?”

“So you’ve got your exams coming up, haven’t you?They’ll be keeping your noses so hard to thatgrindstone they’ll be rubbed raw,” said Fred withsatisfaction.

“Half our year had minor breakdowns coming up toO.W.L.s,” said George happily. “Tears and tantrums... Patricia Stimpson kept coming over faint...”

“Kenneth Towler came out in boils, d’you remember?”said Fred reminiscently.

“That’s ’cause you put Bulbadox Powder in hispajamas,” said George.

“Oh yeah,” said Fred, grinning. “I’d forgotten... Hardto keep track sometimes, isn’t it?”

Page | 288Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Anyway, it’s a nightmare of a year, the fifth,” saidGeorge. “If you care about exam results anyway. Fredand I managed to keep our spirits up somehow.”

“Yeah ... you got, what was it, three O.W.L.s each?”said Ron.

“Yep,” said Fred unconcernedly. “But we feel ourfutures lie outside the world of academicachievement.”

“We seriously debated whether we were going tobother coming back for our seventh year,” saidGeorge brightly, “now that we’ve got —”

He broke off at a warning look from Harry, who knewGeorge had been about to mention the Triwizardwinnings he had given them.

“— now that we’ve got our O.W.L.s,” George saidhastily. “I mean, do we really need N.E.W.T.s? But wedidn’t think Mum could take us leaving school early,not on top of Percy turning out to be the world’sbiggest prat.”

“We’re not going to waste our last year here, though,”said Fred, looking affectionately around at the GreatHall. “We’re going to use it to do a bit of marketresearch, find out exactly what the average Hogwartsstudent requires from his joke shop, carefullyevaluate the results of our research, and thenproduce the products to fit the demand.”

“But where are you going to get the gold to start ajoke shop?” asked Hermione skeptically. “You’re goingto need all the ingredients and materials — andpremises too, I suppose...”

Page | 289Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry did not look at the twins. His face felt hot; hedeliberately dropped his fork and dived down toretrieve it. He heard Fred say overhead, “Ask us noquestions and well tell you no lies, Hermione. C’mon,George, if we get there early we might be able to sell afew Extendable Ears before Herbology.”

Harry emerged from under the table to see Fred andGeorge walking away, each carrying a stack of toast.

“What did that mean?” said Hermione, looking fromHarry to Ron. “ ‘Ask us no questions ...’ Does thatmean they’ve already got some gold to start a jokeshop?”

“You know, I’ve been wondering about that,” saidRon, his brow furrowed. “They bought me a new set ofdress robes this summer, and I couldn’t understandwhere they got the Galleons...”

Harry decided it was time to steer the conversationout of these dangerous waters.

“D’you reckon it’s true this year’s going to be reallytough? Because of the exams?”

“Oh yeah,” said Ron. “Bound to be, isn’t it? O.W.L.sare really important, affect the jobs you can apply forand everything. We get career advice too, later thisyear, Bill told me. So you can choose what N.E.W.T.syou want to do next year.”

“D’you know what you want to do after Hogwarts?”Harry asked the other two, as they left the Great Hallshortly afterward and set off toward their History ofMagic classroom.

“Not really,” said Ron slowly. “Except ... well ...”

Page | 290Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He looked slightly sheepish.

“What?” Harry urged him.

“Well, it’d be cool to be an Auror,” said Ron in anoffhand voice.

“Yeah, it would,” said Harry fervently.

“But they’re, like, the elite,” said Ron. “You’ve got tobe really good. What about you, Hermione?”

“I don’t know,” said Hermione. “I think I’d really liketo do something worthwhile.”

“An Auror’s worthwhile!” said Harry.

“Yes, it is, but it’s not the only worthwhile thing,” saidHermione thoughtfully. “I mean, if I could takeS.P.E.W. further ...”

Harry and Ron carefully avoided looking at eachother.

History of Magic was by common consent the mostboring subject ever devised by Wizard-kind. ProfessorBinns, their ghost teacher, had a wheezy, droningvoice that was almost guaranteed to cause severedrowsiness within ten minutes, five in warm weather.He never varied the form of their lessons, but lecturedthem without pausing while they took notes, orrather, gazed sleepily into space. Harry and Ron hadso far managed to scrape passes in this subject onlyby copying Hermione’s notes before exams; she aloneseemed able to resist the soporific power of Binns’svoice.

Today they suffered through three quarters of anhour’s droning on the subject of giant wars. Harry

Page | 291Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

heard just enough within the first ten minutes toappreciate dimly that in another teacher’s hands thissubject might have been mildly interesting, but thenhis brain disengaged, and he spent the remainingthirty-five minutes playing hangman on a corner ofhis parchment with Ron, while Hermione shot themfilthy looks out of the corner of her eye.

“How would it be,” she asked them coldly as they leftthe classroom for break (Binns drifting away throughthe blackboard), “if I refused to lend you my notesthis year?”

“We’d fail our O.W.L.s,” said Ron. “If you want that onyour conscience, Hermione ...”

“Well, you’d deserve it,” she snapped. “You don’t eventry to listen to him, do you?”

“We do try,” said Ron. “We just haven’t got yourbrains or your memory or your concentration —you’re just cleverer than we are — is it nice to rub itin?”

“Oh, don’t give me that rubbish,” said Hermione, butshe looked slightly mollified as she led the way outinto the damp courtyard.

A fine misty drizzle was falling, so that the peoplestanding in huddles around the yard looked blurredat the edges. Harry, Ron, and Hermione chose asecluded corner under a heavily dripping balcony,turning up the collars of their robes against the chillySeptember air and talking about what Snape waslikely to set them in the first lesson of the year. Theyhad got as far as agreeing that it was likely to besomething extremely difficult, just to catch them offguard after a two-month holiday, when someonewalked around the corner toward them.

Page | 292Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Hello, Harry!”

It was Cho Chang and what was more, she was onher own again. This was most unusual: Cho wasalmost always surrounded by a gang of giggling girls;Harry remembered the agony of trying to get her byherself to ask her to the Yule Ball.

“Hi,” said Harry, feeling his face grow hot. At leastyou’re not covered in Stinksap this time, he toldhimself. Cho seemed to be thinking along the samelines.

“You got that stuff off, then?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, trying to grin as though thememory of their last meeting was funny as opposed tomortifying. “So did you ... er ... have a good summer?”

The moment he had said this he wished he hadn’t:Cedric had been Cho’s boyfriend and the memory ofhis death must have affected her holiday almost asbadly as it had affected Harry’s... Something seemedto tauten in her face, but she said, “Oh, it was allright, you know...”

“Is that a Tornados badge?” Ron demanded suddenly,pointing at the front of Cho’s robes, to which a sky-blue badge emblazoned with a double gold T waspinned. “You don’t support them, do you?”

“Yeah, I do,” said Cho.

“Have you always supported them, or just since theystarted winning the league?” said Ron, in what Harryconsidered an unnecessarily accusatory tone of voice.

“I’ve supported them since I was six,” said Cho coolly.“Anyway ... see you, Harry.”

Page | 293Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She walked away. Hermione waited until Cho washalfway across the courtyard before rounding on Ron.

“You are so tactless!”

“What? I only asked her if —”

“Couldn’t you tell she wanted to talk to Harry on herown?”

“So? She could’ve done, I wasn’t stopping —”

“What on earth were you attacking her about herQuidditch team for?”

“Attacking? I wasn’t attacking her, I was only —”

“Who cares if she supports the Tornados?”

“Oh, come on, half the people you see wearing thosebadges only bought them last season —”

“But what does it matter?”

“It means they’re not real fans, they’re just jumpingon the bandwagon —”

“That’s the bell,” said Harry listlessly, because Ronand Hermione were bickering too loudly to hear it.They did not stop arguing all the way down to Snape’sdungeon, which gave Harry plenty of time to reflectthat between Neville and Ron he would be lucky everto have two minutes’ conversation with Cho that hecould look back on without wanting to leave thecountry.

And yet, he thought, as they joined the queue liningup outside Snape’s classroom door, she had chosento come and talk to him, hadn’t she? She had been

Page | 294Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Cedric’s girlfriend; she could easily have hated Harryfor coming out of the Triwizard maze alive whenCedric had died, yet she was talking to him in aperfectly friendly way, not as though she thought himmad, or a liar, or in some horrible way responsible forCedric’s death... Yes, she had definitely chosen tocome and talk to him, and that made the second timein two days ... and at this thought, Harry’s spiritsrose. Even the ominous sound of Snape’s dungeondoor creaking open did not puncture the small,hopeful bubble that seemed to have swelled in hischest. He filed into the classroom behind Ron andHermione and followed them to their usual table atthe back, ignoring the huffy, irritable noises nowissuing from both of them.

“Settle down,” said Snape coldly, shutting the doorbehind him.

There was no real need for the call to order; themoment the class had heard the door close, quiet hadfallen and all fidgeting stopped. Snape’s merepresence was usually enough to ensure a class’ssilence.

“Before we begin today’s lesson,” said Snape,sweeping over to his desk and staring around at themall, “I think it appropriate to remind you that nextJune you will be sitting an important examination,during which you will prove how much you havelearned about the composition and use of magicalpotions. Moronic though some of this classundoubtedly are, I expect you to scrape an‘Acceptable’ in your O.W.L., or suffer my ...displeasure.”

His gaze lingered this time upon Neville, who gulped.

Page | 295Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“After this year, of course, many of you will ceasestudying with me,” Snape went on. “I take only thevery best into my N.E.W.T. Potions class, whichmeans that some of us will certainly be saying good-bye.”

His eyes rested on Harry and his lip curled. Harryglared back, feeling a grim pleasure at the idea thathe would be able to give up Potions after fifth year.

“But we have another year to go before that happymoment of farewell,” said Snape softly, “so whetheryou are intending to attempt N.E.W.T. or not, I adviseall of you to concentrate your efforts uponmaintaining the high-pass level I have come to expectfrom my O.W.L. students.

“Today we will be mixing a potion that often comes upat Ordinary Wizarding Level: the Draught of Peace, apotion to calm anxiety and soothe agitation. Bewarned: If you are too heavy-handed with theingredients you will put the drinker into a heavy andsometimes irreversible sleep, so you will need to payclose attention to what you are doing.” On Harry’sleft, Hermione sat up a little straighter, herexpression one of the utmost attentiveness. “Theingredients and method” — Snape flicked his wand —“are on the blackboard” — (they appeared there) —“you will find everything you need” — he flicked hiswand again — “in the store cupboard” — (the door ofthe said cupboard sprang open) — “you have an hourand a half... Start.”

Just as Harry, Ron, and Hermione had predicted,Snape could hardly have set them a more difficult,fiddly potion. The ingredients had to be added to thecauldron in precisely the right order and quantities;the mixture had to be stirred exactly the right numberof times, firstly in clockwise, then in counterclockwisePage | 296Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

directions; the heat of the flames on which it wassimmering had to be lowered to exactly the right levelfor a specific number of minutes before the finalingredient was added.

“A light silver vapor should now be rising from yourpotion,” called Snape, with ten minutes left to go.

Harry, who was sweating profusely, lookeddesperately around the dungeon. His own cauldronwas issuing copious amounts of dark gray steam;Ron’s was spitting green sparks. Seamus wasfeverishly prodding the flames at the base of hiscauldron with the tip of his wand, as they had goneout. The surface of Hermione’s potion, however, was ashimmering mist of silver vapor, and as Snape sweptby he looked down his hooked nose at it withoutcomment, which meant that he could find nothing tocriticize. At Harry’s cauldron, however, Snapestopped, looking down at Harry with a horrible smirkon his face.

“Potter, what is this supposed to be?”

The Slytherins at the front of the class all looked upeagerly; they loved hearing Snape taunt Harry.

“The Draught of Peace,” said Harry tensely.

“Tell me, Potter,” said Snape softly, “can you read?”

Draco Malfoy laughed.

“Yes, I can,” said Harry, his fingers clenched tightlyaround his wand.

“Read the third line of the instructions for me, Potter.”

Page | 297Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry squinted at the blackboard; it was not easy tomake out the instructions through the haze ofmulticolored steam now filling the dungeon.

“ ‘Add powdered moonstone, stir three timescounterclockwise, allow to simmer for seven minutes,then add two drops of syrup of hellebore.’ ”

His heart sank. He had not added syrup of hellebore,but had proceeded straight to the fourth line of theinstructions after allowing his potion to simmer forseven minutes.

“Did you do everything on the third line, Potter?”

“No,” said Harry very quietly.

“I beg your pardon?”

“No,” said Harry, more loudly. “I forgot thehellebore...”

“I know you did, Potter, which means that this messis utterly worthless. Evanesco.”

The contents of Harry’s potion vanished; he was leftstanding foolishly beside an empty cauldron.

“Those of you who have managed to read theinstructions, fill one flagon with a sample of yourpotion, label it clearly with your name, and bring it upto my desk for testing,” said Snape. “Homework:twelve inches of parchment on the properties ofmoonstone and its uses in potion-making, to behanded in on Thursday.”

While everyone around him filled their flagons, Harrycleared away his things, seething. His potion hadbeen no worse than Ron’s, which was now giving off a

Page | 298Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

foul odor of bad eggs, or Neville’s, which had achievedthe consistency of just-mixed cement and whichNeville was now having to gouge out of his cauldron,yet it was he, Harry, who would be receiving zeromarks for the day’s work. He stuffed his wand backinto his bag and slumped down onto his seat,watching everyone else march up to Snape’s deskwith filled and corked flagons. When at long last thebell rang, Harry was first out of the dungeon and hadalready started his lunch by the time Ron andHermione joined him in the Great Hall. The ceilinghad turned an even murkier gray during the morning.Rain was lashing the high windows.

“That was really unfair,” said Hermione consolingly,sitting down next to Harry and helping herself toshepherd’s pie. “Your potion wasn’t nearly as bad asGoyle’s, when he put it in his flagon the whole thingshattered and set his robes on fire.”

“Yeah, well,” said Harry, glowering at his plate, “sincewhen has Snape ever been fair to me?”

Neither of the others answered; all three of themknew that Snape and Harry’s mutual enmity hadbeen absolute from the moment Harry had set foot inHogwarts.

“I did think he might be a bit better this year,” saidHermione in a disappointed voice. “I mean ... youknow ...” She looked carefully around; there were halfa dozen empty seats on either side of them andnobody was passing the table. "... Now he’s in theOrder and everything.”

“Poisonous toadstools don’t change their spots,” saidRon sagely. “Anyway, I’ve always thought Dumbledorewas cracked trusting Snape, where’s the evidence heever really stopped working for You-Know-Who?”

Page | 299Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I think Dumbledore’s probably got plenty of evidence,even if he doesn’t share it with you, Ron,” snappedHermione.

“Oh, shut up, the pair of you,” said Harry heavily, asRon opened his mouth to argue back. Hermione andRon both froze, looking angry and offended. “Can’tyou give it a rest?” he said. “You’re always having a goat each other, it’s driving me mad.” And abandoninghis shepherd’s pie, he swung his schoolbag back overhis shoulder and left them sitting there.

He walked up the marble staircase two steps at atime, past the many students hurrying toward lunch.The anger that had just flared so unexpectedly stillblazed inside him, and the vision of Ron andHermione’s shocked faces afforded him a sense ofdeep satisfaction. Serve them right, he thought. Whycan’t they give it a rest? ... Bickering all the time ... It’senough to drive anyone up the wall...

He passed the large picture of Sir Cadogan the knighton a landing; Sir Cadogan drew his sword andbrandished it fiercely at Harry, who ignored him.

“Come back, you scurvy dog, stand fast and fight!”yelled Sir Cadogan in a muffled voice from behind hisvisor, but Harry merely walked on, and when SirCadogan attempted to follow him by running into aneighboring picture, he was rebuffed by itsinhabitant, a large and angry-looking wolfhound.

Harry spent the rest of the lunch hour sitting aloneunderneath the trapdoor at the top of North Tower,and consequently he was the first to ascend the silverladder that led to Sibyll Trelawney’s classroom whenthe bell rang.

Page | 300Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Divination was Harry’s least favorite class afterPotions, which was due mainly to ProfessorTrelawney’s habit of predicting his premature deathevery few lessons. A thin woman, heavily draped inshawls and glittering with strings of beads, shealways reminded Harry of some kind of insect, withher glasses hugely magnifying her eyes. She was busyputting copies of battered, leather-bound books oneach of the spindly little tables with which her roomwas littered when Harry entered the room, but so dimwas the light cast by the lamps covered by scarvesand the low-burning, sickly-scented fire that sheappeared not to notice him as he took a seat in theshadows. The rest of the class arrived over the nextfive minutes. Ron emerged from the trapdoor, lookedaround carefully, spotted Harry and made directly forhim, or as directly as he could while having to wendhis way between tables, chairs, and overstuffed poufs.

“Hermione and me have stopped arguing,” he said,sitting down beside Harry.

“Good,” grunted Harry.

“But Hermione says she thinks it would be nice if youstopped taking out your temper on us,” said Ron.

“I’m not —”

“I’m just passing on the message,” said Ron, talkingover him. “But I reckon she’s right. It’s not our faulthow Seamus and Snape treat you.”

“I never said it —”

“Good day,” said Professor Trelawney in her usualmisty, dreamy voice, and Harry broke off, feeling bothannoyed and slightly ashamed of himself again. “Andwelcome back to Divination. I have, of course, been

Page | 301Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

following your fortunes most carefully over theholidays, and am delighted to see that you have allreturned to Hogwarts safely — as, of course, I knewyou would.

“You will find on the tables before you copies of TheDream Oracle, by Inigo Imago. Dream interpretation isa most important means of divining the future andone that may very probably be tested in your O.W.L.Not, of course, that I believe examination passes orfailures are of the remotest importance when it comesto the sacred art of divination. If you have the SeeingEye, certificates and grades matter very little.

However, the headmaster likes you to sit theexamination, so ...”

Her voice trailed away delicately, leaving them all inno doubt that Professor Trelawney considered hersubject above such sordid matters as examinations.

“Turn, please, to the introduction and read whatImago has to say on the matter of dreaminterpretation. Then divide into pairs. Use The DreamOracle to interpret each other’s most recent dreams.Carry on.”

The one good thing to be said for this lesson was thatit was not a double period. By the time they had allfinished reading the introduction of the book, theyhad barely ten minutes left for dream interpretation.At the table next to Harry and Ron, Dean had pairedup with Neville, who immediately embarked on a long-winded explanation of a nightmare involving a pair ofgiant scissors wearing his grandmother’s best hat;Harry and Ron merely looked at each other glumly.

“I never remember my dreams,” said Ron. “You sayone.”

Page | 302Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You must remember one of them,” said Harryimpatiently.

He was not going to share his dreams with anyone.

He knew perfectly well what his regular nightmareabout a graveyard meant, he did not need Ron orProfessor Trelawney or the stupid Dream Oracle to tellhim that...

“Well, I had one that I was playing Quidditch theother night,” said Ron, screwing up his face in aneffort to remember. “What d’you reckon that means?”

“Probably that you’re going to be eaten by a giantmarshmallow or something,” said Harry, turning thepages of The Dream Oracle without interest.

It was very dull work looking up bits of dreams in theOracle and Harry was not cheered up when ProfessorTrelawney set them the task of keeping a dream diaryfor a month as homework. When the bell went, heand Ron led the way back down the ladder, Rongrumbling loudly.

“D’you realize how much homework we’ve gotalready? Binns set us a foot-and-a-half-long essay ongiant wars, Snape wants a foot on the use ofmoonstones, and now we’ve got a month’s dreamdiary from Trelawney! Fred and George weren’t wrongabout O.W.L. year, were they? That Umbridge womanhad better not give us any...”

When they entered the Defense Against the Dark Artsclassroom they found Professor Umbridge alreadyseated at the teacher’s desk, wearing the fluffy pinkcardigan of the night before and the black velvet bowon top of her head. Harry was again reminded forciblyof a large fly perched unwisely on top of an evenlarger toad.

Page | 303Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The class was quiet as it entered the room; ProfessorUmbridge was, as yet, an unknown quantity andnobody knew yet how strict a disciplinarian she waslikely to be.

“Well, good afternoon!” she said when finally thewhole class had sat down.

A few people mumbled “Good afternoon,” in reply.

“Tut, tut,” said Professor Umbridge. “That won’t do,now, will it? I should like you, please, to reply ‘Goodafternoon, Professor Umbridge.’ One more time,please. Good afternoon, class!”

“Good afternoon, Professor Umbridge,” they chantedback at her.

“There, now,” said Professor Umbridge sweetly. “Thatwasn’t too difficult, was it? Wands away and quillsout, please.”

Many of the class exchanged gloomy looks; the order“wands away” had never yet been followed by a lessonthey had found interesting. Harry shoved his wandback inside his bag and pulled out quill, ink, andparchment. Professor Umbridge opened her handbag,extracted her own wand, which was an unusuallyshort one, and tapped the blackboard sharply with it;words appeared on the board at once:

Defense Against the Dark Arts

A Return to Basic Principles.

“Well now, your teaching in this subject has beenrather disrupted and fragmented, hasn’t it?” statedProfessor Umbridge, turning to face the class with herhands clasped neatly in front of her. “The constant

Page | 304Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

changing of teachers, many of whom do not seem tohave followed any Ministry-approved curriculum, hasunfortunately resulted in your being far below thestandard we would expect to see in your O.W.L. year.

“You will be pleased to know, however, that theseproblems are now to be rectified. We will be followinga carefully structured, theory-centered, Ministry-approved course of defensive magic this year. Copydown the following, please.”

She rapped the blackboard again; the first messagevanished and was replaced by:

Course aims:

1. Understanding the principles underlyingdefensive magic.

2. Learning to recognize situations in whichdefensive magic can legally be used.

3. Placing the use of defensive magic in a contextfor practical use.

For a couple of minutes the room was full of thesound of scratching quills on parchment. Wheneveryone had copied down Professor Umbridge’s threecourse aims she said, “Has everybody got a copy ofDefensive Magical Theory by Wilbert Slinkhard?”

There was a dull murmur of assent throughout theclass.

“I think well try that again,” said Professor Umbridge.“When I ask you a question, I should like you to reply‘Yes, Professor Umbridge,’ or ‘No, ProfessorUmbridge.’ So, has everyone got a copy of DefensiveMagical Theory by Wilbert Slinkhard?”

Page | 305Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, Professor Umbridge,” rang through the room.

“Good,” said Professor Umbridge. “I should like you toturn to page five and read chapter one, ‘Basics forBeginners.’ There will be no need to talk.”

Professor Umbridge left the blackboard and settledherself in the chair behind the teacher’s desk,observing them all with those pouchy toad’s eyes.Harry turned to page five of his copy of DefensiveMagical Theory and started to read.

It was desperately dull, quite as bad as listening toProfessor Binns. He felt his concentration slidingaway from him; he had soon read the same line half adozen times without taking in more than the first fewwords. Several silent minutes passed. Next to him,

Ron was absent-mindedly turning his quill over andover in his fingers, staring at the same spot on thepage. Harry looked right and received a surprise toshake him out of his torpor. Hermione had not evenopened her copy of Defensive Magical Theory. She wasstaring fixedly at Professor Umbridge with her handin the air.

Harry could not remember Hermione ever neglectingto read when instructed to, or indeed resisting thetemptation to open any book that came under hernose. He looked at her questioningly, but she merelyshook her head slightly to indicate that she was notabout to answer questions, and continued to stare atProfessor Umbridge, who was looking just asresolutely in another direction.

After several more minutes had passed, however,Harry was not the only one watching Hermione. Thechapter they had been instructed to read was sotedious that more and more people were choosing towatch Hermione’s mute attempt to catch ProfessorPage | 306Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Umbridge’s eye than to struggle on with “Basics forBeginners.”

When more than half the class were staring atHermione rather than at their books, ProfessorUmbridge seemed to decide that she could ignore thesituation no longer.

“Did you want to ask something about the chapter,dear?” she asked Hermione, as though she had onlyjust noticed her.

“Not about the chapter, no,” said Hermione.

“Well, we’re reading just now,” said ProfessorUmbridge, showing her small, pointed teeth. “If youhave other queries we can deal with them at the endof class.”

“I’ve got a query about your course aims,” saidHermione.

Professor Umbridge raised her eyebrows.

“And your name is — ?”

“Hermione Granger,” said Hermione.

“Well, Miss Granger, I think the course aims areperfectly clear if you read them through carefully,”said Professor Umbridge in a voice of determinedsweetness.

“Well, I don’t,” said Hermione bluntly. “There’snothing written up there about using defensivespells.”

Page | 307Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

There was a short silence in which many members ofthe class turned their heads to frown at the threecourse aims still written on the blackboard.

“Using defensive spells?” Professor Umbridge repeatedwith a little laugh. “Why, I can’t imagine any situationarising in my classroom that would require you to usea defensive spell, Miss Granger. You surely aren’texpecting to be attacked during class?”

“We’re not going to use magic?” Ron ejaculated loudly.

“Students raise their hands when they wish to speakin my class, Mr. — ?”

“Weasley,” said Ron, thrusting his hand into the air.

Professor Umbridge, smiling still more widely, turnedher back on him. Harry and Hermione immediatelyraised their hands too. Professor Umbridge’s pouchyeyes lingered on Harry for a moment before sheaddressed Hermione.

“Yes, Miss Granger? You wanted to ask somethingelse?”

“Yes,” said Hermione. “Surely the whole point ofDefense Against the Dark Arts is to practice defensivespells?”

“Are you a Ministry-trained educational expert, MissGranger?” asked Professor Umbridge in her falselysweet voice.

“No, but —”

“Well then, I’m afraid you are not qualified to decidewhat the Svhole point’ of any class is. Wizards mucholder and cleverer than you have devised our new

Page | 308Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

program of study. You will be learning aboutdefensive spells in a secure, risk-free way —”

“What use is that?” said Harry loudly. “If we’re goingto be attacked it won’t be in a —”

“Hand, Mr. Potter!” sang Professor Umbridge.

Harry thrust his fist in the air. Professor Umbridgepromptly turned away from him again, but nowseveral other people had their hands up too.

“And your name is?” Professor Umbridge said toDean.

“Dean Thomas.”

“Well, Mr. Thomas?”

“Well, it’s like Harry said, isn’t it?” said Dean. “If we’regoing to be attacked, it won’t be risk-free —”

“I repeat,” said Professor Umbridge, smiling in a veryirritating fashion at Dean, “do you expect to beattacked during my classes?”

“No, but —”

Professor Umbridge talked over him.

“I do not wish to criticize the way things have beenrun in this school,” she said, an unconvincing smilestretching her wide mouth, “but you have beenexposed to some very irresponsible wizards in thisclass, very irresponsible indeed — not to mention,”she gave a nasty little laugh, “extremely dangeroushalf-breeds.”

Page | 309Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“If you mean Professor Lupin,” piped up DeanThomas angrily, “he was the best we ever —”

“Hand, Mr. Thomas! As I was saying — you have beenintroduced to spells that have been complex,inappropriate to your age group, and potentiallylethal. You have been frightened into believing thatyou are likely to meet Dark attacks every other day —

“No we haven’t,” Hermione said, “we just —”

“Your hand is not up, Miss Grangeii”

Hermione put up her hand; Professor Umbridgeturned away from her.

“It is my understanding that my predecessor not onlyperformed illegal curses in front of you, he actuallyperformed them on you —”

“Well, he turned out to be a maniac, didn’t he?” saidDean Thomas hotly. “Mind you, we still learned loads

“Your hand is not up, Mr. ThomasY trilled ProfessorUmbridge. “Now, it is the view of the Ministry that atheoretical knowledge will be more than sufficient toget you through your examination, which, after all, iswhat school is all about. And your name is?” sheadded, staring at Parvati, whose hand had just shotup.

“Parvati Patil, and isn’t there a practical bit in ourDefense Against the Dark Arts O.W.L.? Aren’t wesupposed to show that we can actually do thecountercurses and things?”

Page | 310Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“As long as you have studied the theory hard enough,there is no reason why you should not be able toperform the spells under carefully controlledexamination conditions,” said Professor Umbridgedismissively.

“Without ever practicing them before?” said Parvatiincredulously. “Are you telling us that the first timewe’ll get to do the spells will be during our exam?”

“I repeat, as long as you have studied the theory hardenough —”

“And what good’s theory going to be in the realworld?” said Harry loudly, his fist in the air again.

Professor Umbridge looked up.

“This is school, Mr. Potter, not the real world,” shesaid softly.

“So we’re not supposed to be prepared for what’swaiting out there?”

“There is nothing waiting out there, Mr. Potter.”

“Oh yeah?” said Harry. His temper, which seemed tohave been bubbling just beneath the surface all day,was reaching boiling point.

“Who do you imagine wants to attack children likeyourselves?” inquired Professor Umbridge in ahorribly honeyed voice.

“Hmm, let’s think ...” said Harry in a mock thoughtfulvoice, “maybe Lord Voldemort?”

Ron gasped; Lavender Brown uttered a little scream;Neville slipped sideways off his stool. Professor

Page | 311Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Umbridge, however, did not flinch. She was staring atHarry with a grimly satisfied expression on her face.

“Ten points from Gryffindor, Mr. Potter.”

The classroom was silent and still. Everyone wasstaring at either Umbridge or Harry.

“Now, let me make a few things quite plain.”

Professor Umbridge stood up and leaned towardthem, her stubby-fingered hands splayed on her desk.

“You have been told that a certain Dark wizard hasreturned from the dead —”

“He wasn’t dead,” said Harry angrily, “but yeah, he’sreturned!”

“Mr.-Potter-you-have-already-lost-your-House-ten-points-do-not-make-matters-worse-for-yourself,” saidProfessor Umbridge in one breath without looking athim. “As I was saying, you have been informed that acertain Dark wizard is at large once again. This is alie.”

“It is NOT a lie!” said Harry. “I saw him, I fought him!”

“Detention, Mr. Potter!” said Professor Umbridgetriumphantly. “Tomorrow evening. Five o’clock. Myoffice. I repeat, this is a lie. The Ministry of Magicguarantees that you are not in danger from any Darkwizard. If you are still worried, by all means come andsee me outside class hours. If someone is alarmingyou with fibs about reborn Dark wizards, I would liketo hear about it. I am here to help. I am your friend.And now, you will kindly continue your reading. Pagefive, ‘Basics for Beginners.’ ”

Page | 312Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Professor Umbridge sat down behind her desk again.Harry, however, stood up. Everyone was staring athim; Seamus looked half-scared, half-fascinated.

“Harry, no!” Hermione whispered in a warning voice,tugging at his sleeve, but Harry jerked his arm out ofher reach.

“So, according to you, Cedric Diggory dropped dead ofhis own accord, did he?” Harry asked, his voiceshaking.

There was a collective intake of breath from the class,for none of them, apart from Ron and Hermione, hadever heard Harry talk about what had happened onthe night that Cedric had died. They stared avidlyfrom Harry to Professor Umbridge, who had raisedher eyes and was staring at him without a trace of afake smile on her face.

“Cedric Diggory’s death was a tragic accident,” shesaid coldly.

“It was murder,” said Harry. He could feel himselfshaking. He had hardly talked to anyone about this,least of all thirty eagerly listening classmates.“Voldemort killed him, and you know it.”

Professor Umbridge’s face was quite blank. For amoment he thought she was going to scream at him.Then she said, in her softest, most sweetly girlishvoice, “Come here, Mr. Potter, dear.”

He kicked his chair aside, strode around Ron andHermione and up to the teacher’s desk. He could feelthe rest of the class holding its breath. He felt soangry he did not care what happened next.

Page | 313Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Professor Umbridge pulled a small roll of pinkparchment out of her handbag, stretched it out on thedesk, dipped her quill into a bottle of ink, and startedscribbling, hunched over so that Harry could not seewhat she was writing. Nobody spoke. After a minuteor so she rolled up the parchment and tapped it withher wand; it sealed itself seamlessly so that he couldnot open it.

“Take this to Professor McGonagall, dear,” saidProfessor Umbridge, holding out the note to him.

He took it from her without saying a word and left theroom, not even looking back at Ron and Hermione,and slamming the classroom door shut behind him.He walked very fast along the corridor, the note toMcGonagall clutched tight in his hand, and turning acorner walked slap into Peeves the Poltergeist, a wide-faced little man floating on his back in midair,juggling several inkwells.

“Why, it’s Potty Wee Potter!” cackled Peeves, allowingtwo of the inkwells to fall to the ground where theysmashed and spattered the walls with ink; Harryjumped backward out of the way with a snarl.

“Get out of it, Peeves.”

“Oooh, Crackpot’s feeling cranky,” said Peeves,pursuing Harry along the corridor, leering as hezoomed along above him. “What is it this time, myfine Potty friend? Hearing voices? Seeing visions?Speaking in” — Peeves blew a gigantic raspberry —“tongues?”

“I said, leave me ALONE!” Harry shouted, runningdown the nearest flight of stairs, but Peeves merelyslid down the banister on his back beside him.

Page | 314Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, most think he’s barking, the Potty wee lad,

But some are more kindly and think he’s just sad,

But Peevesy knows better and says that he’s mad —”“SHUT UP!”

A door to his left flew open and Professor McGonagallemerged from her office looking grim and slightlyharassed.

“What on earth are you shouting about, Potter?” shesnapped, as Peeves cackled gleefully and zoomed outof sight. “Why aren’t you in class?”

“I’ve been sent to see you,” said Harry stiffly.

“Sent? What do you mean, sent?”

He held out the note from Professor Umbridge.Professor McGonagall took it from him, frowning, slitit open with a tap of her wand, stretched it out, andbegan to read. Her eyes zoomed from side to sidebehind their square spectacles as she read whatUmbridge had written, and with each line theybecame narrower.

“Come in here, Potter.”

He followed her inside her study. The door closedautomatically behind him.

“Well?” said Professor McGonagall, rounding on him.“Is this true?”

“Is what true?” Harry asked, rather more aggressivelythan he had intended. “Professor?” he added in anattempt to sound more polite.

Page | 315Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Is it true that you shouted at Professor Umbridge?”“Yes,” said Harry.

“You called her a liar?”

“Yes.”

“You told her He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back?”“Yes.”

Professor McGonagall sat down behind her desk,frowning at Harry. Then she said, “Have a biscuit,Potter.”

“Have — what?”

“Have a biscuit,” she repeated impatiently, indicatinga tartan tin of cookies lying on top of one of the pilesof papers on her desk. “And sit down.”

There had been a previous occasion when Harry,expecting to be caned by Professor McGonagall, hadinstead been appointed by her to the GryffindorQuidditch team. He sank into a chair opposite herand helped himself to a Ginger Newt, feeling just asconfused and wrong-footed as he had done on thatoccasion.

Professor McGonagall set down Professor Umbridge’snote and looked very seriously at Harry.

“Potter, you need to be careful.”

Harry swallowed his mouthful of Ginger Newt andstared at her. Her tone of voice was not at all what hewas used to; it was not brisk, crisp, and stern; it was

Page | 316Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

low and anxious and somehow much more humanthan usual.

“Misbehavior in Dolores Umbridge’s class could costyou much more than House points and a detention.”

“What do you — ?”

“Potter, use your common sense,” snapped ProfessorMcGonagall, with an abrupt return to her usualmanner. “You know where she comes from, you mustknow to whom she is reporting.”

The bell rang for the end of the lesson. Overhead andall around came the elephantine sounds of hundredsof students on the move.

“It says here she’s given you detention every eveningthis week, starting tomorrow,” Professor McGonagallsaid, looking down at Umbridge’s note again.

“Every evening this week!” Harry repeated, horrified.“But, Professor, couldn’t you — ?”

“No, I couldn’t,” said Professor McGonagall flatly.

“But —”

“She is your teacher and has every right to give youdetention. You will go to her room at five o’clocktomorrow for the first one. Just remember: Treadcarefully around Dolores Umbridge.”

“But I was telling the truth!” said Harry, outraged.“Voldemort’s back, you know he is, ProfessorDumbledore knows he is —”

“For heaven’s sake, Potter!” said ProfessorMcGonagall, straightening her glasses angrily (she

Page | 317Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

had winced horribly when he had used Voldemort’sname). “Do you really think this is about truth orlies? It’s about keeping your head down and yourtemper under control!”

She stood up, nostrils wide and mouth very thin, andhe stood too.

“Have another biscuit,” she said irritably, thrustingthe tin at him.

“No, thanks,” said Harry coldly.

“Don’t be ridiculous,” she snapped.

He took one.

“Thanks,” he said grudgingly.

“Didn’t you listen to Dolores Umbridge’s speech at thestart-of-term feast, Potter?”

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Yeah ... she said ... progress willbe prohibited or ... well, it meant that ... that theMinistry of Magic is trying to interfere at Hogwarts.”

Professor McGonagall eyed him for a moment, thensniffed, walked around her desk, and held open thedoor for him.

“Well, I’m glad you listen to Hermione Granger at anyrate,” she said, pointing him out of her office.

Page | 318Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





DETENTION WITH DOLORES

Dinner in the Great Hall that night was not a pleasantexperience for Harry. The news about his shoutingmatch with Umbridge seemed to have traveledexceptionally fast even by Hogwarts standards. Heheard whispers all around him as he sat eatingbetween Ron and Hermione. The funny thing was thatnone of the whisperers seemed to mind himoverhearing what they were saying about him — onthe contrary, it was as though they were hoping hewould get angry and start shouting again, so thatthey could hear his story firsthand.

“He says he saw Cedric Diggory murdered...”

“He reckons he dueled with You-Know-Who...”

“Come off it...”

“Who does he think he’s kidding?”

“Pur-lease ...”

Page | 319Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What I don’t get,” said Harry in a shaking voice,laying down his knife and fork (his hands weretrembling too much to hold them steady), “is why theyall believed the story two months ago whenDumbledore told them...”

“The thing is, Harry, I’m not sure they did,” saidHermione grimly. “Oh, let’s get out of here.”

She slammed down her own knife and fork; Ronlooked sadly at his half-finished apple pie butfollowed suit. People stared at them all the way out ofthe Hall.

“What d’you mean, you’re not sure they believedDumbledore?” Harry asked Hermione when theyreached the first-floor landing.

“Look, you don’t understand what it was like after ithappened,” said Hermione quietly. “You arrived backin the middle of the lawn clutching Cedric’s deadbody... None of us saw what happened in the maze...We just had Dumbledore’s word for it that You-Know-Who had come back and killed Cedric and foughtyou.”

“Which is the truth!” said Harry loudly.

“I know it is, Harry, so will you please stop biting myhead off?” said Hermione wearily. “It’s just that beforethe truth could sink in, everyone went home for thesummer, where they spent two months reading abouthow you’re a nutcase and Dumbledore’s going senile!”

Rain pounded on the windowpanes as they strodealong the empty corridors back to Gryffindor Tower.Harry felt as though his first day had lasted a week,but he still had a mountain of homework to do beforebed. A dull pounding pain was developing over hisPage | 320Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

right eye. He glanced out of a rain-washed window atthe dark grounds as they turned into the Fat Lady’scorridor. There was still no light in Hagrid’s cabin.

“Mimbulus mimbletonia,” said Hermione, before theFat Lady could ask. The portrait swung open to revealthe hole behind and the three of them scrambledback through it.

The common room was almost empty; nearly everyonewas still down at dinner. Crookshanks uncoiledhimself from an armchair and trotted to meet them,purring loudly, and when Harry, Ron, and Hermionetook their three favorite chairs at the fireside he leaptlightly into Hermione’s lap and curled up there like afurry ginger cushion. Harry gazed into the flames,feeling drained and exhausted.

“How can Dumbledore have let this happen?”Hermione cried suddenly, making Harry and Ronjump; Crookshanks leapt off her, looking affronted.She pounded the arms of her chair in fury, so thatbits of stuffing leaked out of the holes. “How can helet that terrible woman teach us? And in our O.W.L.year too!”

“Well, we’ve never had great Defense Against the DarkArts teachers, have we?” said Harry. “You know whatit’s like, Hagrid told us, nobody wants the job, theysay it’s jinxed.”

“Yes, but to employ someone who’s actually refusingto let us do magic! What’s Dumbledore playing at?”

“And she’s trying to get people to spy for her,” saidRon darkly. “Remember when she said she wanted usto come and tell her if we hear anyone saying You-Know-Who’s back?”

Page | 321Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Of course she’s here to spy on us all, that’s obvious,why else would Fudge have wanted her to come?”snapped Hermione.

“Don’t start arguing again,” said Harry wearily, asRon opened his mouth to retaliate. “Can’t we just ...Let’s just do that homework, get it out of the way...”

They collected their schoolbags from a corner andreturned to the chairs by the fire. People were comingback from dinner now. Harry kept his face avertedfrom the portrait hole, but could still sense the stareshe was attracting.

“Shall we do Snape’s stuff first?” said Ron, dippinghis quill into his ink. “ ‘The properties ...of moonstone... and its uses ...in potion-making ...’ ” he muttered,writing the words across the top of his parchment ashe spoke them. “There.” He underlined the title, thenlooked up expectantly at Hermione.

“So what are the properties of moonstone and its usesin potion-making?”

But Hermione was not listening; she was squintingover into the far corner of the room, where Fred,George, and Lee Jordan were now sitting at the centerof a knot of innocent-looking first years, all of whomwere chewing something that seemed to have comeout of a large paper bag that Fred was holding.

“No, I’m sorry, they’ve gone too far,” she said,standing up and looking positively furious. “Come on,Ron.”

“I — what?” said Ron, plainly playing for time. “No —come on, Hermione — we can’t tell them off for givingout sweets...”

Page | 322Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You know perfectly well that those are bits ofNosebleed Nougat or — or Puking Pastilles or —”

“Fainting Fancies?” Harry suggested quietly.

One by one, as though hit over the heads withinvisible mallets, the first years were slumpingunconscious in their seats; some slid right onto thefloor, others merely hung over the arms of theirchairs, their tongues lolling out. Most of the peoplewatching were laughing; Hermione, however, squaredher shoulders and marched directly over to whereFred and George now stood with clipboards, closelyobserving the unconscious first years. Ron rosehalfway out of his chair, hovered uncertainly for amoment or two, then muttered to Harry, “She’s got itunder control,” before sinking as low in his chair ashis lanky frame permitted.

“That’s enough!” Hermione said forcefully to Fred andGeorge, both of whom looked up in mild surprise.

“Yeah, you’re right,” said George, nodding, “thisdosage looks strong enough, doesn’t it?”

“I told you this morning, you can’t test your rubbishon students!”

“We’re paying them!” said Fred indignantly.

“I don’t care, it could be dangerous!”

“Rubbish,” said Fred.

“Calm down, Hermione, they’re fine!” said Leereassuringly as he walked from first year to first year,inserting purple sweets into their open mouths.

“Yeah, look, they’re coming round now,” said George.

Page | 323Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

A few of the first years were indeed stirring. Severallooked so shocked to find themselves lying on thefloor, or dangling off their chairs, that Harry was sureFred and George had not warned them what thesweets were going to do.

“Feel all right?” said George kindly to a small dark-haired girl lying at his feet.

“I-I think so,” she said shakily.

“Excellent,” said Fred happily, but the next secondHermione had snatched both his clipboard and thepaper bag of Fainting Fancies from his hands.

“It is NOT excellent!”

“ ’Course it is, they’re alive, aren’t they?” said Fredangrily.

“You can’t do this, what if you made one of themreally ill?”

“We’re not going to make them ill, we’ve already testedthem all on ourselves, this is just to see if everyonereacts the same —”

“If you don’t stop doing it, I’m going to —”

“Put us in detention?” said Fred in an I’d-like-to-see-you-try-it voice.

“Make us write lines?” said George, smirking.

Onlookers all over the room were laughing. Hermionedrew herself up to her full height; her eyes werenarrowed and her bushy hair seemed to crackle withelectricity.

Page | 324Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No,” she said, her voice quivering with anger, “but Iwill write to your mother.”

“You wouldn’t,” said George, horrified, taking a stepback from her.

“Oh, yes, I would,” said Hermione grimly. “I can’t stopyou eating the stupid things yourselves, but you’renot giving them to first years.”

Fred and George looked thunderstruck. It was clearthat as far as they were concerned, Hermione’s threatwas way below the belt. With a last threatening lookat them, she thrust Fred’s clipboard and the bag ofFancies back into his arms and stalked back to herchair by the fire.

Ron was now so low in his seat that his nose wasroughly level with his knees.

“Thank you for your support, Ron,” Hermione saidacidly.

“You handled it fine by yourself,” Ron mumbled.

Hermione stared down at her blank piece ofparchment for a few seconds, then said edgily, “Oh,it’s no good, I can’t concentrate now. I’m going tobed.”

She wrenched her bag open; Harry thought she wasabout to put her books away, but instead she pulledout two misshapen woolly objects, placed themcarefully on a table by the fireplace, covered themwith a few screwed-up bits of parchment and abroken quill, and stood back to admire the effect.

“What in the name of Merlin are you doing?” saidRon, watching her as though fearful for her sanity.

Page | 325Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“They’re hats for house-elves,” she said briskly, nowstuffing her books back into her bag. “I did them overthe summer. I’m a really slow knitter without magic,but now I’m back at school I should be able to makelots more.”

“You’re leaving out hats for the house-elves?” saidRon slowly. “And you’re covering them up withrubbish first?”

“Yes,” said Hermione defiantly, swinging her bag ontoher back.

“That’s not on,” said Ron angrily. “You’re trying totrick them into picking up the hats. You’re settingthem free when they might not want to be free.”

“Of course they want to be free!” said Hermione atonce, though her face was turning pink. “Don’t youdare touch those hats, Ron!”

She left. Ron waited until she had disappearedthrough the door to the girls’ dormitories, thencleared the rubbish off the woolly hats.

“They should at least see what they’re picking up,” hesaid firmly. “Anyway ...” He rolled up the parchmenton which he had written the title of Snape’s essay.“There’s no point trying to finish this now, I can’t do itwithout Hermione, I haven’t got a clue what you’resupposed to do with moonstones, have you?”

Harry shook his head, noticing as he did so that theache in his right temple was getting worse. Hethought of the long essay on giant wars and the painstabbed at him sharply. Knowing perfectly well thathe would regret not finishing his homework tonightwhen the morning came, he piled his books back intohis bag.

Page | 326Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm going to bed too.”

He passed Seamus on the way to the door leading tothe dormitories, but did not look at him. Harry had afleeting impression that Seamus had opened hismouth to speak, but sped up, and reached thesoothing peace of the stone spiral staircase withouthaving to endure any more provocation.

The following day dawned just as leaden and rainy asthe previous one. Hagrid was still absent from thestaff table at breakfast.

“But on the plus side, no Snape today,” said Ronbracingly.

Hermione yawned widely and poured herself somecoffee. She looked mildly pleased about something,and when Ron asked her what she had to be so happyabout, she simply said, “The hats have gone. Seemsthe house-elves do want freedom after all.”

“I wouldn’t bet on it,” Ron told her cuttingly. “Theymight not count as clothes. They didn’t look anythinglike hats to me, more like woolly bladders.”

Hermione did not speak to him all morning.

Double Charms was succeeded by doubleTransfiguration. Professor Flitwick and ProfessorMcGonagall both spent the first fifteen minutes oftheir lessons lecturing the class on the importance ofO.W.L.s.

“What you must remember,” said little ProfessorFlitwick squeakily, perched as ever on a pile of booksso that he could see over the top of his desk, “is thatthese examinations may influence your futures formany years to come! If you have not already givenPage | 327Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

serious thought to your careers, now is the time to doso. And in the meantime, I’m afraid, we shall beworking harder than ever to ensure that you all doyourselves justice!”

They then spent more than an hour reviewingSummoning Charms, which according to ProfessorFlitwick were bound to come up in their O.W.L., andhe rounded off the lesson by setting them their largestamount of Charms homework ever.

It was the same, if not worse, in Transfiguration.

“You cannot pass an O.W.L.,” said ProfessorMcGonagall grimly, “without serious application,practice, and study. I see no reason why everybody inthis class should not achieve an O.W.L. inTransfiguration as long as they put in the work.”Neville made a sad little disbelieving noise. “Yes, youtoo, Longbottom,” said Professor McGonagall. “There’snothing wrong with your work except lack ofconfidence. So ... today we are starting VanishingSpells. These are easier than Conjuring Spells, whichyou would not usually attempt until N.E.W.T. level,but they are still among the most difficult magic youwill be tested on in your O.W.L.”

She was quite right; Harry found the Vanishing Spellshorribly difficult. By the end of a double period,neither he nor Ron had managed to vanish the snailson which they were practicing, though Ron saidhopefully that he thought his looked a bit paler.Hermione, on the other hand, successfully vanishedher snail on the third attempt, earning her a ten-pointbonus for Gryffindor from Professor McGonagall. Shewas the only person not given homework; everybodyelse was told to practice the spell overnight, ready fora fresh attempt on their snails the followingafternoon.

Page | 328Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Now panicking slightly about the amount ofhomework they had to do, Harry and Ron spent theirlunch hour in the library looking up the uses ofmoonstones in potion-making. Still angry about Ron’sslur on her woolly hats, Hermione did not join them.By the time they reached Care of Magical Creatures inthe afternoon, Harry’s head was aching again.

The day had become cool and breezy, and, as theywalked down the sloping lawn toward Hagrid’s cabinon the edge of the Forbidden Forest, they felt theoccasional drop of rain on their faces. ProfessorGrubbly-Plank stood waiting for the class some tenyards from Hagrid’s front door, a long trestle table infront of her laden with many twigs. As Harry and Ronreached her, a loud shout of laughter sounded behindthem; turning, they saw Draco Malfoy striding towardthem, surrounded by his usual gang of Slytherincronies. He had clearly just said something highlyamusing, because Crabbe, Goyle, Pansy Parkinson,and the rest continued to snigger heartily as theygathered around the trestle table. Judging by the factthat all of them kept looking over at Harry, he wasable to guess the subject of the joke without too muchdifficulty.

“Everyone here?” barked Professor Grubbly-Plank,once all the Slytherins and Gryffindors had arrived.“Let’s crack on then — who can tell me what thesethings are called?”

She indicated the heap of twigs in front of her.Hermione’s hand shot into the air. Behind her back,Malfoy did a buck-toothed imitation of her jumpingup and down in eagerness to answer a question.

Pansy Parkinson gave a shriek of laughter that turnedalmost at once into a scream, as the twigs on thetable leapt into the air and revealed themselves to bewhat looked like tiny pixieish creatures made of wood,Page | 329Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

each with knobbly brown arms and legs, two twiglikefingers at the end of each hand, and a funny, flat,barklike face in which a pair of beetle-brown eyesglittered.

“Oooooh!” said Parvati and Lavender, thoroughlyirritating Harry: Anyone would have thought thatHagrid never showed them impressive creatures;admittedly the flobberworms had been a bit dull, butthe salamanders and hippogriffs had been interestingenough, and the Blast-Ended Skrewts perhaps toomuch so.

“Kindly keep your voices down, girls!” said ProfessorGrubbly-Plank sharply, scattering a handful of whatlooked like brown rice among the stick-creatures, whoimmediately fell upon the food. “So — anyone knowthe names of these creatures? Miss Granger?”

“Bowtruckles,” said Hermione. “They’re tree-guardians, usually live in wand-trees.”

“Five points for Gryffindor,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank. “Yes, these are bowtruckles and, as MissGranger rightly says, they generally live in treeswhose wood is of wand quality. Anybody know whatthey eat?”

“Wood lice,” said Hermione promptly, which explainedwhy what Harry had taken for grains of brown ricewere moving. “But fairy eggs if they can get them.”

“Good girl, take another five points. So whenever youneed leaves or wood from a tree in which abowtruckle lodges, it is wise to have a gift of wood liceready to distract or placate it. They may not lookdangerous, but if angered they will gouge out humaneyes with their fingers, which, as you can see, arevery sharp and not at all desirable near the eyeballs.Page | 330Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

So if you’d like to gather closer, take a few wood liceand a bowtruckle — I have enough here for onebetween three — you can study them more closely. Iwant a sketch from each of you with all body partslabeled by the end of the lesson.”

The class surged forward around the trestle table.Harry deliberately circled around the back so that heended up right next to Professor Grubbly-Plank.

“Where’s Hagrid?” he asked her, while everyone elsewas choosing bowtruckles.

“Never you mind,” said Professor Grubbly-Plankrepressively, which had been her attitude last timeHagrid had failed to turn up for a class too. Smirkingall over his pointed face, Draco Malfoy leaned acrossHarry and seized the largest bowtruckle.

“Maybe,” said Malfoy in an undertone, so that onlyHarry could hear him, “the stupid great oaf’s gothimself badly injured.”

“Maybe you will if you don’t shut up,” said Harry outof the side of his mouth.

“Maybe he’s been messing with stuff that’s too big forhim, if you get my drift.”

Malfoy walked away, smirking over his shoulder atHarry, who suddenly felt sick. Did Malfoy knowsomething? His father was a Death Eater, after all;what if he had information about Hagrid’s fate thathad not yet reached the Order’s ears? He hurriedback around the table to Ron and Hermione, whowere squatting on the grass some distance away andattempting to persuade a bowtruckle to remain stilllong enough to draw it. Harry pulled out parchment

Page | 331Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and quill, crouched down beside the others, andrelated in a whisper what Malfoy had just said.

“Dumbledore would know if something had happenedto Hagrid,” said Hermione at once. “It’s just playinginto Malfoy’s hands to look worried, it tells him wedon’t know exactly what’s going on. We’ve got toignore him, Harry. Here, hold the bowtruckle for amoment, just so I can draw its face...”

“Yes,” came Malfoy’s clear drawl from the groupnearest them, “Father was talking to the Minister justa couple of days ago, you know, and it sounds asthough the Ministry’s really determined to crack downon substandard teaching in this place. So even if thatovergrown moron does show up again, he’ll probablybe sent packing straight away.”

“OUCH!”

Harry had gripped the bowtruckle so hard that it hadalmost snapped; it had just taken a great retaliatoryswipe at his hand with its sharp fingers, leaving twolong deep cuts there. Harry dropped it; Crabbe andGoyle, who had already been guffawing at the idea ofHagrid being sacked, laughed still harder as thebowtruckle set off at full tilt toward the forest, a little,moving stickman soon swallowed up by the tree roots.When the bell echoed distantly over the groundsHarry rolled up his bloodstained bowtruckle pictureand marched off to Herbology with his hand wrappedin a handkerchief of Hermione’s and Malfoy’s derisivelaughter still ringing in his ears.

“If he calls Hagrid a moron one more time ...” snarledHarry.

Page | 332Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, don’t go picking a row with Malfoy, don’tforget, he’s a prefect now, he could make life difficultfor you...”

“Wow, I wonder what it’d be like to have a difficultlife?” said Harry sarcastically. Ron laughed, butHermione frowned. Together they traipsed across thevegetable patch. The sky still appeared unable tomake up its mind whether it wanted to rain or not.

“I just wish Hagrid would hurry up and get back,that’s all,” said Harry in a low voice, as they reachedthe greenhouses. “And don’t say that Grubbly-Plankwoman’s a better teacher!” he added threateningly.

“I wasn’t going to,” said Hermione calmly.

“Because she’ll never be as good as Hagrid,” saidHarry firmly, fully aware that he had just experiencedan exemplary Care of Magical Creatures lesson andwas thoroughly annoyed about it.

The door of the nearest greenhouse opened and somefourth years spilled out of it, including Ginny.

“Hi,” she said brightly as she passed. A few secondslater, Luna Lovegood emerged, trailing behind the restof the class, a smudge of earth on her nose and herhair tied in a knot on the top of her head. When shesaw Harry, her prominent eyes seemed to bulgeexcitedly and she made a beeline straight for him.Many of his classmates turned curiously to watch.Luna took a great breath and then said, without somuch as a preliminary hello: “I believe He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back, and I believe you fought himand escaped from him.”

“Er — right,” said Harry awkwardly. Luna waswearing what looked like a pair of orange radishes for

Page | 333Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

earrings, a fact that Parvati and Lavender seemed tohave noticed, as they were both giggling and pointingat her earlobes.

“You can laugh!” Luna said, her voice rising,apparently under the impression that Parvati andLavender were laughing at what she had said ratherthan what she was wearing. “But people used tobelieve there were no such things as the BlibberingHumdinger or the Crumple-Horned Snorkack!”

“Well, they were right, weren’t they?” said Hermioneimpatiently. “There weren’t any such things as theBlibbering Humdinger or the Crumple-HornedSnorkack.”

Luna gave her a withering look and flounced away,radishes swinging madly. Parvati and Lavender werenot the only ones hooting with laughter now.

“D’you mind not offending the only people who believeme?” Harry asked Hermione as they made their wayinto class.

“Oh, for heaven’s sake, Harry, you can do better thanher,” said Hermione. “Ginny’s told me all about her,apparently she’ll only believe in things as long asthere’s no proof at all. Well, I wouldn’t expectanything else from someone whose father runs TheQuibbler.”

Harry thought of the sinister winged horses he hadseen on the night he had arrived and how Luna hadsaid she could see them too. His spirits sank slightly.Had she been lying? But before he could devote muchmore thought to the matter, Ernie Macmillan hadstepped up to him.

Page | 334Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I want you to know, Potter,” he said in a loud,carrying voice, “that it’s not only weirdos who supportyou. I personally believe you one hundred percent. Myfamily have always stood firm behind Dumbledore,and so do I.”

“Er — thanks very much, Ernie,” said Harry, takenaback but pleased. Ernie might be pompous onoccasions like these, but Harry was in a mood todeeply appreciate a vote of confidence from somebodywho was not wearing radishes in their ears. Ernie’swords had certainly wiped the smile from LavenderBrown’s face and, as he turned to talk to Ron andHermione, Harry caught Seamus’s expression, whichlooked both confused and defiant.

To nobody’s surprise, Professor Sprout started theirlesson by lecturing them about the importance ofO.W.L.s. Harry wished all the teachers would stopdoing this; he was starting to get an anxious, twistedfeeling in his stomach every time he remembered howmuch homework he had to do, a feeling thatworsened dramatically when Professor Sprout gavethem yet another essay at the end of class. Tired andsmelling strongly of dragon dung, Professor Sprout’spreferred brand of fertilizer, the Gryffindors troopedback up to the castle an hour and a half later, none ofthem talking very much; it had been another longday.

As Harry was starving, and he had his first detentionwith Umbridge at five o’clock, he headed straight fordinner without dropping off his bag in GryffindorTower so that he could bolt something down beforefacing whatever she had in store for him. He hadbarely reached the entrance of the Great Hall,however, when a loud and angry voice said, “Oy,Potter!”

Page | 335Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What now?” he muttered wearily, turning to faceAngelina Johnson, who looked as though she was in atowering temper.

“I’ll tell you what now,” she said, marching straightup to him and poking him hard in the chest with herfinger. “How come you’ve landed yourself in detentionfor five o’clock on Friday?”

“What?” said Harry. “Why ... oh yeah, Keeper tryouts!”

“Now he remembers!” snarled Angelina. “Didn’t I tellyou I wanted to do a tryout with the whole team, andfind someone who fitted in with everyone? Didn’t I tellyou I’d booked the Quidditch pitch specially? Andnow you’ve decided you’re not going to be there!”

“I didn’t decide not to be there!” said Harry, stung bythe injustice of these words. “I got detention from thatUmbridge woman, just because I told her the truthabout You-Know-Who —”

“Well, you can just go straight to her and ask her tolet you off on Friday,” said Angelina fiercely, “and Idon’t care how you do it, tell her You-Know-Who’s afigment of your imagination if you like, just make sureyou’re therel”

She stormed away.

“You know what?” Harry said to Ron and Hermione asthey entered the Great Hall. “I think we’d better checkwith Puddlemere United whether Oliver Wood’s beenkilled during a training session, because she seems tobe channeling his spirit.”

“What d’you reckon are the odds of Umbridge lettingyou off on Friday?” said Ron skeptically, as they satdown at the Gryffindor table.

Page | 336Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Less than zero,” said Harry glumly, tipping lambchops onto his plate and starting to eat. “Better try,though, hadn’t I? I’ll offer to do two more detentionsor something, I dunno...” He swallowed a mouthful ofpotato and added, “I hope she doesn’t keep me toolong this evening. You realize we’ve got to write threeessays, practice Vanishing Spells for McGonagall,work out a countercharm for Flitwick, finish thebowtruckle drawing, and start that stupid dreamdiary for Trelawney?”

Ron moaned and for some reason glanced up at theceiling.

“And it looks like it’s going to rain.”

“What’s that got to do with our homework?” saidHermione, her eyebrows raised.

“Nothing,” said Ron at once, his ears reddening.

At five to five Harry bade the other two good-bye andset off for Umbridge’s office on the third floor. Whenhe knocked on the door she said, “Come in,” in asugary voice. He entered cautiously, looking around.

He had known this office under three of its previousoccupants. In the days when Gilderoy Lockhart hadlived here it had been plastered in beaming portraitsof its owner. When Lupin had occupied it, it was likelyyou would meet some fascinating Dark creature in acage or tank if you came to call. In the impostorMoody’s days it had been packed with variousinstruments and artifacts for the detection ofwrongdoing and concealment.

Now, however, it looked totally unrecognizable. Thesurfaces had all been draped in lacy covers andcloths. There were several vases full of dried flowers,

Page | 337Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

each residing on its own doily, and on one of the wallswas a collection of ornamental plates, each decoratedwith a large technicolor kitten wearing a different bowaround its neck. These were so foul that Harry staredat them, transfixed, until Professor Umbridge spokeagain.

“Good evening, Mr. Potter.”

Harry started and looked around. He had not noticedher at first because she was wearing a luridlyflowered set of robes that blended only too well withthe tablecloth on the desk behind her.

“Evening,” Harry said stiffly.

“Well, sit down,” she said, pointing toward a smalltable draped in lace beside which she had drawn up astraight-backed chair. A piece of blank parchment layon the table, apparently waiting for him.

“Er,” said Harry, without moving. “ProfessorUmbridge? Er — before we start, I-I wanted to askyou a ... a favor.”

Her bulging eyes narrowed.

“Oh yes?”

“Well I’m ... I’m on the Gryffindor Quidditch team.

And I was supposed to be at the tryouts for the newKeeper at five o’clock on Friday and I was — waswondering whether I could skip detention that nightand do it — do it another night ... instead ...”

He knew long before he reached the end of hissentence that it was no good.

Page | 338Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh no,” said Umbridge, smiling so widely that shelooked as though she had just swallowed aparticularly juicy fly. “Oh no, no, no. This is yourpunishment for spreading evil, nasty, attention-seeking stories, Mr. Potter, and punishmentscertainly cannot be adjusted to suit the guilty one’sconvenience. No, you will come here at five o’clocktomorrow, and the next day, and on Friday too, andyou will do your detentions as planned. I think itrather a good thing that you are missing somethingyou really want to do. It ought to reinforce the lesson Iam trying to teach you.”

Harry felt the blood surge to his head and heard athumping noise in his ears. So he told evil, nasty,attention-seeking stories, did he?

She was watching him with her head slightly to oneside, still smiling widely, as though she knew exactlywhat he was thinking and was waiting to see whetherhe would start shouting again. With a massive effortHarry looked away from her, dropped his schoolbagbeside the straight-backed chair, and sat down.

“There,” said Umbridge sweetly, “we’re getting betterat controlling our temper already, aren’t we? Now, youare going to be doing some lines for me, Mr. Potter.

No, not with your quill,” she added, as Harry bentdown to open his bag. “You’re going to be using arather special one of mine. Here you are.”

She handed him a long, thin black quill with anunusually sharp point.

“I want you to write ‘I must not tell lies,’ ” she told himsoftly.

“How many times?” Harry asked, with a creditableimitation of politeness.

Page | 339Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, as long as it takes for the message to sink in,”said Umbridge sweetly. “Off you go.”

She moved over to her desk, sat down, and bent overa stack of parchment that looked like essays formarking. Harry raised the sharp black quill and thenrealized what was missing.

“You haven’t given me any ink,” he said.

“Oh, you won’t need ink,” said Professor Umbridgewith the merest suggestion of a laugh in her voice.

Harry placed the point of the quill on the paper andwrote: I must not tell lies.

He let out a gasp of pain. The words had appeared onthe parchment in what appeared to be shining redink. At the same time, the words had appeared on theback of Harry’s right hand, cut into his skin asthough traced there by a scalpel — yet even as hestared at the shining cut, the skin healed over again,leaving the place where it had been slightly redderthan before but quite smooth.

Harry looked around at Umbridge. She was watchinghim, her wide, toadlike mouth stretched in a smile.

“Yes?”

“Nothing,” said Harry quietly.

He looked back at the parchment, placed the quillupon it once more, wrote I must not tell lies, and feltthe searing pain on the back of his hand for a secondtime; once again the words had been cut into hisskin, once again they healed over seconds later.

Page | 340Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

And on it went. Again and again Harry wrote thewords on the parchment in what he soon came torealize was not ink, but his own blood. And again andagain the words were cut into the back of his hand,healed, and then reappeared the next time he set quillto parchment.

Darkness fell outside Umbridge’s window. Harry didnot ask when he would be allowed to stop. He did noteven check his watch. He knew she was watching himfor signs of weakness and he was not going to showany, not even if he had to sit here all night, cuttingopen his own hand with this quill...

“Come here,” she said, after what seemed hours.

He stood up. His hand was stinging painfully. Whenhe looked down at it he saw that the cut had healed,but that the skin there was red raw.

“Hand,” she said.

He extended it. She took it in her own. Harryrepressed a shudder as she touched him with herthick, stubby fingers on which she wore a number ofugly old rings.

“Tut, tut, I don’t seem to have made much of animpression yet,” she said, smiling. “Well, we’ll justhave to try again tomorrow evening, won’t we? Youmay go.”

Harry left her office without a word. The school wasquite deserted; it was surely past midnight. Hewalked slowly up the corridor then, when he hadturned the corner and was sure that she would nothear him, broke into a run.

Page | 341Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He had not had time to practice Vanishing Spells, hadnot written a single dream in his dream diary, andhad not finished the drawing of the bowtruckle, norhad he written his essays. He skipped breakfast nextmorning to scribble down a couple of made-updreams for Divination, their first lesson, and wassurprised to find a disheveled Ron keeping himcompany.

“How come you didn’t do it last night?” Harry asked,as Ron stared wildly around the common room forinspiration. Ron, who had been fast asleep whenHarry got back to the dormitory, muttered somethingabout “doing other stuff,” bent low over hisparchment, and scrawled a few words.

“That’ll have to do,” he said, slamming the diary shut,“I’ve said I dreamed I was buying a new pair of shoes,she can’t make anything weird out of that, can she?”

They hurried off to North Tower together.

“How was detention with Umbridge, anyway? Whatdid she make you do?”

Harry hesitated for a fraction of a second, then said,“Lines.”

“That’s not too bad, then, eh?” said Ron.

“Nope,” said Harry.

“Hey — I forgot — did she let you off for Friday?”

“No,” said Harry.

Ron groaned sympathetically.

Page | 342Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It was another bad day for Harry; he was one of theworst in Transfiguration, not having practicedVanishing Spells at all. He had to give up his lunchhour to complete the picture of the bowtruckle, andmeanwhile, Professors McGonagall, Grubbly-Plank,and Sinistra gave them yet more homework, which hehad no prospect of finishing that evening because ofhis second detention with Umbridge. To cap it all,Angelina Johnson tracked him down at dinner againand, on learning that he would not be able to attendFriday’s Keeper tryouts, told him she was not at allimpressed by his attitude and that she expectedplayers who wished to remain on the team to puttraining before their other commitments.

“I’m in detention!” Harry yelled after her as shestalked away. “D’you think I’d rather be stuck in aroom with that old toad or playing Quidditch?”

“At least it’s only lines,” said Hermione consolingly, asHarry sank back onto his bench and looked down athis steak-and-kidney pie, which he no longer fanciedvery much. “It’s not as if it’s a dreadful punishment,really...”

Harry opened his mouth, closed it again, and nodded.He was not really sure why he was not telling Ronand Hermione exactly what was happening inUmbridge’s room: He only knew that he did not wantto see their looks of horror; that would make thewhole thing seem worse and therefore more difficultto face. He also felt dimly that this was betweenhimself and Umbridge, a private battle of wills, and hewas not going to give her the satisfaction of hearingthat he had complained about it.

“I can’t believe how much homework we’ve got,” saidRon miserably.

Page | 343Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, why didn’t you do any last night?” Hermioneasked him. “Where were you anyway?”

“I was ... I fancied a walk,” said Ron shiftily.

Harry had the distinct impression that he was notalone in concealing things at the moment.

k k k

The second detention was just as bad as the previousone. The skin on the back of Harry’s hand becameirritated more quickly now, red and inflamed; Harrythought it unlikely to keep healing as effectively forlong. Soon the cut would remain etched in his handand Umbridge would, perhaps, be satisfied. He let nomoan of pain escape him, however, and from themoment of entering the room to the moment of hisdismissal, again past midnight, he said nothing but“Good evening” and “Good night.”

His homework situation, however, was now desperate,and when he returned to the Gryffindor commonroom he did not, though exhausted, go to bed, butopened his books and began Snape’s moonstoneessay. It was half-past two by the time he hadfinished it. He knew he had done a poor job, but therewas no help for it; unless he had something to give inhe would be in detention with Snape next. He thendashed off answers to the questions ProfessorMcGonagall had set them, cobbled togethersomething on the proper handling of bowtruckles forProfessor Grubbly-Plank, and staggered up to bed,where he fell fully clothed on top of the bed coversand fell asleep immediately.

Thursday passed in a haze of tiredness. Ron seemedvery sleepy too, though Harry could not see why he

Page | 344Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

should be. Harry’s third detention passed in the sameway as the previous two, except that after two hoursthe words “I must not tell lies” did not fade from theback of Harry’s hand, but remained scratched there,oozing droplets of blood. The pause in the pointedquill’s scratching made Professor Umbridge look up.

“Ah,” she said softly, moving around her desk toexamine his hand herself. “Good. That ought to serveas a reminder to you, oughtn’t it? You may leave fortonight.”

“Do I still have to come back tomorrow?” said Harry,picking up his schoolbag with his left hand ratherthan his smarting right.

“Oh yes,” said Professor Umbridge, smiling widely asbefore. “Yes, I think we can etch the message a littledeeper with another evening’s work.”

He had never before considered the possibility thatthere might be another teacher in the world he hatedmore than Snape, but as he walked back towardGryffindor Tower he had to admit he had found acontender. She’s evil, he thought, as he climbed astaircase to the seventh floor, she’s an evil, twisted,mad, old —

“Ron?”

He had reached the top of the stairs, turned right,and almost walked into Ron, who was lurking behinda statue of Lachlan the Lanky, clutching hisbroomstick. He gave a great leap of surprise when hesaw Harry and attempted to hide his new CleansweepEleven behind his back.

“What are you doing?”

Page | 345Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Er — nothing. What are you doing?”

Harry frowned at him.

“Come on, you can tell me! What are you hiding herefor?”

“I’m — I’m hiding from Fred and George, if you mustknow,” said Ron. “They just went past with a bunchof first years, I bet they’re testing stuff on them again,

I mean, they can’t do it in the common room now, canthey, not with Hermione there.”

He was talking in a very fast, feverish way.

“But what have you got your broom for, you haven’tbeen flying, have you?” Harry asked.

“I — well — well, okay, I’ll tell you, but don’t laugh, allright?” Ron said defensively, turning redder withevery second. “I-I thought I’d try out for GryffindorKeeper now I’ve got a decent broom. There. Go on.Laugh.”

“I’m not laughing,” said Harry. Ron blinked. “It’s abrilliant idea! It’d be really cool if you got on the team!I’ve never seen you play Keeper, are you good?”

“I’m not bad,” said Ron, who looked immenselyrelieved at Harry’s reaction. “Charlie, Fred, andGeorge always made me Keep for them when theywere training during the holidays.”

“So you’ve been practicing tonight?”

“Every evening since Tuesday ... just on my own,though, I’ve been trying to bewitch Quaffles to fly atme, but it hasn’t been easy and I don’t know howmuch use it’ll be.” Ron looked nervous and anxious.

Page | 346Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Fred and George are going to laugh themselvesstupid when I turn up for the tryouts. They haven’tstopped taking the mickey out of me since I got madea prefect.”

“I wish I was going to be there,” said Harry bitterly, asthey set off together toward the common room.

“Yeah, so do — Harry, what’s that on the back of yourhand?”

Harry, who had just scratched his nose with his freeright hand, tried to hide it, but had as much successas Ron with his Cleans weep.

“It’s just a cut — it’s nothing — it’s —”

But Ron had grabbed Harry’s forearm and pulled theback of Harry’s hand up level with his eyes. Therewas a pause, during which he stared at the wordscarved into the skin, then he released Harry, lookingsick.

“I thought you said she was giving you lines?”

Harry hesitated, but after all, Ron had been honestwith him, so he told Ron the truth about the hours hehad been spending in Umbridge’s office.

“The old hag!” Ron said in a revolted whisper as theycame to a halt in front of the Fat Lady, who wasdozing peacefully with her head against her frame.“She’s sick! Go to McGonagall, say something!”

“No,” said Harry at once. “I’m not giving her thesatisfaction of knowing she’s got to me.”

“Got to you? You can’t let her get away with this!”

Page | 347Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t know how much power McGonagall’s got overher,” said Harry.

“Dumbledore, then, tell Dumbledore!”

“No,” said Harry flatly.

“Why not?”

“He’s got enough on his mind,” said Harry, but thatwas not the true reason. He was not going to go toDumbledore for help when Dumbledore had notspoken to him once since last June.

“Well, I reckon you should —” Ron began, but he wasinterrupted by the Fat Lady, who had been watchingthem sleepily and now burst out, “Are you going togive me the password or will I have to stay awake allnight waiting for you to finish your conversation?”

Friday dawned sullen and sodden as the rest of theweek. Though Harry glanced toward the staff tableautomatically when he entered the Great Hall, it waswithout real hope of seeing Hagrid and he turned hismind immediately to his more pressing problems,such as the mountainous pile of homework he had todo and the prospect of yet another detention withUmbridge.

Two things sustained Harry that day. One was thethought that it was almost the weekend; the otherwas that, dreadful though his final detention withUmbridge was sure to be, he had a distant view of theQuidditch pitch from her window and might, withluck, be able to see something of Ron’s tryout. Thesewere rather feeble rays of light, it was true, but Harrywas grateful for anything that might lighten hispresent darkness; he had never had a worse firstweek of term at Hogwarts.

Page | 348Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

At five o’clock that evening he knocked on ProfessorUmbridge’s office door for what he sincerely hopedwould be the final time, was told to enter and did so.The blank parchment lay ready for him on the lace-covered table, the pointed black quill beside it.

“You know what to do, Mr. Potter,” said Umbridge,smiling sweetly over at him.

Harry picked up the quill and glanced through thewindow. If he just shifted his chair an inch or so tothe right ... On the pretext of shifting himself closer tothe table he managed it. He now had a distant view ofthe Gryffindor Quidditch team soaring up and downthe pitch, while half a dozen black figures stood at thefoot of the three high goalposts, apparently awaitingtheir turn to Keep. It was impossible to tell which onewas Ron at this distance.

I must not tell lies, Harry wrote. The cut in the back ofhis right hand opened and began to bleed afresh.

I must not tell lies. The cut dug deeper, stinging andsmarting.

I must not tell lies. Blood trickled down his wrist.

He chanced another glance out of the window.Whoever was defending the goalposts now was doinga very poor job indeed. Katie Bell scored twice in thefew seconds Harry dared watch. Hoping very muchthat the Keeper wasn’t Ron, he dropped his eyes backto the parchment dotted with blood.

I must not tell lies.

I must not tell lies.

Page | 349Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He looked up whenever he thought he could risk it,when he could hear the scratching of Umbridge’s quillor the opening of a desk drawer. The third person totry out was pretty good, the fourth was terrible, thefifth dodged a Bludger exceptionally well but thenfumbled an easy save. The sky was darkening so thatHarry doubted he would be able to watch the sixthand seventh people at all.

I must not tell lies.

I must not tell lies.

The parchment was now shining with drops of bloodfrom the back of his hand, which was searing withpain. When he next looked up, night had fallen andthe Quidditch pitch was no longer visible.

“Let’s see if you’ve gotten the message yet, shall we?”said Umbridge’s soft voice half an hour later.

She moved toward him, stretching out her short be-ringed fingers for his arm. And then, as she took holdof him to examine the words now cut into his skin,pain seared, not across the back of his hand, butacross the scar on his forehead. At the same time, hehad a most peculiar sensation somewhere around hismidriff.

He wrenched his arm out of her grip and leapt to hisfeet, staring at her. She looked back at him, a smilestretching her wide, slack mouth.

“Yes, it hurts, doesn’t it?” she said softly.

He did not answer. His heart was thumping very hardand fast. Was she talking about his hand or did sheknow what he had just felt in his forehead?

Page | 350Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, I think I’ve made my point, Mr. Potter. You maygo.”

He caught up his schoolbag and left the room asquickly as he could.

Stay calm, he told himself as he sprinted up thestairs. Stay calm, it doesn’t necessarily mean whatyou think it means...

“Mimbulus mimbletoniaV’ he gasped at the Fat Lady,who swung forward once more.

A roar of sound greeted him. Ron came runningtoward him, beaming all over his face and sloppingbutterbeer down his front from the goblet he wasclutching.

“Harry, I did it, I’m in, I’m Keeper!”

“What? Oh — brilliant!” said Harry, trying to smilenaturally, while his heart continued to race and hishand throbbed and bled.

“Have a butterbeer.” Ron pressed a bottle onto him. “Ican’t believe it — where’s Hermione gone?”

“She’s there,” said Fred, who was also swiggingbutterbeer, and pointed to an armchair by the fire.Hermione was dozing in it, her drink tippingprecariously in her hand.

“Well, she said she was pleased when I told her,” saidRon, looking slightly put out.

“Let her sleep,” said George hastily. It was a fewmoments before Harry noticed that several of the firstyears gathered around them bore unmistakable signsof recent nosebleeds.

Page | 351Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Come here, Ron, and see if Oliver’s old robes fit you,”called Katie Bell. “We can take off his name and putyours on instead...”

As Ron moved away, Angelina came striding up toHarry.

“Sorry I was a bit short with you earlier, Potter,” shesaid abruptly. “It’s stressful, this managing lark, youknow, I’m starting to think I was a bit hard on Woodsometimes.” She was watching Ron over the rim ofher goblet with a slight frown on her face.

“Look, I know he’s your best mate, but he’s notfabulous,” she said bluntly. “I think with a bit oftraining he’ll be all right, though. He comes from afamily of good Quidditch players. I’m banking on himturning out to have a bit more talent than he showedtoday, to be honest. Vicky Frobisher and GeoffreyHooper both flew better this evening, but Hooper’s areal whiner, he’s always moaning about something orother, and Vicky’s involved in all sorts of societies,she admitted herself that if training clashed with herCharm Club she’d put Charms first. Anyway, we’rehaving a practice session at two o’clock tomorrow, sojust make sure you’re there this time. And do me afavor and help Ron as much as you can, okay?”

He nodded and Angelina strolled back to AliciaSpinnet. Harry moved over to sit next to Hermione,who awoke with a jerk as he put down his bag.

“Oh, Harry, it’s you... Good about Ron, isn’t it?” shesaid blearily. “I’m just so — so — so tired,” sheyawned. “I was up until one o’clock making morehats. They’re disappearing like mad!”

Page | 352Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

And sure enough, now that he looked, Harry saw thatthere were woolly hats concealed all around the roomwhere unwary elves might accidentally pick them up.

“Great,” said Harry distractedly; if he did not tellsomebody soon, he would burst. “Listen, Hermione, Iwas just up in Umbridge’s office and she touched myarm ...”

Hermione listened closely. When Harry had finishedshe said slowly, “You’re worried that You-Know-Who’scontrolling her like he controlled Quirrell?”

“Well,” said Harry, dropping his voice, “it’s apossibility, isn’t it?”

“I suppose so,” said Hermione, though she soundedunconvinced. “But I don’t think he can be possessingher the way he possessed Quirrell, I mean, he’sproperly alive again now, isn’t he, he’s got his ownbody, he wouldn’t need to share someone else’s. Hecould have her under the Imperius Curse, Isuppose...”

Harry watched Fred, George, and Lee Jordan jugglingempty butterbeer bottles for a moment. ThenHermione said, “But last year your scar hurt whennobody was touching you, and didn’t Dumbledore sayit had to do with what You-Know-Who was feeling atthe time? I mean, maybe this hasn’t got anything todo with Umbridge at all, maybe it’s just coincidence ithappened while you were with her?”

“She’s evil,” said Harry flatly. “Twisted.”

“She’s horrible, yes, but ... Harry, I think you ought totell Dumbledore your scar hurt.”

Page | 353Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It was the second time in two days he had beenadvised to go to Dumbledore and his answer toHermione was just the same as his answer to Ron.

“I’m not bothering him with this. Like you just said,it’s not a big deal. It’s been hurting on and off allsummer — it was just a bit worse tonight, that’s all —

“Harry, I’m sure Dumbledore would want to bebothered by this —”

“Yeah,” said Harry, before he could stop himself,“that’s the only bit of me Dumbledore cares about,isn’t it, my scar?”

“Don’t say that, it’s not true!”

“I think I’ll write and tell Sirius about it, see what hethinks —”

“Harry, you can’t put something like that in a letter!”said Hermione, looking alarmed. “Don’t youremember, Moody told us to be careful what we put inwriting! We just can’t guarantee owls aren’t beingintercepted anymore!”

“All right, all right, I won’t tell him, then!” said Harryirritably. He got to his feet. “I’m going to bed. Tell Ronfor me, will you?”

“Oh no,” said Hermione, looking relieved, “if you’regoing that means I can go without being rude too, I’mabsolutely exhausted and I want to make some morehats tomorrow. Listen, you can help me if you like,it’s quite fun, I’m getting better, I can do patterns andbobbles and all sorts of things now.”

Page | 354Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked into her face, which was shining withglee, and tried to look as though he was vaguelytempted by this offer.

“Er ... no, I don’t think I will, thanks,” he said. “Er —not tomorrow. I’ve got loads of homework to do...”

And he traipsed off to the boys’ stairs, leaving herlooking slightly disappointed behind him.

Page | 355Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





PERCY AND PADFOOT

Harry was the first to awake in his dormitory nextmorning. He lay for a moment watching dust swirl inthe chink of sunlight falling through the gap in hisfour-poster’s hangings and savored the thought thatit was Saturday. The first week of term seemed tohave dragged on forever, like one gigantic History ofMagic lesson.

Judging by the sleepy silence and the freshly mintedlook of that beam of sunlight, it was just afterdaybreak. He pulled open the curtains around hisbed, got up, and started to dress. The only soundapart from the distant twittering of birds was theslow, deep breathing of his fellow Gryffindors. Heopened his schoolbag carefully, pulled out parchmentand quill, and headed out of the dormitory for thecommon room.

Making straight for his favorite squashy old armchairbeside the now extinct fire, Harry settled himselfdown comfortably and unrolled his parchment whilelooking around the room. The detritus of crumpled-up

Page | 356Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

bits of parchment, old Gobstones, empty ingredientjars, and candy wrappers that usually covered thecommon room at the end of each day was gone, aswere all Hermione’s elf hats. Wondering vaguely howmany elves had now been set free whether theywanted to be or not, Harry uncorked his ink bottle,dipped his quill into it, and then held it suspended aninch above the smooth yellowish surface of hisparchment, thinking hard... But after a minute or sohe found himself staring into the empty grate, at acomplete loss for what to say.

He could now appreciate how hard it had been forRon and Hermione to write him letters over thesummer. How was he supposed to tell Siriuseverything that had happened over the past week andpose all the questions he was burning to ask withoutgiving potential letter-thieves a lot of information hedid not want them to have?

He sat quite motionless for a while, gazing into thefireplace, then, finally coming to a decision, he dippedhis quill into the ink bottle once more and set itresolutely upon the parchment.

Dear Snuffles,

Hope you’re okay, the first week back here’s beenterrible, I’m really glad it’s the weekend.

We’ve got a new Defense Against the Dark Artsteacher, Professor Umbridge. She’s nearly as nice asyour mum. I’m writing because that thing I wrote toyou about last summer happened again last nightwhen I was doing a detention with Umbridge.

We’re all missing our biggest friend, we hope he’ll beback soon.

Page | 357Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Please write back quickly.

Best,

Harry

Harry reread this letter several times, trying to see itfrom the point of view of an outsider. He could not seehow they would know what he was talking about — orwho he was talking to —just from reading this letter.He did hope Sirius would pick up the hint aboutHagrid and tell them when he might be back: Harrydid not want to ask directly in case it drew too muchattention to what Hagrid might be up to while he wasnot at Hogwarts.

Considering it was a very short letter it had taken along time to write; sunlight had crept halfway acrossthe room while he had been working on it, and hecould now hear distant sounds of movement from thedormitories above. Sealing the parchment carefully heclimbed through the portrait hole and headed off forthe Owlery.

“I would not go that way if I were you,” said NearlyHeadless Nick, drifting disconcertingly through a walljust ahead of him as he walked down the passage.“Peeves is planning an amusing joke on the nextperson to pass the bust of Paracelsus halfway downthe corridor.”

“Does it involve Paracelsus falling on top of theperson’s head?” asked Harry.

“Funnily enough, it does,” said Nearly Headless Nickin a bored voice. “Subtlety has never been Peeves’sstrong point. I’m off to try and find the BloodyBaron... He might be able to put a stop to it... Seeyou, Harry...”

Page | 358Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, ’bye,” said Harry and instead of turning right,he turned left, taking a longer but safer route up tothe Owlery. His spirits rose as he walked past windowafter window showing brilliantly blue sky; he hadtraining later, he would be back on the Quidditchpitch at last —

Something brushed his ankles. He looked down andsaw the caretaker’s skeletal gray cat, Mrs. Norris,slinking past him. She turned lamplike yellow eyesupon him for a moment before disappearing behind astatue of Wilfred the Wistful.

“I’m not doing anything wrong,” Harry called afterher. She had the unmistakable air of a cat that wasoff to report to her boss, yet Harry could not see why;he was perfectly entitled to walk up to the Owlery ona Saturday morning.

The sun was high in the sky now and when Harryentered the Owlery the glassless windows dazzled hiseyes; thick silvery beams of sunlight crisscrossed thecircular room in which hundreds of owls nestled onrafters, a little restless in the early morning light,some clearly just returned from hunting. The straw-covered floor crunched a little as he stepped acrosstiny animal bones, craning his neck for a sight ofHedwig.

“There you are,” he said, spotting her somewhere nearthe very top of the vaulted ceiling. “Get down here,

I’ve got a letter for you.”

With a low hoot she stretched her great white wingsand soared down onto his shoulder.

“Right, I know this says ‘Snuffles’ on the outside,” hetold her, giving her the letter to clasp in her beak and,

Page | 359Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

without knowing exactly why, whispering, “but it’s forSirius, okay?”

She blinked her amber eyes once and he took that tomean that she understood.

“Safe flight, then,” said Harry and he carried her toone of the windows; with a moment’s pressure on hisarm Hedwig took off into the blindingly bright sky. Hewatched her until she became a tiny black speck andvanished, then switched his gaze to Hagrid’s hut,clearly visible from this window, and just as clearlyuninhabited, the chimney smokeless, the curtainsdrawn.

The treetops of the Forbidden Forest swayed in a lightbreeze. Harry watched them, savoring the fresh air onhis face, thinking about Quidditch later ... and thenhe saw it. A great, reptilian winged horse, just like theones pulling the Hogwarts carriages, with leatheryblack wings spread wide like a pterodactyl’s, rose upout of the trees like a grotesque, giant bird. It soaredin a great circle and then plunged once more into thetrees. The whole thing had happened so quickly Harrycould hardly believe what he had seen, except thathis heart was hammering madly.

The Owlery door opened behind him. He leapt inshock, and turning quickly, saw Cho Chang holding aletter and a parcel in her hands.

“Hi,” said Harry automatically.

“Oh ... hi,” she said breathlessly. “I didn’t thinkanyone would be up here this early... I onlyremembered five minutes ago, it’s my mum’sbirthday.”

She held up the parcel.

Page | 360Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Right,” said Harry. His brain seemed to havejammed. He wanted to say something funny andinteresting, but the memory of that terrible wingedhorse was fresh in his mind.

“Nice day,” he said, gesturing to the windows. Hisinsides seemed to shrivel with embarrassment. Theweather. He was talking about the weather...

“Yeah,” said Cho, looking around for a suitable owl.“Good Quidditch conditions. I haven’t been out allweek, have you?”

“No,” said Harry.

Cho had selected one of the school barn owls. Shecoaxed it down onto her arm where it held out anobliging leg so that she could attach the parcel.

“Hey, has Gryffindor got a new Keeper yet?” sheasked.

“Yeah,” said Harry. “It’s my friend Ron Weasley, d’youknow him?”

“The Tornado-hater?” said Cho rather coolly. “Is heany good?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, “I think so. I didn’t see his tryout,though, I was in detention.”

Cho looked up, the parcel only half-attached to theowl’s legs.

“That Umbridge woman’s foul,” she said in a lowvoice. “Putting you in detention just because you toldthe truth about how — how — how he died. Everyoneheard about it, it was all over the school. You werereally brave standing up to her like that.”

Page | 361Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s insides reinflated so rapidly he felt as thoughhe might actually float a few inches off the dropping-strewn floor. Who cared about a stupid flying horse,Cho thought he had been really brave... For amoment he considered accidentally-on-purposeshowing her his cut hand as he helped her tie herparcel onto her owl... But the very instant that thisthrilling thought occurred, the Owlery door openedagain.

Filch, the caretaker, came wheezing into the room.There were purple patches on his sunken, veinedcheeks, his jowls were aquiver and his thin gray hairdisheveled; he had obviously run here. Mrs. Norriscame trotting at his heels, gazing up at the owlsoverhead and mewing hungrily. There was a restlessshifting of wings from above, and a large brown owlsnapped his beak in a menacing fashion.

“Aha!” said Filch, taking a flat-footed step towardHarry, his pouchy cheeks trembling with anger. “I’vehad a tip-off that you are intending to place a massiveorder for Dungbombs!”

Harry folded his arms and stared at the caretaker.

“Who told you I was ordering Dungbombs?”

Cho was looking from Harry to Filch, also frowning;the barn owl on her arm, tired of standing on one leg,gave an admonitory hoot but she ignored it.

“I have my sources,” said Filch in a self-satisfied hiss.“Now hand over whatever it is you’re sending.”

Feeling immensely thankful that he had not dawdledin posting off the letter, Harry said, “I can’t, it’s gone.”

“Gone?” said Filch, his face contorting with rage.

Page | 362Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Gone,” said Harry calmly.

Filch opened his mouth furiously, mouthed for a fewseconds, then raked Harry’s robes with his eyes. “Howdo I know you haven’t got it in your pocket?”

“Because —”

“I saw him send it,” said Cho angrily.

Filch rounded on her.

“You saw him — ?”

“That’s right, I saw him,” she said fiercely.

There was a moment’s pause in which Filch glared atCho and Cho glared right back, then the caretakerturned and shuffled back toward the door. Hestopped with his hand on the handle and looked backat Harry.

“If I get so much as a whiff of a Dungbomb ...”

He stumped off down the stairs. Mrs. Norris cast alast longing look at the owls and followed him.

Harry and Cho looked at each other.

“Thanks,” Harry said.

“No problem,” said Cho, finally fixing the parcel to thebarn owl’s other leg, her face slightly pink. “Youweren’t ordering Dungbombs, were you?”

“No,” said Harry.

“I wonder why he thought you were, then?” she said,as she carried the owl to the window.

Page | 363Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry shrugged; he was quite as mystified by that asshe was, though, oddly, it was not bothering him verymuch at the moment.

They left the Owlery together. At the entrance of acorridor that led toward the west wing of the castle,Cho said, “I’m going this way. Well, I’ll ... I’ll see youaround, Harry.”

“Yeah ... see you.”

She smiled at him and departed. He walked on,feeling quietly elated. He had managed to have anentire conversation with her and not embarrassedhimself once... You were really brave standing up toher like that... She had called him brave... She did nothate him for being alive...

Of course, she had preferred Cedric, he knew that...Though if he’d only asked her to the ball before Cedrichad, things might have turned out differently... Shehad seemed sincerely sorry that she had to refusewhen Harry had asked her...

“Morning,” Harry said brightly to Ron and Hermione,joining them at the Gryffindor table in the Great Hall.

“What are you looking so pleased about?” said Ron,eyeing Harry in surprise.

“Erm ... Quidditch later,” said Harry happily, pullinga large platter of bacon and eggs toward him.

“Oh ... yeah ...” said Ron. He put down the bit of toasthe was eating and took a large swig of pumpkin juice.Then he said, “Listen ... you don’t fancy going out abit earlier with me, do you? Just to — er — give mesome practice before training? So I can, you know, getmy eye in a bit ...”

Page | 364Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, okay,” said Harry.

“Look, I don’t think you should,” said Hermioneseriously, “you’re both really behind on homework as

it —”

But she broke off; the morning post was arriving and,as usual, the Daily Prophet was soaring toward her inthe beak of a screech owl, which landed perilouslyclose to the sugar bowl and held out a leg; Hermionepushed a Knut into its leather pouch, took thenewspaper, and scanned the front page critically asthe owl took off again.

“Anything interesting?” said Ron; Harry smiled — heknew Ron was keen to get her off the subject ofhomework.

“No,” she sighed, “just some guff about the bassplayer in the Weird Sisters getting married...”

She opened the paper and disappeared behind it.Harry devoted himself to another helping of eggs andbacon; Ron was staring up at the high windows,looking slightly preoccupied.

“Wait a moment,” said Hermione suddenly. “Oh no ...Sirius!”

“What’s happened?” said Harry, and he snatched atthe paper so violently that it ripped down the middleso that he and Hermione were holding half each.

“ ‘The Ministry of Magic has received a tip-off from areliable source that Sirius Black, notorious massmurderer ... blah blah blah ...is currently hiding inLondon\ ’ ” Hermione read from her half in ananguished whisper.

Page | 365Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Lucius Malfoy, I’ll bet anything,” said Harry in a low,furious voice. “He did recognize Sirius on theplatform...”

“What?” said Ron, looking alarmed. “You didn’t say —

“Shh!” said the other two.

"... ‘Ministry warns Wizarding community that Black isvery dangerous ... killed thirteen people ... broke out ofAzkaban ...’ the usual rubbish,” Hermione concluded,laying down her half of the paper and looking fearfullyat Harry and Ron. “Well, he just won’t be able to leavethe house again, that’s all,” she whispered.“Dumbledore did warn him not to.”

Harry looked down glumly at the bit of the Prophet hehad torn off. Most of the page was devoted to anadvertisement for Madame Malkin’s Robes for AllOccasions, which was apparently having a sale.

“Hey!” he said, flattening it down so Hermione andRon could both see it. “Look at this!”

“I’ve got all the robes I want,” said Ron.

“No,” said Harry, “look ... this little piece here ...”

Ron and Hermione bent closer to read it; the item wasbarely an inch long and placed right at the bottom ofa column. It was headlined:

TRESPASS AT MINISTRY

Sturgis Podmore, 38, of number two, LaburnumGardens, Clapham, has appeared in front of theWizengamot charged with trespass and attemptedrobbery at the Ministry of Magic on 31st August.

Page | 366Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Podmore was arrested by Ministry of Magic watch-wizard Eric Munch, who found him attempting toforce his way through a top-security door at oneo’clock in the morning. Podmore, who refused tospeak in his own defense, was convicted on bothcharges and sentenced to six months in Azkaban.

“Sturgis Podmore?” said Ron slowly, “but he’s thatbloke who looks like his head’s been thatched, isn’the? He’s one of the Ord —”

“Ron, shh\” said Hermione, casting a terrified lookaround them.

“Six months in Azkaban!” whispered Harry, shocked.“Just for trying to get through a door!”

“Don’t be silly, it wasn’t just for trying to get througha door — what on earth was he doing at the Ministryof Magic at one o’clock in the morning?” breathedHermione.

“D’you reckon he was doing something for the Order?”Ron muttered.

“Wait a moment...” said Harry slowly. “Sturgis wassupposed to come and see us off, remember?”

The other two looked at him.

“Yeah, he was supposed to be part of our guard goingto King’s Cross, remember? And Moody was allannoyed because he didn’t turn up, so that doesn’tseem like he was supposed to be on a iob for them,does it?”

“Well, maybe they didn’t expect him to get caught,”said Hermione.

Page | 367Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It could be a frame-up!” Ron exclaimed excitedly. “No— listen!” he went on, dropping his voice dramaticallyat the threatening look on Hermione’s face. “TheMinistry suspects he’s one of Dumbledore’s lot so — Idunno — they lured him to the Ministry, and hewasn’t trying to get through a door at all! Maybethey’ve just made something up to get him!”

There was a pause while Harry and Hermioneconsidered this. Harry thought it seemed far-fetched;Hermione, on the other hand, looked ratherimpressed and said, “Do you know, I wouldn’t be atall surprised if that were true.”

She folded up her half of the newspaper thoughtfully.When Harry laid down his knife and fork she seemedto come out of a reverie.

“Right, well, I think we should tackle that essay forSprout on Self-Fertilizing Shrubs first, and if we’relucky we’ll be able to start McGonagall’s InanimatusConjurus before lunch...”

Harry felt a small twinge of guilt at the thought of thepile of homework awaiting him upstairs, but the skywas a clear, exhilarating blue, and he had not beenon his Firebolt for a week...

“I mean, we can do it tonight,” said Ron, as he andHarry walked down the sloping lawns toward theQuidditch pitch, their broomsticks over theirshoulders, Hermione’s dire warnings that they wouldfail all their O.W.L.s still ringing in their ears. “Andwe’ve got tomorrow. She gets too worked up aboutwork, that’s her trouble...” There was a pause and headded, in a slightly more anxious tone, “D’you thinkshe meant it when she said we weren’t copying fromher?”

Page | 368Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, I do,” said Harry. “Still, this is important too,we’ve got to practice if we want to stay on theQuidditch team...”

“Yeah, that’s right,” said Ron in a heartened tone.

“And we have got plenty of time to do it all...”

Harry glanced over to his right as they approachedthe Quidditch pitch, to where the trees of theForbidden Forest were swaying darkly. Nothing flewout of them; the sky was empty but for a few distantowls fluttering around the Owlery Tower. He hadenough to worry about; the flying horse wasn’t doinghim any harm: He pushed it out of his mind.

They collected balls from the cupboard in thechanging room and set to work, Ron guarding thethree tall goalposts, Harry playing Chaser and tryingto get the Quaffle past Ron. Harry thought Ron waspretty good; he blocked three-quarters of the goalsHarry attempted to put past him and played betterthe longer they practiced. After a couple of hours theyreturned to the school, where they ate lunch, duringwhich Hermione made it quite clear that she thoughtthey were irresponsible, then returned to theQuidditch pitch for the real training session. All theirteammates but Angelina were already in the changingroom when they entered.

“All right, Ron?” said George, winking at him.

“Yeah,” said Ron, who had become quieter andquieter all the way down to the pitch.

“Ready to show us all up, Ickle Prefect?” said Fred,emerging tousle-haired from the neck of his Quidditchrobes, a slightly malicious grin on his face.

Page | 369Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Shut up,” said Ron, stony-faced, pulling on his ownteam robes for the first time. They fitted him wellconsidering they had been Oliver Wood’s, who wasrather broader in the shoulder.

“Okay everyone,” said Angelina, entering from theCaptain’s office, already changed. “Let’s get to it;

Alicia and Fred, if you can just bring the ball crateout for us. Oh, and there are a couple of people outthere watching but I want you to just ignore them, allright?”

Something in her would-be casual voice made Harrythink he might know who the uninvited spectatorswere, and sure enough, when they left the changingroom for the bright sunlight of the pitch it was to astorm of catcalls and jeers from the SlytherinQuidditch team and assorted hangers-on, who weregrouped halfway up the empty stands and whosevoices echoed loudly around the stadium.

“What’s that Weasley’s riding?” Malfoy called in hissneering drawl. “Why would anyone put a FlyingCharm on a moldy old log like that?”

Crabbe, Goyle, and Pansy Parkinson guffawed andshrieked with laughter. Ron mounted his broom andkicked off from the ground and Harry followed him,watching his ears turn red from behind.

“Ignore them,” he said, accelerating to catch up withRon. “We’ll see who’s laughing after we play them...”

“Exactly the attitude I want, Harry,” said Angelinaapprovingly, soaring around them with the Quaffleunder her arm and slowing to hover on the spot infront of her airborne team. “Okay everyone, we’regoing to start with some passes just to warm up, thewhole team please —”

Page | 370Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Hey, Johnson, what’s with that hairstyle anyway?”shrieked Pansy Parkinson from below. “Why wouldanyone want to look like they’ve got worms comingout of their head?”

Angelina swept her long braided hair out of her faceand said calmly, “Spread out, then, and let’s see whatwe can do...”

Harry reversed away from the others to the far side ofthe pitch. Ron fell back toward the opposite goal.Angelina raised the Quaffle with one hand and threwit hard to Fred, who passed to George, who passed toHarry, who passed to Ron, who dropped it.

The Slytherins, led by Malfoy, roared and screamedwith laughter. Ron, who had pelted toward theground to catch the Quaffle before it landed, pulledout of the dive untidily, so that he slipped sidewayson his broom, and returned to playing height,blushing. Harry saw Fred and George exchange looks,but uncharacteristically neither of them saidanything, for which he was grateful.

“Pass it on, Ron,” called Angelina, as though nothinghad happened.

Ron threw the Quaffle to Alicia, who passed back toHarry, who passed to George...

“Hey, Potter, how’s your scar feeling?” called Malfoy.“Sure you don’t need a lie-down? It must be, what, awhole week since you were in the hospital wing, that’sa record for you, isn’t it?”

Fred passed to Angelina; she reverse passed to Harry,who had not been expecting it, but caught it in thevery tips of his fingers and passed it quickly to Ron,who lunged for it and missed by inches.

Page | 371Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Come on now, Ron,” said Angelina crossly, as Rondived for the ground again, chasing the Quaffle. “Payattention.”

It would have been hard to say whether Ron’s face orthe Quaffle was a deeper scarlet when he returnedagain to playing height. Malfoy and the rest of theSlytherin team were howling with laughter.

On his third attempt, Ron caught the Quaffle;perhaps out of relief he passed it on soenthusiastically that it soared straight through Katie’soutstretched hands and hit her hard in the face.

“Sorry!” Ron groaned, zooming forward to see whetherhe had done any damage.

“Get back in position, she’s fine!” barked Angelina.“But as you’re passing to a teammate, do try not toknock her off her broom, won’t you? We’ve gotBludgers for that!”

Katie’s nose was bleeding. Down below the Slytherinswere stamping their feet and jeering. Fred and Georgeconverged on Katie.

“Here, take this,” Fred told her, handing hersomething small and purple from out of his pocket.“It’ll clear it up in no time.”

“All right,” called Angelina, “Fred, George, go and getyour bats and a Bludger; Ron, get up to the goalposts,Harry, release the Snitch when I say so. We’re goingto aim for Ron’s goal, obviously.”

Harry zoomed off after the twins to fetch the Snitch.

“Ron’s making a right pig’s ear of things, isn’t he?”muttered George, as the three of them landed at the

Page | 372Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

crate containing the balls and opened it to extract oneof the Bludgers and the Snitch.

“He’s just nervous,” said Harry. “He was fine when Iwas practicing with him this morning.”

“Yeah, well, I hope he hasn’t peaked too soon,” saidFred gloomily.

They returned to the air. When Angelina blew herwhistle, Harry released the Snitch and Fred andGeorge let fly the Bludger; from that moment on,

Harry was barely aware of what the others weredoing. It was his job to recapture the tiny flutteringgolden ball that was worth a hundred and fifty pointsto the Seeker’s team and doing so required enormousspeed and skill. He accelerated, rolling and swervingin and out of the Chasers, the warm autumn airwhipping his face and the distant yells of theSlytherins so much meaningless roaring in his ears...But too soon, the whistle brought him to a halt again.

“Stop — stop - STOP!” screamed Angelina. “Ron —you’re not covering your middle post!”

Harry looked around at Ron, who was hovering infront of the left-hand hoop, leaving the other twocompletely unprotected.

“Oh ... sorry ...”

“You keep shifting around while you’re watching theChasers!” said Angelina. “Either stay in centerposition until you have to move to defend a hoop, orelse circle the hoops, but don’t drift vaguely off to oneside, that’s how you let in the last three goals!”

“Sorry ...” Ron repeated, his red face shining like abeacon against the bright blue sky.

Page | 373Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“And Katie, can’t you do something about thatnosebleed?”

“It’s just getting worse!” said Katie thickly, attemptingto stem the flow with her sleeve.

Harry glanced around at Fred, who was lookinganxious and checking his pockets. He saw Fred pullout something purple, examine it for a second, andthen look around at Katie, evidently horrorstruck.

“Well, let’s try again,” said Angelina. She was ignoringthe Slytherins, who had now set up a chant of“ Gryffindor are losers, Gryffindor are losers,” but therewas a certain rigidity about her seat on the broomnevertheless.

This time they had been flying for barely threeminutes when Angelina’s whistle sounded. Harry,who had just sighted the Snitch circling the oppositegoalpost, pulled up feeling distinctly aggrieved.

“What now?” he said impatiently to Alicia, who wasnearest.

“Katie,” she said shortly.

Harry turned and saw Angelina, Fred, and George allflying as fast as they could toward Katie. Harry andAlicia sped toward her too. It was plain that Angelinahad stopped training just in time; Katie was nowchalk-white and covered in blood.

“She needs the hospital wing,” said Angelina.

“We’ll take her,” said Fred. “She — er — might haveswallowed a Blood Blisterpod by mistake —”

Page | 374Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, there’s no point continuing with no Beaters anda Chaser gone,” said Angelina glumly, as Fred andGeorge zoomed off toward the castle supporting Katiebetween them. “Come on, let’s go and get changed.”

The Slytherins continued to chant as they trailedback into the changing rooms.

“How was practice?” asked Hermione rather coollyhalf an hour later, as Harry and Ron climbed throughthe portrait hole into the Gryffindor common room.

“It was —” Harry began.

“Completely lousy,” said Ron in a hollow voice,sinking into a chair beside Hermione. She looked upat Ron and her frostiness seemed to melt.

“Well, it was only your first one,” she said consolingly,“it’s bound to take time to —”

“Who said it was me who made it lousy?” snappedRon.

“No one,” said Hermione, looking taken aback, “Ithought —”

“You thought I was bound to be rubbish?”

“No, of course I didn’t! Look, you said it was lousy so Ijust —”

“I’m going to get started on some homework,” saidRon angrily and stomped off to the staircase to theboys’ dormitories and vanished from sight. Hermioneturned to Harry.

“ Was he lousy?”

Page | 375Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry loyally.

Hermione raised her eyebrows.

“Well, I suppose he could’ve played better,” Harrymuttered, “but it was only the first training session,like you said...”

Neither Harry nor Ron seemed to make muchheadway with their homework that night. Harry knewRon was too preoccupied with how badly he hadperformed at Quidditch practice and he himself washaving difficulty in getting the chant of “Gryffindor arelosers” out of his head.

They spent the whole of Sunday in the common room,buried in their books while the room around themfilled up, then emptied: It was another clear, fine dayand most of their fellow Gryffindors spent the day outin the grounds, enjoying what might well be some ofthe last sunshine that year. By the evening Harry feltas though somebody had been beating his brainagainst the inside of his skull.

“You know, we probably should try and get morehomework done during the week,” Harry muttered toRon, as they finally laid aside Professor McGonagall’slong essay on the Inanimatus Conjurus spell andturned miserably to Professor Sinistra’s equally longand difficult essay about Jupiter’s moons.

“Yeah,” said Ron, rubbing slightly bloodshot eyes andthrowing his fifth spoiled bit of parchment into thefire beside them. “Listen ... shall we just askHermione if we can have a look at what she’s done?”

Harry glanced over at her; she was sitting withCrookshanks on her lap and chatting merrily toGinny as a pair of knitting needles flashed in midair

Page | 376Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

in front of her, now knitting a pair of shapeless elfsocks.

“No,” he said heavily, “you know she won’t let us.”

And so they worked on while the sky outside thewindows became steadily darker; slowly, the crowd inthe common room began to thin again. At half-pasteleven, Hermione wandered over to them, yawning.

“Nearly done?”

“No,” said Ron shortly.

“Jupiter’s biggest moon is Ganymede, not Callisto,”she said, pointing over Ron’s shoulder at a line in hisAstronomy essay, “and it’s Io that’s got the volcanos.”

“Thanks,” snarled Ron, scratching out the offendingsentences.

“Sorry, I only —”

“Yeah, well, if you’ve just come over here to criticize —

“Ron —”

“I haven’t got time to listen to a sermon, all right,Hermione, I’m up to my neck in it here —”

“No — look!”

Hermione was pointing to the nearest window. Harryand Ron both looked over. A handsome screech owlwas standing on the windowsill, gazing into the roomat Ron.

Page | 377Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Isn’t that Hermes?” said Hermione, soundingamazed.

“Blimey, it is!” said Ron quietly, throwing down hisquill and getting to his feet. “What’s Percy writing tome for?”

He crossed to the window and opened it; Hermes flewinside, landed upon Ron’s essay, and held out a leg towhich a letter was attached. Ron took it off and theowl departed at once, leaving inky footprints acrossRon’s drawing of the moon Io.

“That’s definitely Percy’s handwriting,” said Ron,sinking back into his chair and staring at the wordson the outside of the scroll: To Ronald Weasley,Gryffindor House, Hogwarts. He looked up at theother two. “What d’you reckon?”

“Open it!” said Hermione eagerly. Harry nodded.

Ron unrolled the scroll and began to read. The fartherdown the parchment his eyes traveled, the morepronounced became his scowl. When he had finishedreading, he looked disgusted. He thrust the letter atHarry and Hermione, who leaned toward each otherto read it together:

Dear Ron,

I have only just heard (from no less a person than theMinister of Magic himself, who has it from your newteacher, Professor Umbridge) that you have become aHogwarts prefect

I was most pleasantly surprised when I heard thisnews and must firstly offer my congratulations. I mustadmit that I have always been afraid that you wouldtake what we might call the “Fred and George” route,

Page | 378Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

rather than following in my footsteps, so you canimagine my feelings on hearing you have stoppedflouting authority and have decided to shoulder somereal responsibility.

But I want to give you more than congratulations, Ron,

I want to give you some advice, which is why I amsending this at night rather than by the usual morningpost Hopefully you will be able to read this away fromprying eyes and avoid awkward questions.

From something the Minister let slip when telling meyou are now a prefect, I gather that you are still seeinga lot of Harry Potter. I must tell you, Ron, that nothingcould put you in danger of losing your badge more thancontinued fraternization with that boy. Yes, I am sureyou are surprised to hear this — no doubt you will saythat Potter has always been Dumbledore’s favorite —but I feel bound to tell you that Dumbledore may not bein charge at Hogwarts much longer and the people whocount have a very different — and probably moreaccurate — view of Potters behavior. I shall say nomore here, but if you look at the Daily Prophettomorrow you will get a good idea of the way the windis blowing — and see if you can spot yours truly!

Seriously, Ron, you do not want to be tarred with thesame brush as Potter, it could be very damaging toyour future prospects, and I am talking here about lifeafter school too. As you must be aware, given that ourfather escorted him to court, Potter had a disciplinaryhearing this summer in front of the whole Wizengamotand he did not come out of it looking too good. He gotoff on a mere technicality if you ask me and many ofthe people I’ve spoken to remain convinced of his guilt.

It may be that you are afraid to sever ties with Potter— I know that he can be unbalanced and, for all Iknow, violent — but if you have any worries about this,

Page | 379Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

or have spotted anything else in Potter’s behavior thatis troubling you, I urge you to speak to DoloresUmbridge, a really delightful woman, who I know willbe only too happy to advise you.

This leads me to my other bit of advice. As I havehinted above, Dumbledore’s regime at Hog warts maysoon be over. Your loyalty, Ron, should be not to him,but to the school and the Ministry. I am very sorry tohear that so far Professor Umbridge is encounteringvery little cooperation from staff as she strives to makethose necessary changes within Hogwarts that theMinistry so ardently desires (although she should findthis easier from next week — again, see the Prophettomorrow!). I shall say only this — a student whoshows himself willing to help Professor Umbridge nowmay be very well placed for Head Boy ship in a coupleof years!

I am sorry that I was unable to see more of you overthe summer. It pains me to criticize our parents, but Iam afraid I can no longer live under their roof whilethey remain mixed up with the dangerous crowdaround Dumbledore (if you are writing to Mother at anypoint, you might tell her that a certain Sturgis Podmore,who is a great friend of Dumbledore’s, has recentlybeen sent to Azkaban for trespass at the Ministry.Perhaps that will open their eyes to the kind of pettycriminals with whom they are currently rubbingshoulders). I count myself very lucky to have escapedthe stigma of association with such people — theMinister really could not be more gracious to me — andI do hope, Ron, that you will not allow family ties toblind you to the misguided nature of our parents’beliefs and actions either. I sincerely hope that, in time,they will realize how mistaken they were and I shall,of course, be ready to accept a full apology when thatday comes.

Page | 380Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Please think over what I have said most carefully,particularly the bit about Harry Potter, andcongratulations again on becoming prefect.

Your brother,

Percy

Harry looked up at Ron.

“Well,” he said, trying to sound as though he foundthe whole thing a joke, “if you want to — er — what isit?” (He checked Percy’s letter.) “Oh yeah — ‘sever ties’with me, I swear I won’t get violent.”

“Give it back,” said Ron, holding out his hand. “He is—” Ron said jerkily, tearing Percy’s letter in half, “theworld’s” — he tore it into quarters — “biggest” — hetore it into eighths — “git.” He threw the pieces intothe fire.

“Come on, we’ve got to get this finished some timebefore dawn,” he said briskly to Harry, pullingProfessor Sinistra’s essay back toward him.

Hermione was looking at Ron with an odd expressionon her face.

“Oh, give them here,” she said abruptly.

“What?” said Ron.

“Give them to me, I’ll look through them and correctthem,” she said.

“Are you serious? Ah, Hermione, you’re a lifesaver,”said Ron, “what can I — ?”

Page | 381Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What you can say is, ‘We promise well never leaveour homework this late again,’ ” she said, holding outboth hands for their essays, but she looked slightlyamused all the same.

“Thanks a million, Hermione,” said Harry weakly,passing over his essay and sinking back into hisarmchair, rubbing his eyes.

It was now past midnight and the common room wasdeserted but for the three of them and Crookshanks.The only sound was that of Hermione’s quillscratching out sentences here and there on theiressays and the ruffle of pages as she checked variousfacts in the reference books strewn across the table.Harry was exhausted. He also felt an odd, sick, emptyfeeling in his stomach that had nothing to do withtiredness and everything to do with the letter nowcurling blackly in the heart of the fire.

He knew that half the people inside Hogwarts thoughthim strange, even mad; he knew that the DailyProphet had been making snide allusions to him formonths, but there was something about seeing itwritten down like that in Percy’s writing, aboutknowing that Percy was advising Ron to drop him andeven to tell tales on him to Umbridge, that made hissituation real to him as nothing else had. He hadknown Percy for four years, had stayed in his houseduring the summers, shared a tent with him duringthe Quidditch World Cup, had even been awarded fullmarks by him in the second task of the TriwizardTournament last year, yet now, Percy thought himunbalanced and possibly violent.

And with a surge of sympathy for his godfather, Harrythought that Sirius was probably the only person heknew who could really understand how he felt at themoment, because Sirius was in the same situation;

Page | 382Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

nearly everyone in the Wizarding world thought Siriusa dangerous murderer and a great Voldemortsupporter and he had had to live with that knowledgefor fourteen years...

Harry blinked. He had just seen something in the firethat could not have been there. It had flashed intosight and vanished immediately. No ... it could nothave been... He had imagined it because he had beenthinking about Sirius...

“Okay, write that down,” Hermione said to Ron,pushing his essay and a sheet covered in her ownwriting back to Ron, “and then copy out thisconclusion that I’ve written for you.”

“Hermione, you are honestly the most wonderfulperson I’ve ever met,” said Ron weakly, “and if I’mever rude to you again —”

“— I’ll know you’re back to normal,” said Hermione.“Harry, yours is okay except for this bit at the end, Ithink you must have misheard Professor Sinistra,Europa’s covered in ice, not mice — Harry?”

Harry had slid off his chair onto his knees and wasnow crouching on the singed and threadbarehearthrug, gazing into the flames.

“Er — Harry?” said Ron uncertainly. “Why are youdown there?”

“Because I’ve just seen Sirius’s head in the fire,” saidHarry.

He spoke quite calmly; after all, he had seen Sirius’shead in this very fire the previous year and talked toit too. Nevertheless, he could not be sure that he hadreally seen it this time... It had vanished so quickly...

Page | 383Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Sirius’s head?” Hermione repeated. “You mean likewhen he wanted to talk to you during the TriwizardTournament? But he wouldn’t do that now, it wouldbe too — Siriusl”

She gasped, gazing at the fire; Ron dropped his quill.There in the middle of the dancing flames sat Sirius’shead, long dark hair falling around his grinning face.

“I was starting to think you’d go to bed beforeeveryone else had disappeared,” he said. “I’ve beenchecking every hour.”

“You’ve been popping into the fire every hour?” Harrysaid, half laughing.

“Just for a few seconds to check if the coast was clearyet.”

“But what if you’d been seen?” said Hermioneanxiously.

“Well, I think a girl — first year by the look of her —might’ve got a glimpse of me earlier, but don’t worry,”Sirius said hastily, as Hermione clapped a hand toher mouth. “I was gone the moment she looked backat me and I’ll bet she just thought I was an oddlyshaped log or something.”

“But Sirius, this is taking an awful risk —” Hermionebegan.

“You sound like Molly,” said Sirius. “This was the onlyway I could come up with of answering Harry’s letterwithout resorting to a code — and codes arebreakable.”

At the mention of Harry’s letter, Hermione and Ronhad both turned to stare at him.

Page | 384Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You didn’t say you’d written to Sirius!” saidHermione accusingly.

“I forgot,” said Harry, which was perfectly true; hismeeting with Cho in the Owlery had driven everythingbefore it out of his mind. “Don’t look at me like that,Hermione, there was no way anyone would have gotsecret information out of it, was there, Sirius?”

“No, it was very good,” said Sirius, smiling. “Anyway,we’d better be quick, just in case we’re disturbed —your scar.”

“What about — ?” Ron began, but Hermione saidquickly, “We’ll tell you afterward, go on, Sirius.”

“Well, I know it can’t be fun when it hurts, but wedon’t think it’s anything to really worry about. It keptaching all last year, didn’t it?”

“Yeah, and Dumbledore said it happened wheneverVoldemort was feeling a powerful emotion,” saidHarry, ignoring, as usual, Ron and Hermione’swinces. “So maybe he was just, I dunno, really angryor something the night I had that detention.”

“Well, now he’s back it’s bound to hurt more often,”said Sirius.

“So you don’t think it had anything to do withUmbridge touching me when I was in detention withher?” Harry asked.

“I doubt it,” said Sirius. “I know her by reputation andI’m sure she’s no Death Eater —”

“She’s foul enough to be one,” said Harry darkly andRon and Hermione nodded vigorously in agreement.

Page | 385Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, but the world isn’t split into good people andDeath Eaters,” said Sirius with a wry smile. “I knowshe’s a nasty piece of work, though — you shouldhear Remus talk about her.”

“Does Lupin know her?” asked Harry quickly,remembering Umbridge’s comments about dangeroushalf-breeds during her first lesson.

“No,” said Sirius, “but she drafted a bit of anti-werewolf legislation two years ago that makes italmost impossible for him to get a job.”

Harry remembered how much shabbier Lupin lookedthese days and his dislike of Umbridge deepened evenfurther.

“What’s she got against werewolves?” said Hermioneangrily.

“Scared of them, I expect,” said Sirius, smiling at herindignation. “Apparently she loathes part-humans;she campaigned to have mer-people rounded up andtagged last year too. Imagine wasting your time andenergy persecuting merpeople when there are littletoerags like Kreacher on the loose —”

Ron laughed but Hermione looked upset.

“Sirius!” she said reproachfully. “Honestly, if youmade a bit of an effort with Kreacher I’m sure he’drespond, after all, you are the only member of hisfamily he’s got left, and Professor Dumbledore said —”

“So what are Umbridge’s lessons like?” Siriusinterrupted. “Is she training you all to kill half-breeds?”

Page | 386Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry, ignoring Hermione’s affronted lookat being cut off in her defense of Kreacher. “She’s notletting us use magic at all!”

“All we do is read the stupid textbook,” said Ron.

“Ah, well, that figures,” said Sirius. “Our informationfrom inside the Ministry is that Fudge doesn’t wantyou trained in combat.”

“Trained in combat?” repeated Harry incredulously.“What does he think we’re doing here, forming somesort of wizard army?”

“That’s exactly what he thinks you’re doing,” saidSirius, “or rather, that’s exactly what he’s afraidDumbledore’s doing — forming his own private army,with which he will be able to take on the Ministry ofMagic.”

There was a pause at this, then Ron said, “That’s thestupidest thing I’ve ever heard, including all the stuffthat Luna Lovegood comes out with.”

“So we’re being prevented from learning DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts because Fudge is scared we’lluse spells against the Ministry?” said Hermione,looking furious.

“Yep,” said Sirius. “Fudge thinks Dumbledore willstop at nothing to seize power. He’s getting moreparanoid about Dumbledore by the day. It’s a matterof time before he has Dumbledore arrested on sometrumped-up charge.”

This reminded Harry of Percy’s letter.

Page | 387Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“D’you know if there’s going to be anything aboutDumbledore in the Daily Prophet tomorrow? OnlyRon’s brother Percy reckons there will be —”

“I don’t know,” said Sirius, “I haven’t seen anyonefrom the Order all weekend, they’re all busy. It’s justbeen Kreacher and me here...”

There was a definite note of bitterness in Sirius’svoice.

“So you haven’t had any news about Hagrid, either?”

“Ah ...” said Sirius, “well, he was supposed to be backby now, no one’s sure what’s happened to him.” Then,seeing their stricken faces, he added quickly, “ButDumbledore’s not worried, so don’t you three getyourselves in a state; I’m sure Hagrid’s fine.”

“But if he was supposed to be back by now ...” saidHermione in a small, worried voice.

“Madame Maxime was with him, we’ve been in touchwith her and she says they got separated on thejourney home — but there’s nothing to suggest he’shurt or — well, nothing to suggest he’s not perfectlyokay.”

Unconvinced, Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchangedworried looks.

“Listen, don’t go asking too many questions aboutHagrid,” said Sirius hastily, “it’ll just draw even moreattention to the fact that he’s not back, and I knowDumbledore doesn’t want that. Hagrid’s tough, he’llbe okay.” And when they did not appear cheered bythis, Sirius added, “When’s your next Hogsmeadeweekend anyway? I was thinking, we got away with

Page | 388Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

the dog disguise at the station, didn’t we? I thought Icould —”

“NO!” said Harry and Hermione together, very loudly.

“Sirius, didn’t you see the Daily Prophet?” saidHermione anxiously.

“Oh that,” said Sirius, grinning, “they’re alwaysguessing where I am, they haven’t really got a clue —”

“Yeah, but we think this time they have,” said Harry.“Something Malfoy said on the train made us think heknew it was you, and his father was on the platform,Sirius — you know, Lucius Malfoy — so don’t comeup here, whatever you do, if Malfoy recognizes youagain —”

“All right, all right, I’ve got the point,” said Sirius. Helooked most displeased. “Just an idea, thought youmight like to get together —”

“I would, I just don’t want you chucked back inAzkaban!” said Harry.

There was a pause in which Sirius looked out of thefire at Harry, a crease between his sunken eyes.

“You’re less like your father than I thought,” he saidfinally, a definite coolness in his voice. “The riskwould’ve been what made it fun for James.”

“Look —”

“Well, I’d better get going, I can hear Kreacher comingdown the stairs,” said Sirius, but Harry was sure hewas lying. “I’ll write to tell you a time I can make itback into the fire, then, shall I? If you can stand torisk it?”

Page | 389Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

There was a tiny pop, and the place where Sirius’shead had been was flickering flame once more.

Page | 390Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE HOGWARTS HIGH INQUISITOR

They had expected to have to comb Hermione’s DailyProphet carefully next morning to find the articlePercy had mentioned in his letter. However, thedeparting delivery owl had barely cleared the top ofthe milk jug when Hermione let out a huge gasp andflattened the newspaper to reveal a large photographof Dolores Umbridge, smiling widely and blinkingslowly at them from beneath the headline:

MINISTRY SEEKS EDUCATIONAL REFORM

DOLORES UMBRIDGE APPOINTED FIRST-EVER“HIGH INQUISITOR”

“ “High Inquisitor’?” said Harry darkly, his half-eatenbit of toast slipping from his fingers. “What does thatmean?”

Hermione read aloud:

“In a surprise move last night the Ministry of Magicpassed new legislation giving itself an unprecedented

Page | 391Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

level of control at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft andWizardry.

“ ‘The Minister has been growing uneasy about goings-on at Hogwarts for some time,’ said Junior Assistant tothe Minister, Percy Weasley. ‘He is now responding toconcerns voiced by anxious parents, who feel theschool may be moving in a direction they do notapprove.’

“This is not the first time in recent weeks Fudge hasused new laws to effect improvements at theWizarding school. As recently as August 30thEducational Decree Twenty-two was passed, to ensurethat, in the event of the current headmaster beingunable to provide a candidate for a teaching post, theMinistry should select an appropriate person.

“ ‘That’s how Dolores Umbridge came to be appointedto the teaching staff at Hogwarts,’ said Weasley lastnight. ‘Dumbledore couldn’t find anyone, so theMinister put in Umbridge and of course, she’s been animmediate success —’ ”

“She’s been a WHAT?” said Harry loudly.

“Wait, there’s more,” said Hermione grimly.

“ ‘— an immediate success, totally revolutionizing theteaching of Defense Against the Dark Arts andproviding the Minister with on-the-ground feedbackabout what’s really happening at Hogwarts.’

“It is this last function that the Ministry has nowformalized with the passing of Educational DecreeTwenty-three, which creates the new position of‘Hogwarts High Inquisitor.’

Page | 392Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“ ‘This is an exciting new phase in the Minister’s planto get to grips with what some are calling the “fallingstandards” at Hog warts,’ said Weasley. ‘The Inquisitorwill have powers to inspect her fellow educators andmake sure that they are coming up to scratch.

Professor Umbridge has been offered this position inaddition to her own teaching post, and we aredelighted to say that she has accepted.’

“The Ministry’s new moves have received enthusiasticsupport from parents of students at Hogwarts.

“ ‘Ifeel much easier in my mind now that I know thatDumbledore is being subjected to fair and objectiveevaluation,’ said Mr. Lucius Malfoy, 41, speaking fromhis Wiltshire mansion last night. ‘Many of us with ourchildren’s best interests at heart have been concernedabout some of Dumbledore’s eccentric decisions in thelast few years and will be glad to know that theMinistry is keeping an eye on the situation.’

“Among those ‘eccentric decisions’ are undoubtedly thecontroversial staff appointments previously describedin this newspaper, which have included the hiring ofwerewolf Remus Lupin, half giant Rubeus Hagrid, anddelusional ex-Auror ‘Mad-Eye’ Moody.

“Rumors abound, of course, that Albus Dumbledore,once Supreme Mugwump of the InternationalConfederation of Wizards and Chief Warlock of theWizengamot, is no longer up to the task of managingthe prestigious school of Hogwarts.

“ ‘I think the appointment of the Inquisitor is a first steptoward ensuring that Hogwarts has a headmaster inwhom we can all repose confidence,’ said a Ministryinsider last night.

Page | 393Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Wizengamot elders Griselda Marchbanks and TiberiusOgden have resigned in protest at the introduction ofthe post of Inquisitor to Hogwarts.

“ ‘Hogwarts is a school, not an outpost of CorneliusFudge’s office,’ said Madam Marchbanks. ‘This is afurther disgusting attempt to discredit AlbusDumbledore.’ (For a full account of MadamMarchbanks’ alleged links to subversive goblin groups,turn to page 17].”

Hermione finished reading and looked across thetable at the other two.

“So now we know how we ended up with Umbridge!Fudge passed this ‘Educational Decree’ and forcedher on us! And now he’s given her the power toinspect other teachers!” Hermione was breathing fastand her eyes were very bright. “I can’t believe this. It’soutrageous...”

“I know it is,” said Harry. He looked down at his righthand, clenched upon the tabletop, and saw the faintwhite outline of the words Umbridge had forced himto cut into his skin.

But a grin was unfurling on Ron’s face.

“What?” said Harry and Hermione together, staring athim.

“Oh, I can’t wait to see McGonagall inspected,” saidRon happily. “Umbridge won’t know what’s hit her.”

“Well, come on,” said Hermione, jumping up, “we’dbetter get going, if she’s inspecting Binns’s class wedon’t want to be late...”

Page | 394Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But Professor Umbridge was not inspecting theirHistory of Magic lesson, which was just as dull as theprevious Monday, nor was she in Snape’s dungeonwhen they arrived for double Potions, where Harry’smoonstone essay was handed back to him with alarge, spiky black D scrawled in an upper corner.

“I have awarded you the grades you would havereceived if you presented this work in your O.W.L,”said Snape with a smirk, as he swept among them,passing back their homework. “This should give you arealistic idea of what to expect in your examination.”

Snape reached the front of the class and turned toface them.

“The general standard of this homework was abysmal.Most of you would have failed had this been yourexamination. I expect to see a great deal more effortfor this week’s essay on the various varieties of venomantidotes, or I shall have to start handing outdetentions to those dunces who get D’s.”

He smirked as Malfoy sniggered and said in acarrying whisper, “Some people got D’s? Ha!”

Harry realized that Hermione was looking sideways tosee what grade he had received; he slid hismoonstone essay back into his bag as quickly aspossible, feeling that he would rather keep thatinformation private.

Determined not to give Snape an excuse to fail himthis lesson, Harry read and reread every line of theinstructions on the blackboard at least three timesbefore acting on them. His Strengthening Solutionwas not precisely the clear turquoise shade ofHermione’s but it was at least blue rather than pink,like Neville’s, and he delivered a flask of it to Snape’sPage | 395Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

desk at the end of the lesson with a feeling of mingleddefiance and relief.

“Well, that wasn’t as bad as last week, was it?” saidHermione, as they climbed the steps out of thedungeon and made their way across the entrance halltoward lunch. “And the homework didn’t go too badlyeither, did it?”

When neither Ron nor Harry answered, she pressedon, “I mean, all right, I didn’t expect the top grade,not if he’s marking to O.W.L. standard, but a pass isquite encouraging at this stage, wouldn’t you say?”

Harry made a noncommittal noise in his throat.

“Of course, a lot can happen between now and theexam, we’ve got plenty of time to improve, but thegrades we’re getting now are a sort of baseline, aren’tthey? Something we can build on ...”

They sat down together at the Gryffindor table.

“Obviously, I’d have been thrilled if I’d gotten an O —”

“Hermione,” said Ron sharply, “if you want to knowwhat grades we got, ask.”

“I don’t — I didn’t mean — well, if you want to tell me

“I got a P,” said Ron, ladling soup into his bowl.“Happy?”

“Well, that’s nothing to be ashamed of,” said Fred,who had just arrived at the table with George and LeeJordan and was sitting down on Harry’s right.“Nothing wrong with a good healthy P.”

Page | 396Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But,” said Hermione, “doesn’t P stand for ...”

“ Boor,’yeah,” said Lee Jordan. “Still, better than D,isn’t it? ‘Dreadful’?”

Harry felt his face grow warm and faked a smallcoughing fit over his roll. When he emerged from thishe was sorry to find that Hermione was still in fullflow about O.W.L. grades.

“So top grade’s O for ‘Outstanding,’ ” she was saying,“and then there’s A —”

“No, E,” George corrected her, “E for ‘ExceedsExpectations.’ And I’ve always thought Fred and Ishould’ve got E in everything, because we exceededexpectations just by turning up for the exams.”

They all laughed except Hermione, who plowed on,

“So after E, it’s A for ‘Acceptable,’ and that’s the lastpass grade, isn’t it?”

“Yep,” said Fred, dunking an entire roll in his soup,transferring it to his mouth, and swallowing it whole.

“Then you get P for ‘Poor’ ” — Ron raised both hisarms in mock celebration — “and D for ‘Dreadful.’ ”

“And then T,” George reminded him.

“T?” asked Hermione, looking appalled. “Even lowerthan a D? What on earth does that stand for?”

“ Troll,’ ” said George promptly.

Harry laughed again, though he was not sure whetheror not George was joking. He imagined trying toconceal from Hermione that he had received T’s in all

Page | 397Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

his O.W.L.s and immediately resolved to work harderfrom now on.

“You lot had an inspected lesson yet?” Fred askedthem.

“No,” said Hermione at once, “have you?”

“Just now, before lunch,” said George. “Charms.”

“What was it like?” Harry and Hermione askedtogether.

Fred shrugged.

“Not that bad. Umbridge just lurked in the cornermaking notes on a clipboard. You know whatFlitwick’s like, he treated her like a guest, didn’t seemto bother him at all. She didn’t say much. AskedAlicia a couple of questions about what the classesare normally like, Alicia told her they were reallygood, that was it.”

“I can’t see old Flitwick getting marked down,” saidGeorge, “he usually gets everyone through theirexams all right.”

“Who’ve you got this afternoon?” Fred asked Harry.“Trelawney —”

“A T if ever I saw one —”

“— and Umbridge herself.”

“Well, be a good boy and keep your temper withUmbridge today,” said George. “Angelina’ll do her nutif you miss any more Quidditch practices.”

Page | 398Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But Harry did not have to wait for Defense Againstthe Dark Arts to meet Professor Umbridge. He waspulling out his dream diary in a seat at the very backof the shadowy Divination room when Ron elbowedhim in the ribs and, looking round, he saw ProfessorUmbridge emerging through the trapdoor in the floor.The class, which had been talking cheerily, fell silentat once. The abrupt fall in the noise level madeProfessor Trelawney, who had been wafting abouthanding out Dream Oracles, look round.

“Good afternoon, Professor Trelawney,” said ProfessorUmbridge with her wide smile. “You received my note,

I trust? Giving the time and date of your inspection?”

Professor Trelawney nodded curtly and, looking verydisgruntled, turned her back on Professor Umbridgeand continued to give out books. Still smiling,Professor Umbridge grasped the back of the nearestarmchair and pulled it to the front of the class so thatit was a few inches behind Professor Trelawney’s seat.She then sat down, took her clipboard from herflowery bag, and looked up expectantly, waiting forthe class to begin.

Professor Trelawney pulled her shawls tight about herwith slightly trembling hands and surveyed the classthrough her hugely magnifying lenses. “We shall becontinuing our study of prophetic dreams today,” shesaid in a brave attempt at her usual mystic tones,though her voice shook slightly. “Divide into pairs,please, and interpret each other’s latest nighttimevisions with the aid of the Oracle.”

She made as though to sweep back to her seat, sawProfessor Umbridge sitting right beside it, andimmediately veered left toward Parvati and Lavender,who were already deep in discussion about Parvati’smost recent dream.

Page | 399Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry opened his copy of The Dream Oracle, watchingUmbridge covertly. She was making notes on herclipboard now. After a few minutes she got to her feetand began to pace the room in Trelawney’s wake,listening to her conversations with students andposing questions here and there. Harry bent his headhurriedly over his book.

“Think of a dream, quick,” he told Ron, “in case theold toad comes our way.”

“I did it last time,” Ron protested, “it’s your turn, youtell me one.”

“Oh, I dunno ...” said Harry desperately, who couldnot remember dreaming anything at all over the lastfew days. “Let’s say I dreamed I was ... drowningSnape in my cauldron. Yeah, that’ll do...”

Ron chortled as he opened his Dream Oracle.

“Okay, we’ve got to add your age to the date you hadthe dream, the number of letters in the subject ...would that be ‘drowning’ or ‘cauldron’ or ‘Snape’?”

“It doesn’t matter, pick any of them,” said Harry,chancing a glance behind him. Professor Umbridgewas now standing at Professor Trelawney’s shouldermaking notes while the Divination teacher questionedNeville about his dream diary.

“What night did you dream this again?” Ron said,immersed in calculations.

“I dunno, last night, whenever you like,” Harry toldhim, trying to listen to what Umbridge was saying toProfessor Trelawney. They were only a table awayfrom him and Ron now. Professor Umbridge was

Page | 400Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

making another note on her clipboard and ProfessorTrelawney was looking extremely put out.

“Now,” said Umbridge, looking up at Trelawney,“you’ve been in this post how long, exactly?”

Professor Trelawney scowled at her, arms crossed andshoulders hunched as though wishing to protectherself as much as possible from the indignity of theinspection. After a slight pause in which she seemedto decide that the question was not so offensive thatshe could reasonably ignore it, she said in a deeplyresentful tone, “Nearly sixteen years.”

“Quite a period,” said Professor Umbridge, making anote on her clipboard. “So it was ProfessorDumbledore who appointed you?”

“That’s right,” said Professor Trelawney shortly.

Professor Umbridge made another note.

“And you are a great-great-granddaughter of thecelebrated Seer Cassandra Trelawney?”

“Yes,” said Professor Trelawney, holding her head alittle higher.

Another note on the clipboard.

“But I think — correct me if I am mistaken — thatyou are the first in your family since Cassandra to bepossessed of second sight?”

“These things often skip — er — three generations,”said Professor Trelawney.

Professor Umbridge’s toadlike smile widened.

Page | 401Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Of course,” she said sweetly, making yet anothernote. “Well, if you could just predict something forme, then?”

She looked up inquiringly, still smiling. ProfessorTrelawney had stiffened as though unable to believeher ears.

“I don’t understand you,” said Professor Trelawney,clutching convulsively at the shawl around herscrawny neck.

“I’d like you to make a prediction for me,” saidProfessor Umbridge very clearly.

Harry and Ron were not the only people watching andlistening sneakily from behind their books now; mostof the class were staring transfixed at ProfessorTrelawney as she drew herself up to her full height,her beads and bangles clinking.

“The Inner Eye does not See upon command!” shesaid in scandalized tones.

“I see,” said Professor Umbridge softly, making yetanother note on her clipboard.

“I — but — but ... wait\” said Professor Trelawneysuddenly, in an attempt at her usual ethereal voice,though the mystical effect was ruined somewhat bythe way it was shaking with anger. “I ... I think I dosee something ... something that concerns you... Why,I sense something ... something dark ... some graveperil ...”

Professor Trelawney pointed a shaking finger atProfessor Umbridge who continued to smile blandly ather, eyebrows raised.

Page | 402Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I am afraid ... I am afraid that you are in gravedanger!” Professor Trelawney finished dramatically.

There was a pause. Professor Umbridge’s eyebrowswere still raised.

“Right,” she said softly, scribbling on her clipboardonce more. “Well, if that’s really the best you can do

She turned away, leaving Professor Trelawneystanding rooted to the spot, her chest heaving. Harrycaught Ron’s eye and knew that Ron was thinkingexactly the same as he was: They both knew thatProfessor Trelawney was an old fraud, but on theother hand, they loathed Umbridge so much that theyfelt very much on Trelawney’s side — until sheswooped down on them a few seconds later, that was.

“Well?” she said, snapping her long fingers underHarry’s nose, uncharacteristically brisk. “Let me seethe start you’ve made on your dream diary, please.”

And by the time she had interpreted Harry’s dreamsat the top of her voice (all of which, even the ones thatinvolved eating porridge, apparently foretold agruesome and early death), he was feeling much lesssympathetic toward her. All the while, ProfessorUmbridge stood a few feet away, making notes on thatclipboard, and when the bell rang she descended thesilver ladder first so that she was waiting for them allwhen they reached their Defense Against the DarkArts lesson ten minutes later.

She was humming and smiling to herself when theyentered the room. Harry and Ron told Hermione, whohad been in Arithmancy, exactly what had happenedin Divination while they all took out their copies ofDefensive Magical Theory, but before Hermione couldPage | 403Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

ask any questions Professor Umbridge had calledthem all to order and silence fell.

“Wands away,” she instructed them all smilingly, andthose people who had been hopeful enough to takethem out sadly returned them to their bags. “As wefinished chapter one last lesson, I would like you allto turn to page nineteen today and commence chaptertwo, ‘Common Defensive Theories and TheirDerivation.’ There will be no need to talk.”

Still smiling her wide, self-satisfied smile, she satdown at her desk. The class gave an audible sigh as itturned, as one, to page nineteen. Harry wondereddully whether there were enough chapters in the bookto keep them reading through all this year’s lessonsand was on the point of checking the contents whenhe noticed that Hermione had her hand in the airagain.

Professor Umbridge had noticed too, and what wasmore, she seemed to have worked out a strategy forjust such an eventuality. Instead of trying to pretendshe had not noticed Hermione, she got to her feet andwalked around the front row of desks until they wereface-to-face, then she bent down and whispered, sothat the rest of the class could not hear, “What is itthis time, Miss Granger?”

“I’ve already read chapter two,” said Hermione.

“Well then, proceed to chapter three.”

“I’ve read that too. I’ve read the whole book.”

Professor Umbridge blinked but recovered her poisealmost instantly.

Page | 404Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, then, you should be able to tell me whatSlinkhard says about counterjinxes in chapterfifteen.”

“He says that counterjinxes are improperly named,”said Hermione promptly. “He says ‘counterjinx’ is justa name people give their jinxes when they want tomake them sound more acceptable.”

Professor Umbridge raised her eyebrows, and Harryknew she was impressed against her will.

“But I disagree,” Hermione continued.

Professor Umbridge’s eyebrows rose a little higher andher gaze became distinctly colder.

“You disagree?”

“Yes, I do,” said Hermione, who, unlike Umbridge,was not whispering, but speaking in a clear, carryingvoice that had by now attracted the rest of the class’sattention. “Mr. Slinkhard doesn’t like jinxes, does he?But I think they can be very useful when they’re useddefensively.”

“Oh, you do, do you?” said Professor Umbridge,forgetting to whisper and straightening up. “Well, I’mafraid it is Mr. Slinkhard’s opinion, and not yours,that matters within this classroom, Miss Granger.”

“But —” Hermione began.

“That is enough,” said Professor Umbridge. Shewalked back to the front of the class and stood beforethem, all the jauntiness she had shown at thebeginning of the lesson gone. “Miss Granger, I amgoing to take five points from Gryffindor House.”

Page | 405Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

There was an outbreak of muttering at this.

“What for?” said Harry angrily.

“Don’t you get involved!” Hermione whisperedurgently to him.

“For disrupting my class with pointlessinterruptions,” said Professor Umbridge smoothly. “Iam here to teach you using a Ministry-approvedmethod that does not include inviting students to givetheir opinions on matters about which theyunderstand very little. Your previous teachers in thissubject may have allowed you more license, but asnone of them — with the possible exception ofProfessor Quirrell, who did at least appear to haverestricted himself to age-appropriate subjects —would have passed a Ministry inspection —”

“Yeah, Quirrell was a great teacher,” said Harryloudly, “there was just that minor drawback of himhaving Lord Voldemort sticking out of the back of hishead.”

This pronouncement was followed by one of theloudest silences Harry had ever heard. Then —

“I think another week’s detentions would do you somegood, Mr. Potter,” said Umbridge sleekly.

k k k

The cut on the back of Harry’s hand had barelyhealed and by the following morning, it was bleedingagain. He did not complain during the evening’sdetention; he was determined not to give Umbridgethe satisfaction; over and over again he wrote I must

Page | 406Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

not tell lies and not a sound escaped his lips, thoughthe cut deepened with every letter.

The very worst part of this second week’s worth ofdetentions was, just as George had predicted,Angelina’s reaction. She cornered him just as hearrived at the Gryffindor table for breakfast onTuesday and shouted so loudly that ProfessorMcGonagall came sweeping down upon the pair ofthem from the staff table.

“Miss Johnson, how dare you make such a racket inthe Great Hall! Five points from Gryffindor!”

“But Professor — he’s gone and landed himself indetention again —”

“What’s this, Potter?” said Professor McGonagallsharply, rounding on Harry. “Detention? Fromwhom?”

“From Professor Umbridge,” muttered Harry, notmeeting Professor McGonagall’s beady, square-framedeyes.

“Are you telling me,” she said, lowering her voice sothat the group of curious Ravenclaws behind themcould not hear, “that after the warning I gave you lastMonday you lost your temper in Professor Umbridge’sclass again?”

“Yes,” Harry muttered, speaking to the floor.

“Potter, you must get a grip on yourself! You areheading for serious trouble! Another five points fromGryffindor!”

Page | 407Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But — what? Professor, no!” Harry said, furious atthis injustice. “I’m already being punished by her,why do you have to take points as well?”

“Because detentions do not appear to have any effecton you whatsoever!” said Professor McGonagall tartly.“No, not another word of complaint, Potter! And as foryou, Miss Johnson, you will confine your shoutingmatches to the Quidditch pitch in future or risklosing the team Captaincy!”

She strode back toward the staff table. Angelina gaveHarry a look of deepest disgust and stalked away,upon which Harry flung himself onto the benchbeside Ron, fuming.

“She’s taken points off Gryffindor because I’m havingmy hand sliced open every night! How is that fair,how?”

“I know, mate,” said Ron sympathetically, tippingbacon onto Harry’s plate, “she’s bang out of order.”

Hermione, however, merely rustled the pages of herDaily Prophet and said nothing.

“You think McGonagall was right, do you?” said Harryangrily to the picture of Cornelius Fudge obscuringHermione’s face.

“I wish she hadn’t taken points from you, but I thinkshe’s right to warn you not to lose your temper withUmbridge,” said Hermione’s voice, while Fudgegesticulated forcefully from the front page, clearlygiving some kind of speech.

Harry did not speak to Hermione all through Charms,but when they entered Transfiguration he forgot hisanger; Professor Umbridge and her clipboard were

Page | 408Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

sitting in a corner and the sight of her drove thememory of breakfast right out of his head.

“Excellent,” whispered Ron, as they sat down in theirusual seats. “Let’s see Umbridge get what shedeserves.”

Professor McGonagall marched into the room withoutgiving the slightest indication that she knew ProfessorUmbridge was there.

“That will do,” she said and silence fell immediately.“Mr. Finnigan, kindly come here and hand back thehomework — Miss Brown, please take this box ofmice — don’t be silly, girl, they won’t hurt you — andhand one to each student —”

“Hem, hem,” said Professor Umbridge, employing thesame silly little cough she had used to interruptDumbledore on the first night of term. ProfessorMcGonagall ignored her. Seamus handed backHarry’s essay; Harry took it without looking at himand saw, to his relief, that he had managed an A.

“Right then, everyone, listen closely — Dean Thomas,if you do that to the mouse again I shall put you indetention — most of you have now successfullyvanished your snails and even those who were leftwith a certain amount of shell have the gist of thespell. Today we shall be —”

“Hem, hem,” said Professor Umbridge.

“Yes?” said Professor McGonagall, turning round, hereyebrows so close together they seemed to form onelong, severe line.

Page | 409Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I was just wondering, Professor, whether youreceived my note telling you of the date and time ofyour inspec —”

“Obviously I received it, or I would have asked youwhat you are doing in my classroom,” said ProfessorMcGonagall, turning her back firmly on ProfessorUmbridge. Many of the students exchanged looks ofglee. “As I was saying, today we shall be practicingthe altogether more difficult vanishment of mice. Now,the Vanishing Spell —”

“Hem, hem.”

“I wonder,” said Professor McGonagall in cold fury,turning on Professor Umbridge, “how you expect togain an idea of my usual teaching methods if youcontinue to interrupt me? You see, I do not generallypermit people to talk when I am talking.”

Professor Umbridge looked as though she had justbeen slapped in the face. She did not speak, butstraightened the parchment on her clipboard andbegan scribbling furiously. Looking supremelyunconcerned, Professor McGonagall addressed theclass once more.

“As I was saying, the Vanishing Spell becomes moredifficult with the complexity of the animal to bevanished. The snail, as an invertebrate, does notpresent much of a challenge; the mouse, as amammal, offers a much greater one. This is not,therefore, magic you can accomplish with your mindon your dinner. So — you know the incantation, letme see what you can do...”

“How she can lecture me about not losing my temperwith Umbridge!” Harry said to Ron under his voice,

Page | 410Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

but he was grinning; his anger with ProfessorMcGonagall had quite evaporated.

Professor Umbridge did not follow ProfessorMcGonagall around the class as she had followedProfessor Trelawney; perhaps she thought thatProfessor McGonagall would not permit it. She did,however, take many more notes while she sat in hercorner, and when Professor McGonagall finally toldthem all to pack away, rose with a grim expression onher face.

“Well, it’s a start,” said Ron, holding up a long,wriggling mouse tail and dropping it back into the boxLavender was passing around.

As they filed out of the classroom, Harry sawProfessor Umbridge approach the teacher’s desk; henudged Ron, who nudged Hermione in turn, and thethree of them deliberately fell back to eavesdrop.

“How long have you been teaching at Hogwarts?”Professor Umbridge asked.

“Thirty-nine years this December,” said ProfessorMcGonagall brusquely, snapping her bag shut.

Professor Umbridge made a note.

“Very well,” she said, “you will receive the results ofyour inspection in ten days’ time.”

“I can hardly wait,” said Professor McGonagall in acoldly indifferent voice, and she strode off toward thedoor. “Hurry up, you three,” she added, sweepingHarry, Ron, and Hermione before her. Harry could nothelp giving her a faint smile and could have sworn hereceived one in return.

Page | 411Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He had thought that the next time he would seeUmbridge would be in his detention that evening, buthe was wrong. When they walked down the lawnstoward the forest for Care of Magical Creatures, theyfound her and her clipboard waiting for them besideProfessor Grubbly-Plank.

“You do not usually take this class, is that correct?”Harry heard her ask as they arrived at the trestletable where the group of captive bowtruckles werescrabbling around for wood lice like so many livingtwigs.

“Quite correct,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank, handsbehind her back and bouncing on the balls of herfeet. “I am a substitute teacher standing in forProfessor Hagrid.”

Harry exchanged uneasy looks with Ron andHermione. Malfoy was whispering with Crabbe andGoyle; he would surely love this opportunity to telltales on Hagrid to a member of the Ministry.

“Hmm,” said Professor Umbridge, dropping her voice,though Harry could still hear her quite clearly, “Iwonder — the headmaster seems strangely reluctantto give me any information on the matter — can youtell me what is causing Professor Hagrid’s veryextended leave of absence?”

Harry saw Malfoy look up eagerly.

“ ’Fraid I can’t,” said Professor Grubbly-Plankbreezily. “Don’t know anything more about it thanyou do. Got an owl from Dumbledore, would I like acouple of weeks teaching work, accepted — that’s asmuch as I know. Well ... shall I get started then?”

Page | 412Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, please do,” said Professor Umbridge, scribblingupon her clipboard.

Umbridge took a different tack in this class andwandered among the students, questioning them onmagical creatures. Most people were able to answerwell and Harry’s spirits lifted somewhat; at least theclass was not letting Hagrid down.

“Overall,” said Professor Umbridge, returning toProfessor Grubbly-Plank’s side after a lengthyinterrogation of Dean Thomas, “how do you, as atemporary member of staff— an objective outsider, Isuppose you might say — how do you find Hogwarts?Do you feel you receive enough support from theschool management?”

“Oh, yes, Dumbledore’s excellent,” said ProfessorGrubbly-Plank heartily. “No, I’m very happy with theway things are run, very happy indeed.”

Looking politely incredulous, Umbridge made a tinynote on her clipboard and went on, “And what are youplanning to cover with this class this year —assuming, of course, that Professor Hagrid does notreturn?”

“Oh, I’ll take them through the creatures that mostoften come up in O.W.L.,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank. “Not much left to do — they’ve studiedunicorns and nifflers, I thought we’d cover porlocksand kneazles, make sure they can recognize crupsand knarls, you know...”

“Well, you seem to know what you’re doing, at anyrate,” said Professor Umbridge, making a very obvioustick on her clipboard. Harry did not like the emphasisshe put on “you” and liked it even less when she put

Page | 413Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

her next question to Goyle: “Now, I hear there havebeen injuries in this class?”

Goyle gave a stupid grin. Malfoy hastened to answerthe question.

“That was me,” he said. “I was slashed by ahippogriff.”

“A hippogriff?” said Professor Umbridge, nowscribbling frantically.

“Only because he was too stupid to listen to whatHagrid told him to do,” said Harry angrily.

Both Ron and Hermione groaned. Professor Umbridgeturned her head slowly in Harry’s direction.

“Another night’s detention, I think,” she said softly.“Well, thank you very much, Professor Grubbly-Plank,I think that’s all I need here. You will be receiving theresults of your inspection within ten days.”

“Jolly good,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank, andProfessor Umbridge set off back across the lawn tothe castle.

ie ie ie

It was nearly midnight when Harry left Umbridge’soffice that night, his hand now bleeding so severelythat it was staining the scarf he had wrapped aroundit. He expected the common room to be empty whenhe returned, but Ron and Hermione had sat upwaiting for him. He was pleased to see them,especially as Hermione was disposed to besympathetic rather than critical.

Page | 414Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Here,” she said anxiously, pushing a small bowl ofyellow liquid toward him, “soak your hand in that, it’sa solution of strained and pickled murtlap tentacles,it should help.”

Harry placed his bleeding, aching hand into the bowland experienced a wonderful feeling of relief.Crookshanks curled around his legs, purring loudly,and then leapt into his lap and settled down.

“Thanks,” he said gratefully, scratching behindCrookshanks’s ears with his left hand.

“I still reckon you should complain about this,” saidRon in a low voice.

“No,” said Harry flatly.

“McGonagall would go nuts if she knew —”

“Yeah, she probably would,” said Harry. “And howlong d’you reckon it’d take Umbridge to pass anotherDecree saying anyone who complains about the HighInquisitor gets sacked immediately?”

Ron opened his mouth to retort but nothing came outand after a moment he closed it again in a defeatedsort of way.

“She’s an awful woman,” said Hermione in a smallvoice. “Awful. You know, I was just saying to Ronwhen you came in ... we’ve got to do something abouther.” "

“I suggested poison,” said Ron grimly.

“No ... I mean, something about what a dreadfulteacher she is, and how we’re not going to learn anydefense from her at all,” said Hermione.

Page | 415Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, what can we do about that?” said Ron,yawning. “ ’S too late, isn’t it? She got the job, she’shere to stay, Fudge’ll make sure of that.”

“Well,” said Hermione tentatively. “You know, I wasthinking today...” She shot a slightly nervous look atHarry and then plunged on, “I was thinking that —maybe the time’s come when we should just —justdo it ourselves.”

“Do what ourselves?” said Harry suspiciously, stillfloating his hand in the essence of murtlap tentacles.

“Well — learn Defense Against the Dark Artsourselves,” said Hermione.

“Come off it,” groaned Ron. “You want us to do extrawork? D’you realize Harry and I are behind onhomework again and it’s only the second week?”

“But this is much more important than homework!”said Hermione.

Harry and Ron goggled at her.

“I didn’t think there was anything in the universemore important than homework,” said Ron.

“Don’t be silly, of course there is!” said Hermione, andHarry saw, with an ominous feeling, that her face wassuddenly alight with the kind of fervor that S.P.E.W.usually inspired in her. “It’s about preparingourselves, like Harry said in Umbridge’s first lesson,for what’s waiting out there. It’s about making surewe really can defend ourselves. If we don’t learnanything for a whole year —”

“We can’t do much by ourselves,” said Ron in adefeated voice. “I mean, all right, we can go and look

Page | 416Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

jinxes up in the library and try and practice them, Isuppose —”

“No, I agree, we’ve gone past the stage where we canjust learn things out of books,” said Hermione. “Weneed a teacher, a proper one, who can show us howto use the spells and correct us if we’re going wrong.”

“If you’re talking about Lupin ...” Harry began.

“No, no, I’m not talking about Lupin,” said Hermione.“He’s too busy with the Order and anyway, the mostwe could see him is during Hogsmeade weekends andthat’s not nearly often enough.”

“Who, then?” said Harry, frowning at her.

Hermione heaved a very deep sigh.

“Isn’t it obvious?” she said. “I’m talking about you,Harry.”

There was a moment’s silence. A light night breezerattled the windowpanes behind Ron and the fireguttered.

“About me what?” said Harry.

“I’m talking about you teaching us Defense Againstthe Dark Arts.”

Harry stared at her. Then he turned to Ron, ready toexchange the exasperated looks they sometimesshared when Hermione elaborated on far-fetchedschemes like S.P.E.W. To Harry’s consternation,however, Ron did not look exasperated. He wasfrowning slightly, apparently thinking. Then he said,“That’s an idea.”

Page | 417Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What’s an idea?” said Harry.

“You,” said Ron. “Teaching us to do it.”

“But ...”

Harry was grinning now, sure the pair of them werepulling his leg.

“But I’m not a teacher, I can’t —”

“Harry, you’re the best in the year at Defense Againstthe Dark Arts,” said Hermione.

“Me?” said Harry, now grinning more broadly thanever. “No I’m not, you’ve beaten me in every test —”

“Actually, I haven’t,” said Hermione coolly. “You beatme in our third year — the only year we both sat thetest and had a teacher who actually knew the subjectBut I’m not talking about test results, Harry. Lookwhat you’ve done\”

“How d’you mean?”

“You know what, I’m not sure I want someone thisstupid teaching me,” Ron said to Hermione, smirkingslightly. He turned to Harry. “Let’s think,” he said,pulling a face like Goyle concentrating. “Uh ... firstyear — you saved the Stone from You-Know-Who.”

“But that was luck,” said Harry, “that wasn’t skill —”

“Second year,” Ron interrupted, “you killed thebasilisk and destroyed Riddle.”

“Yeah, but if Fawkes hadn’t turned up I —”

Page | 418Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Third year,” said Ron, louder still, “you fought offabout a hundred dementors at once —”

“You know that was a fluke, if the Time-Turner hadn’t??

“Last year,” Ron said, almost shouting now, “youfought off You-Know-Who again —”

“Listen to me!” said Harry, almost angrily, becauseRon and Hermione were both smirking now. “Justlisten to me, all right? It sounds great when you say itlike that, but all that stuff was luck — I didn’t knowwhat I was doing half the time, I didn’t plan any of it,

I just did whatever I could think of, and I nearlyalways had help —”

Ron and Hermione were still smirking and Harry felthis temper rise; he wasn’t even sure why he wasfeeling so angry.

“Don’t sit there grinning like you know better than Ido, I was there, wasn’t I?” he said heatedly. “I knowwhat went on, all right? And I didn’t get through anyof that because I was brilliant at Defense Against theDark Arts, I got through it all because — becausehelp came at the right time, or because I guessedright — but I just blundered through it all, I didn’thave a clue what I was doing — STOP LAUGHING!”

The bowl of murtlap essence fell to the floor andsmashed. He became aware that he was on his feet,though he couldn’t remember standing up.Crookshanks streaked away under a sofa; Ron andHermione’s smiles had vanished.

“You don’t know what it’s likel You — neither of you— you’ve never had to face him, have you? You thinkit’s just memorizing a bunch of spells and throwing

Page | 419Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

them at him, like you’re in class or something? Thewhole time you know there’s nothing between youand dying except your own — your own brain or gutsor whatever — like you can think straight when youknow you’re about a second from being murdered, ortortured, or watching your friends die — they’ve nevertaught us that in their classes, what it’s like to dealwith things like that — and you two sit there actinglike I’m a clever little boy to be standing here, alive,like Diggory was stupid, like he messed up — you justdon’t get it, that could just as easily have been me, itwould have been if Voldemort hadn’t needed me —”

“We weren’t saying anything like that, mate,” saidRon, looking aghast. “We weren’t having a go atDiggory, we didn’t — you’ve got the wrong end of the

He looked helplessly at Hermione, whose face wasstricken.

“Harry,” she said timidly, “don’t you see? This ... thisis exactly why we need you... We need to know whatit’s r-really like ... facing him ... facing V-Voldemort.”

It was the first time she had ever said Voldemort’sname, and it was this, more than anything else, thatcalmed Harry. Still breathing hard, he sank back intohis chair, becoming aware as he did so that his handwas throbbing horribly again. He wished he had notsmashed the bowl of murtlap essence.

“Well ... think about it,” said Hermione quietly.“Please?”

Harry could not think of anything to say. He wasfeeling ashamed of his outburst already. He nodded,hardly aware of what he was agreeing to.

Page | 420Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hermione stood up.

“Well, I’m off to bed,” she said in a voice that wasclearly as natural as she could make it. “Erm ...’night.”

Ron had gotten to his feet too.

“Coming?” he said awkwardly to Harry.

“Yeah,” said Harry. “In ... in a minute. I’ll just clearthis up.”

He indicated the smashed bowl on the floor. Ronnodded and left.

“Reparo,” Harry muttered, pointing his wand at thebroken pieces of china. They flew back together, goodas new, but there was no returning the murtlapessence to the bowl.

He was suddenly so tired that he was tempted to sinkback into his armchair and sleep there, but insteadhe got to his feet and followed Ron upstairs. Hisrestless night was punctuated once more by dreamsof long corridors and locked doors, and he awoke nextday with his scar prickling again.

Page | 421Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





IN THE HOG’S HEAD

Hermione made no mention of Harry giving DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts lessons for two whole weeksafter her original suggestion. Harry’s detentions withUmbridge were finally over (he doubted whether thewords now etched on the back of his hand would everfade entirely); Ron had had four more Quidditchpractices and not been shouted at during the lasttwo; and all three of them had managed to vanishtheir mice in Transfiguration (Hermione had actuallyprogressed to vanishing kittens), before the subjectwas broached again, on a wild, blustery evening atthe end of September, when the three of them weresitting in the library, looking up potion ingredients forSnape.

“I was wondering,” Hermione said suddenly, “whetheryou’d thought any more about Defense Against theDark Arts, Harry.”

“ ’Course I have,” said Harry grumpily. “Can’t forget it,can we, with that hag teaching us —”

Page | 422Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I meant the idea Ron and I had” — Ron cast her analarmed, threatening kind of look; she frowned at him— “oh, all right, the idea / had, then — about youteaching us.”

Harry did not answer at once. He pretended to beperusing a page of Asiatic Anti-Venoms, because hedid not want to say what was in his mind.

The fact was that he had given the matter a great dealof thought over the past fortnight. Sometimes itseemed an insane idea, just as it had on the nightHermione had proposed it, but at others, he hadfound himself thinking about the spells that hadserved him best in his various encounters with Darkcreatures and Death Eaters — found himself, in fact,subconsciously planning lessons...

“Well,” he said slowly, when he could not pretend tofind Asiatic anti-venoms interesting much longer,“yeah, I — I’ve thought about it a bit.”

“And?” said Hermione eagerly.

“I dunno,” said Harry, playing for time. He looked upat Ron.

“I thought it was a good idea from the start,” saidRon, who seemed keener to join in this conversationnow that he was sure that Harry was not going tostart shouting again.

Harry shifted uncomfortably in his chair.

“You did listen to what I said about a load of it beingluck, didn’t you?”

“Yes, Harry,” said Hermione gently, “but all the same,there’s no point pretending that you’re not good at

Page | 423Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Defense Against the Dark Arts, because you are. Youwere the only person last year who could throw off theImperius Curse completely, you can produce aPatronus, you can do all sorts of stuff that full-grownwizards can’t, Viktor always said —”

Ron looked around at her so fast he appeared to crickhis neck; rubbing it, he said, “Yeah? What did Vickysay?”

“Ho ho,” said Hermione in a bored voice. “He saidHarry knew how to do stuff even he didn’t, and hewas in the final year at Durmstrang.”

Ron was looking at Hermione suspiciously.

“You’re not still in contact with him, are you?”

“So what if I am?” said Hermione coolly, though herface was a little pink. “I can have a pen pal if I —”

“He didn’t only want to be your pen pal,” said Ronaccusingly.

Hermione shook her head exasperatedly and, ignoringRon, who was continuing to watch her, said to Harry,“Well, what do you think? Will you teach us?”

“Just you and Ron, yeah?”

“Well,” said Hermione, now looking a mite anxiousagain. “Well ... now, don’t fly off the handle again,Harry, please... But I really think you ought to teachanyone who wants to learn. I mean, we’re talkingabout defending ourselves against V-Voldemort — oh,don’t be pathetic, Ron — it doesn’t seem fair if wedon’t offer the chance to other people.”

Page | 424Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry considered this for a moment, then said, “Yeah,but I doubt anyone except you two would want to betaught by me. I’m a nutter, remember?”

“Well, I think you might be surprised how manypeople would be interested in hearing what you’ve gotto say,” said Hermione seriously. “Look,” she leanedtoward him; Ron, who was still watching her with afrown on his face, leaned forward to listen too, “youknow the first weekend in October’s a Hogsmeadeweekend? How would it be if we tell anyone who’sinterested to meet us in the village and we can talk itover?”

“Why do we have to do it outside school?” said Ron.

“Because,” said Hermione, returning to the diagram ofthe Chinese Chomping Cabbage she was copying, “Idon’t think Umbridge would be very happy if shefound out what we were up to.”

Harry had been looking forward to the weekend tripinto Hogsmeade, but there was one thing worryinghim. Sirius had maintained a stony silence since hehad appeared in the fire at the beginning ofSeptember; Harry knew they had made him angry bysaying that they did not want him to come — but hestill worried from time to time that Sirius might throwcaution to the winds and turn up anyway. What werethey going to do if the great black dog came boundingup the street toward them in Hogsmeade, perhapsunder the nose of Draco Malfoy?

“Well, you can’t blame him for wanting to get out andabout,” said Ron, when Harry discussed his fearswith him and Hermione. “I mean, he’s been on therun for over two years, hasn’t he, and I know thatcan’t have been a laugh, but at least he was free,

Page | 425Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

wasn’t he? And now he’s just shut up all the timewith that lunatic elf.”

Hermione scowled at Ron, but otherwise ignored theslight on Kreacher.

“The trouble is,” she said to Harry, “until V-Voldemort— oh for heaven’s sake, Ron — comes out into theopen, Sirius is going to have to stay hidden, isn’t he? Imean, the stupid Ministry isn’t going to realize Siriusis innocent until they accept that Dumbledore’s beentelling the truth about him all along. And once thefools start catching real Death Eaters again it’ll beobvious Sirius isn’t one ... I mean, he hasn’t got theMark, for one thing.”

“I don’t reckon he’d be stupid enough to turn up,”said Ron bracingly. “Dumbledore’d go mad if he didand Sirius listens to Dumbledore even if he doesn’tlike what he hears.”

When Harry continued to look worried, Hermionesaid, “Listen, Ron and I have been sounding outpeople who we thought might want to learn someproper Defense Against the Dark Arts, and there are acouple who seem interested. We’ve told them to meetus in Hogsmeade.”

“Right,” said Harry vaguely, his mind still on Sirius.

“Don’t worry, Harry,” Hermione said quietly. “You’vegot enough on your plate without Sirius too.”

She was quite right, of course; he was barely keepingup with his homework, though he was doing muchbetter now that he was no longer spending everyevening in detention with Umbridge. Ron was evenfurther behind with his work than Harry, becausewhile they both had Quidditch practices twice a week,Page | 426Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Ron also had prefect duties. However, Hermione, whowas taking more subjects than either of them, hadnot only finished all her homework but was alsofinding time to knit more elf clothes. Harry had toadmit that she was getting better; it was now almostalways possible to distinguish between the hats andthe socks.

The morning of the Hogsmeade visit dawned brightbut windy. After breakfast they queued up in front ofFilch, who matched their names to the long list ofstudents who had permission from their parents orguardian to visit the village. With a slight pang, Harryremembered that if it hadn’t been for Sirius, he wouldnot have been going at all.

When Harry reached Filch, the caretaker gave a greatsniff as though trying to detect a whiff of somethingfrom Harry. Then he gave a curt nod that set his jowlsaquiver again and Harry walked on, out onto thestone steps and the cold, sunlit day.

“Er — why was Filch sniffing you?” asked Ron, as he,Harry, and Hermione set off at a brisk pace down thewide drive to the gates.

“I suppose he was checking for the smell ofDungbombs,” said Harry with a small laugh. “I forgotto tell you ...”

And he recounted the story of sending his letter toSirius and Filch bursting in seconds later, demandingto see the letter. To his slight surprise, Hermionefound this story highly interesting, much more,indeed, than he did himself.

“He said he was tipped off you were orderingDungbombs? But who had tipped him off?”

Page | 427Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I dunno,” said Harry, shrugging. “Maybe Malfoy, he’dthink it was a laugh.”

They walked between the tall stone pillars toppedwith winged boars and turned left onto the road intothe village, the wind whipping their hair into theireyes.

“Malfoy?” said Hermione, very skeptically. “Well ... yes... maybe ...”

And she remained deep in thought all the way intothe outskirts of Hogsmeade.

“Where are we going anyway?” Harry asked. “TheThree Broomsticks?”

“Oh — no,” said Hermione, coming out of her reverie,“no, it’s always packed and really noisy. I’ve told theothers to meet us in the Hog’s Head, that other pub,you know the one, it’s not on the main road. I thinkit’s a bit ... you know ... dodgy ... but students don’tnormally go in there, so I don’t think we’ll beoverheard.”

They walked down the main street past Zonko’s JokeShop, where they were unsurprised to see Fred,George, and Lee Jordan, past the post office, fromwhich owls issued at regular intervals, and turned upa side street at the top of which stood a small inn. Abattered wooden sign hung from a rusty bracket overthe door, with a picture upon it of a wild boar’ssevered head leaking blood onto the white clotharound it. The sign creaked in the wind as theyapproached. All three of them hesitated outside thedoor.

“Well, come on,” said Hermione slightly nervously.Harry led the way inside.

Page | 428Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It was not at all like the Three Broomsticks, whoselarge bar gave an impression of gleaming warmth andcleanliness. The Hog’s Head bar comprised one small,dingy, and very dirty room that smelled strongly ofsomething that might have been goats. The baywindows were so encrusted with grime that very littledaylight could permeate the room, which was litinstead with the stubs of candles sitting on roughwooden tables. The floor seemed at first glance to beearthy, though as Harry stepped onto it he realizedthat there was stone beneath what seemed to be theaccumulated filth of centuries.

Harry remembered Hagrid mentioning this pub in hisfirst year: “Yeh get a lot o’ funny folk in the Hog’sHead,” he had said, explaining how he had won adragons egg from a hooded stranger there. At the timeHarry had wondered why Hagrid had not found it oddthat the stranger kept his face hidden throughouttheir encounter; now he saw that keeping your facehidden was something of a fashion in the Hog’s Head.There was a man at the bar whose whole head waswrapped in dirty gray bandages, though he was stillmanaging to gulp endless glasses of some smoking,fiery substance through a slit over his mouth. Twofigures shrouded in hoods sat at a table in one of thewindows; Harry might have thought them dementorsif they had not been talking in strong Yorkshireaccents; in a shadowy corner beside the fireplace sata witch with a thick, black veil that fell to her toes.They could just see the tip of her nose because itcaused the veil to protrude slightly.

“I don’t know about this, Hermione,” Harry muttered,as they crossed to the bar. He was lookingparticularly at the heavily veiled witch. “Has itoccurred to you Umbridge might be under that?”

Hermione cast an appraising eye at the veiled figure.

Page | 429Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Umbridge is shorter than that woman,” she saidquietly. “And anyway, even if Umbridge does come inhere there’s nothing she can do to stop us, Harry,because I’ve double- and triple-checked the schoolrules. We’re not out-of-bounds; I specifically askedProfessor Flitwick whether students were allowed tocome in the Hog’s Head, and he said yes, but headvised me strongly to bring our own glasses. And I’velooked up everything I can think of about studygroups and homework groups and they’re definitelyallowed. I just don’t think it’s a good idea if we paradewhat we’re doing.”

“No,” said Harry dryly, “especially as it’s not exactly ahomework group you’re planning, is it?”

The barman sidled toward them out of a back room.He was a grumpy-looking old man with a great deal oflong gray hair and beard. He was tall and thin andlooked vaguely familiar to Harry.

“What?” he grunted.

“Three butterbeers, please,” said Hermione.

The man reached beneath the counter and pulled upthree very dusty, very dirty bottles, which heslammed on the bar.

“Six Sickles,” he said.

“I’ll get them,” said Harry quickly, passing over thesilver. The barman’s eyes traveled over Harry, restingfor a fraction of a second on his scar. Then he turnedaway and deposited Harry’s money in an ancientwooden till whose drawer slid open automatically toreceive it. Harry, Ron, and Hermione retreated to thefarthest table from the bar and sat down, lookingaround, while the man in the dirty gray bandagesPage | 430Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

rapped the counter with his knuckles and receivedanother smoking drink from the barman.

“You know what?” Ron murmured, looking over at thebar with enthusiasm. “We could order anything weliked in here, I bet that bloke would sell us anything,he wouldn’t care. I’ve always wanted to try firewhisky

“You — are — a — prefect,” snarled Hermione.

“Oh,” said Ron, the smile fading from his face. “Yeah

“So who did you say is supposed to be meeting us?”Harry asked, wrenching open the rusty top of hisbutterbeer and taking a swig.

“Just a couple of people,” Hermione repeated,checking her watch and then looking anxiouslytoward the door. “I told them to be here about nowand I’m sure they all know where it is — oh look, thismight be them now —”

The door of the pub had opened. A thick band ofdusty sunlight split the room in two for a momentand then vanished, blocked by the incoming rush of acrowd of people.

First came Neville with Dean and Lavender, who wereclosely followed by Parvati and Padma Patil with(Harry’s stomach did a back flip) Cho and one of herusually giggling girlfriends, then (on her own andlooking so dreamy that she might have walked in byaccident) Luna Lovegood; then Katie Bell, AliciaSpinnet, and Angelina Johnson, Colin and DennisCreevey, Ernie Macmillan, Justin Finch-Fletchley,Hannah Abbott, and a Hufflepuff girl with a long plaitdown her back whose name Harry did not know;

Page | 431Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

three Ravenclaw boys he was pretty sure were calledAnthony Goldstein, Michael Corner, and Terry Boot;Ginny, followed by a tall skinny blond boy with anupturned nose whom Harry recognized vaguely asbeing a member of the Hufflepuff Quidditch team, andbringing up the rear, Fred and George Weasley withtheir friend Lee Jordan, all three of whom werecarrying large paper bags crammed with Zonko’smerchandise.

“A couple of people?” said Harry hoarsely toHermione. “A couple of people?”

“Yes, well, the idea seemed quite popular,” saidHermione happily. “Ron, do you want to pull up somemore chairs?”

The barman had frozen in the act of wiping out aglass with a rag so filthy it looked as though it hadnever been washed. Possibly he had never seen hispub so full.

“Hi,” said Fred, reaching the bar first and countinghis companions quickly. “Could we have ... twenty-five butterbeers, please?”

The barman glared at him for a moment, then,throwing down his rag irritably as though he hadbeen interrupted in something very important, hestarted passing up dusty butterbeers from under thebar.

“Cheers,” said Fred, handing them out. “Cough up,everyone, I haven’t got enough gold for all of these...”

Harry watched numbly as the large chattering grouptook their beers from Fred and rummaged in theirrobes to find coins. He could not imagine what allthese people had turned up for until the horrible

Page | 432Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

thought occurred to him that they might be expectingsome kind of speech, at which he rounded onHermione.

“What have you been telling people?” he said in a lowvoice. “What are they expecting?”

“I’ve told you, they just want to hear what you’ve gotto say,” said Hermione soothingly; but Harrycontinued to look at her so furiously that she addedquickly, “You don’t have to do anything yet, I’ll speakto them first.”

“Hi, Harry,” said Neville, beaming and taking a seatopposite Harry.

Harry tried to smile back, but did not speak; hismouth was exceptionally dry. Cho had just smiled athim and sat down on Ron’s right. Her friend, who hadcurly reddish-blonde hair, did not smile, but gaveHarry a thoroughly mistrustful look that told Harryplainly that, given her way, she would not be here atall.

In twos and threes the new arrivals settled aroundHarry, Ron, and Hermione, some looking ratherexcited, others curious, Luna Lovegood gazingdreamily into space. When everybody had pulled up achair, the chatter died out. Every eye was uponHarry.

“Er,” said Hermione, her voice slightly higher thanusual out of nerves. “Well — er — hi.”

The group focused its attention on her instead,though eyes continued to dart back regularly toHarry.

Page | 433Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well ... erm ... well, you know why you’re here. Erm... well, Harry here had the idea — I mean” — Harryhad thrown her a sharp look — “I had the idea — thatit might be good if people who wanted to studyDefense Against the Dark Arts — and I mean, reallystudy it, you know, not the rubbish that Umbridge isdoing with us” — (Hermione’s voice became suddenlymuch stronger and more confident) — “becausenobody could call that Defense Against the Dark Arts”— “Hear, hear,” said Anthony Goldstein, andHermione looked heartened — “well, I thought itwould be good if we, well, took matters into our ownhands.”

She paused, looked sideways at Harry, and went on,“And by that I mean learning how to defend ourselvesproperly, not just theory but the real spells —”

“You want to pass your Defense Against the Dark ArtsO.W.L. too though, I bet?” said Michael Corner.

“Of course I do,” said Hermione at once. “But I wantmore than that, I want to be properly trained inDefense because ... because ...” She took a greatbreath and finished, “Because Lord Voldemort’sback.”

The reaction was immediate and predictable. Cho’sfriend shrieked and slopped butterbeer down herself,Terry Boot gave a kind of involuntary twitch, PadmaPatil shuddered, and Neville gave an odd yelp that hemanaged to turn into a cough. All of them, however,looked fixedly, even eagerly, at Harry.

“Well ... that’s the plan anyway,” said Hermione. “Ifyou want to join us, we need to decide how we’regoing to —”

Page | 434Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Where’s the proof You-Know-Who’s back?” said theblond Hufflepuff player in a rather aggressive voice.

“Well, Dumbledore believes it —” Hermione began.

“You mean, Dumbledore believes him,” said the blondboy, nodding at Harry.

“Who are you?” said Ron rather rudely.

“Zacharias Smith,” said the boy, “and I think we’vegot the right to know exactly what makes him sayYou-Know-Who’s back.”

“Look,” said Hermione, intervening swiftly, “that’sreally not what this meeting was supposed to beabout —”

“It’s okay, Hermione,” said Harry.

It had just dawned upon him why there were so manypeople there. He felt that Hermione should have seenthis coming. Some of these people — maybe evenmost of them — had turned up in the hope of hearingHarry’s story firsthand.

“What makes me say You-Know-Who’s back?” heasked, looking Zacharias straight in the face. “I sawhim. But Dumbledore told the whole school whathappened last year, and if you didn’t believe him, youdon’t believe me, and I’m not wasting an afternoontrying to convince anyone.”

The whole group seemed to have held its breath whileHarry spoke. Harry had the impression that even thebarman was listening in. He was wiping the sameglass with the filthy rag; it was becoming steadilydirtier.

Page | 435Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Zacharias said dismissively, “All Dumbledore told uslast year was that Cedric Diggory got killed by You-Know-Who and that you brought Diggory’s body backto Hogwarts. He didn’t give us details, he didn’t tell usexactly how Diggory got murdered, I think we’d alllike to know —”

“If you’ve come to hear exactly what it looks like whenVoldemort murders someone I can’t help you,” Harrysaid. His temper, always so close to the surface thesedays, was rising again. He did not take his eyes fromZacharias Smith’s aggressive face, determined not tolook at Cho. “I don’t want to talk about CedricDiggory, all right? So if that’s what you’re here for,you might as well clear out.”

He cast an angry look in Hermione’s direction. Thiswas, he felt, all her fault; she had decided to displayhim like some sort of freak and of course they had allturned up to see just how wild his story was... Butnone of them left their seats, not even ZachariasSmith, though he continued to gaze intently at Harry.

“So,” said Hermione, her voice very high-pitchedagain. “So ... like I was saying ... if you want to learnsome defense, then we need to work out how we’regoing to do it, how often we’re going to meet, andwhere we’re going to —”

“Is it true,” interrupted the girl with the long plaitdown her back, looking at Harry, “that you canproduce a Patronus?”

There was a murmur of interest around the group atthis.

“Yeah,” said Harry slightly defensively.

“A corporeal Patronus?”

Page | 436Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The phrase stirred something in Harry’s memory.

“Er — you don’t know Madam Bones, do you?” heasked.

The girl smiled.

“She’s my auntie,” she said. “I’m Susan Bones. Shetold me about your hearing. So — is it really true?

You make a stag Patronus?”

“Yes,” said Harry.

“Blimey, Harry!” said Lee, looking deeply impressed. “Inever knew that!”

“Mum told Ron not to spread it around,” said Fred,grinning at Harry. “She said you got enough attentionas it was.”

“She’s not wrong,” mumbled Harry and a couple ofpeople laughed. The veiled witch sitting alone shiftedvery slightly in her seat.

“And did you kill a basilisk with that sword inDumbledore’s office?” demanded Terry Boot. “That’swhat one of the portraits on the wall told me when Iwas in there last year...”

“Er — yeah, I did, yeah,” said Harry.

Justin Finch-Fletchley whistled, the Creevey brothersexchanged awestruck looks, and Lavender Brown said“wow” softly. Harry was feeling slightly hot around thecollar now; he was determinedly looking anywherebut at Cho.

“And in our first year,” said Neville to the group atlarge, “he saved that Sorcerous Stone —”

Page | 437Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Sorcerer’s,” hissed Hermione.

“Yes, that, from You-Know-Who,” finished Neville.

Hannah Abbott’s eyes were as round as Galleons.

“And that’s not to mention,” said Cho (Harry’s eyessnapped onto her, she was looking at him, smiling;his stomach did another somersault), “all the tasks hehad to get through in the Triwizard Tournament lastyear — getting past dragons and merpeople andacromantulas and things...”

There was a murmur of impressed agreement aroundthe table.

Harry’s insides were squirming. He was trying toarrange his face so that he did not look too pleasedwith himself. The fact that Cho had just praised himmade it much, much harder for him to say the thinghe had sworn to himself he would tell them.

“Look,” he said and everyone fell silent at once, “I ... Idon’t want to sound like I’m trying to be modest oranything, but ... I had a lot of help with all thatstuff...”

“Not with the dragon, you didn’t,” said Michael Cornerat once. “That was a seriously cool bit of flying...”

“Yeah, well —” said Harry, feeling it would be churlishto disagree.

“And nobody helped you get rid of those dementorsthis summer,” said Susan Bones.

“No,” said Harry, “no, okay, I know I did bits of itwithout help, but the point I’m trying to make is —”

Page | 438Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Are you trying to weasel out of showing us any ofthis stuff?” said Zacharias Smith.

“Here’s an idea,” said Ron loudly, before Harry couldspeak, “why don’t you shut your mouth?”

Perhaps the word “weasel” had affected Ronparticularly strongly; in any case, he was now lookingat Zacharias as though he would like nothing betterthan to thump him. Zacharias flushed.

“Well, we’ve all turned up to learn from him, and nowhe’s telling us he can’t really do any of it,” he said.

“That’s not what he said,” snarled Fred Weasley.

“Would you like us to clean out your ears for you?”inquired George, pulling a long and lethal-lookingmetal instrument from inside one of the Zonko’s bags.

“Or any part of your body, really, we’re not fussywhere we stick this,” said Fred.

“Yes, well,” said Hermione hastily, “moving on ... thepoint is, are we agreed we want to take lessons fromHarry?”

There was a murmur of general agreement. Zachariasfolded his arms and said nothing, though perhapsthis was because he was too busy keeping an eye onthe instrument in George’s hand.

“Right,” said Hermione, looking relieved thatsomething had at last been settled. “Well, then, thenext question is how often we do it. I really don’tthink there’s any point in meeting less than once aweek —”

Page | 439Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Hang on,” said Angelina, “we need to make sure thisdoesn’t clash with our Quidditch practice.”

“No,” said Cho, “nor with ours.”

“Nor ours,” added Zacharias Smith.

“I’m sure we can find a night that suits everyone,”said Hermione, slightly impatiently, “but you know,this is rather important, we’re talking about learningto defend ourselves against V-Voldemort’s DeathEaters —”

“Well said!” barked Ernie Macmillan, whom Harry hadbeen expecting to speak long before this. “Personally Ithink this is really important, possibly moreimportant than anything else we’ll do this year, evenwith our O.W.L.s coming up!”

He looked around impressively, as though waiting forpeople to cry, “Surely not!” When nobody spoke, hewent on, “I, personally, am at a loss to see why theMinistry has foisted such a useless teacher upon usat this critical period. Obviously they are in denialabout the return of You-Know-Who, but to give us ateacher who is trying to actively prevent us fromusing defensive spells —”

“We think the reason Umbridge doesn’t want ustrained in Defense Against the Dark Arts,” saidHermione, “is that she’s got some ... some mad ideathat Dumbledore could use the students in the schoolas a kind of private army. She thinks he’d mobilize usagainst the Ministry.”

Nearly everybody looked stunned at this news;everybody except Luna Lovegood, who piped up,

“Well, that makes sense. After all, Cornelius Fudgehas got his own private army.”

Page | 440Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What?” said Harry, completely thrown by thisunexpected piece of information.

“Yes, he’s got an army of heliopaths,” said Lunasolemnly.

“No, he hasn’t,” snapped Hermione.

“Yes, he has,” said Luna.

“What are heliopaths?” asked Neville, looking blank.

“They’re spirits of fire,” said Luna, her protuberanteyes widening so that she looked madder than ever.“Great tall flaming creatures that gallop across theground burning everything in front of —”

“They don’t exist, Neville,” said Hermione tartly.

“Oh yes they do!” said Luna angrily.

“I’m sorry, but where’s the proof of that?” snappedHermione.

“There are plenty of eyewitness accounts, justbecause you’re so narrow-minded you need to haveeverything shoved under your nose before you —”

“Hem, hem,” said Ginny in such a good imitation ofProfessor Umbridge that several people looked aroundin alarm and then laughed. “Weren’t we trying todecide how often we’re going to meet and get Defenselessons?”

“Yes,” said Hermione at once, “yes, we were, you’reright...”

“Well, once a week sounds cool,” said Lee Jordan.

Page | 441Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“As long as —” began Angelina.

“Yes, yes, we know about the Quidditch,” saidHermione in a tense voice. “Well, the other thing todecide is where we’re going to meet...”

This was rather more difficult; the whole group fellsilent.

“Library?” suggested Katie Bell after a few moments.

“I can’t see Madam Pince being too chuffed with usdoing jinxes in the library,” said Harry.

“Maybe an unused classroom?” said Dean.

“Yeah,” said Ron, “McGonagall might let us have hers,she did when Harry was practicing for theTri wizard...”

But Harry was pretty certain that McGonagall wouldnot be so accommodating this time. For all thatHermione had said about study and homeworkgroups being allowed, he had the distinct feeling thisone might be considered a lot more rebellious.

“Right, well, we’ll try to find somewhere,” saidHermione. “We’ll send a message round to everybodywhen we’ve got a time and a place for the firstmeeting.”

She rummaged in her bag and produced parchmentand a quill, then hesitated, rather as though she wassteeling herself to say something.

“I-I think everybody should write their name down,just so we know who was here. But I also think,” shetook a deep breath, “that we all ought to agree not toshout about what we’re doing. So if you sign, you’re

Page | 442Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

agreeing not to tell Umbridge — or anybody elsewhat we’re up to.”

Fred reached out for the parchment and cheerfullyput down his signature, but Harry noticed at oncethat several people looked less than happy at theprospect of putting their names on the list.

“Er ...” said Zacharias slowly, not taking theparchment that George was trying to pass him. “Well... I’m sure Ernie will tell me when the meeting is.”

But Ernie was looking rather hesitant about signingtoo. Hermione raised her eyebrows at him.

“I — well, we are prefects,” Ernie burst out. “And ifthis list was found ... well, I mean to say ... you saidyourself, if Umbridge finds out ...”

“You just said this group was the most importantthing you’d do this year,” Harry reminded him.

“I — yes,” said Ernie, “yes, I do believe that, it’s just

“Ernie, do you really think I’d leave that list lyingaround?” said Hermione testily.

“No. No, of course not,” said Ernie, looking slightlyless anxious. “I — yes, of course I’ll sign.”

Nobody raised objections after Ernie, though Harrysaw Cho’s friend give her a rather reproachful lookbefore adding her name. When the last person —Zacharias — had signed, Hermione took theparchment back and slipped it carefully into her bag.There was an odd feeling in the group now. It was asthough they had just signed some kind of contract.

Page | 443Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, time’s ticking on,” said Fred briskly, getting tohis feet. “George, Lee, and I have got items of asensitive nature to purchase, we’ll be seeing you alllater.”

In twos and threes the rest of the group took theirleave too. Cho made rather a business of fasteningthe catch on her bag before leaving, her long darkcurtain of hair swinging forward to hide her face, buther friend stood beside her, arms folded, clicking hertongue, so that Cho had little choice but to leave withher. As her friend ushered her through the door, Cholooked back and waved at Harry.

“Well, I think that went quite well,” said Hermionehappily, as she, Harry, and Ron walked out of theHog’s Head into the bright sunlight a few momentslater, Harry and Ron still clutching their bottles ofbutterbeer.

“That Zacharias bloke’s a wart,” said Ron, who wasglowering after the figure of Smith just discernible inthe distance.

“I don’t like him much either,” admitted Hermione,“but he overheard me talking to Ernie and Hannah atthe Hufflepuff table and he seemed really interestedin coming, so what could I say? But the more peoplethe better really — I mean, Michael Corner and hisfriends wouldn’t have come if he hadn’t been goingout with Ginny —”

Ron, who had been draining the last few drops fromhis butterbeer bottle, gagged and sprayed butterbeerdown his front.

“He’s WHAT?” said Ron, outraged, his ears nowresembling curls of raw beef. “She’s going out with —

Page | 444Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

my sister’s going — what d’you mean, MichaelCorner?”

“Well, that’s why he and his friends came, I think —well, they’re obviously interested in learning defense,but if Ginny hadn’t told Michael what was going on —

“When did this — when did she — ?”

“They met at the Yule Ball and they got together atthe end of last year,” said Hermione composedly. Theyhad turned into the High Street and she pausedoutside Scrivenshaft’s Quill Shop, where there was ahandsome display of pheasant-feather quills in thewindow. “Hmm ... I could do with a new quill.”

She turned into the shop. Harry and Ron followedher.

“Which one was Michael Corner?” Ron demandedfuriously.

“The dark one,” said Hermione.

“I didn’t like him,” said Ron at once.

“Big surprise,” said Hermione under her breath.

“But,” said Ron, following Hermione along a row ofquills in copper pots, “I thought Ginny fancied Harry!”

Hermione looked at him rather pityingly and shookher head.

“Ginny used to fancy Harry, but she gave up on himmonths ago. Not that she doesn’t like you, of course,”she added kindly to Harry while she examined a longblack-and-gold quill.

Page | 445Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry, whose head was still full of Cho’s parting wave,did not find this subject quite as interesting as Ron,who was positively quivering with indignation, but itdid bring something home to him that until now hehad not really registered.

“So that’s why she talks now?” he asked Hermione.“She never used to talk in front of me.”

“Exactly,” said Hermione. “Yes, I think I’ll have thisone...”

She went up to the counter and handed over fifteenSickles and two Knuts, Ron still breathing down herneck.

“Ron,” she said severely as she turned and trod on hisfeet, “this is exactly why Ginny hasn’t told you she’sseeing Michael, she knew you’d take it badly. So don’tharp on about it, for heaven’s sake.”

“What d’you mean, who’s taking anything badly? I’mnot going to harp on about anything ...”

Ron continued to chunter under his breath all theway down the street. Hermione rolled her eyes atHarry and then said in an undertone, while Ron wasmuttering imprecations about Michael Corner, “Andtalking about Michael and Ginny ... what about Choand you?”

“What d’you mean?” said Harry quickly.

It was as though boiling water was rising rapidlyinside him; a burning sensation that was causing hisface to smart in the cold — had he been that obvious?

“Well,” said Hermione, smiling slightly, “she justcouldn’t keep her eyes off you, could she?”

Page | 446Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry had never before appreciated just how beautifulthe village of Hogsmeade was.

Page | 447Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



EDUCATIONAL DECREE NUMBERTWENTY-FOUR

Harry felt happier for the rest of the weekend than hehad done all term. He and Ron spent much of Sundaycatching up with all their homework again, andalthough this could hardly be called fun, the lastburst of autumn sunshine persisted, so rather thansitting hunched over tables in the common room, theytook their work outside and lounged in the shade of alarge beech tree on the edge of the lake. Hermione,who of course was up to date with all her work,brought more wool outside with her and bewitchedher knitting needles so that they flashed and clickedin midair beside her, producing more hats andscarves.

The knowledge that they were doing something toresist Umbridge and the Ministry, and that he was akey part of the rebellion, gave Harry a feeling ofimmense satisfaction. He kept reliving Saturday’smeeting in his mind: all those people, coming to himto learn Defense Against the Dark Arts ... and thelooks on their faces as they had heard some of the

Page | 448Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

things he had done ... and Cho praising hisperformance in the Triwizard Tournament... Theknowledge that all those people did not think him alying weirdo, but someone to be admired, buoyed himup so much that he was still cheerful on Mondaymorning, despite the imminent prospect of all hisleast favorite classes.

He and Ron headed downstairs from their dormitorytogether, discussing Angelina’s idea that they were towork on a new move called the Sloth Grip Roll duringthat night’s Quidditch practice, and not until theywere halfway across the sunlit common room did theynotice the addition to the room that had alreadyattracted the attention of a small group of people.

A large sign had been affixed to the Gryffindor noticeboard, so large that it covered everything else on there— the lists of secondhand spellbooks for sale, theregular reminders of school rules from Argus Filch,the Quidditch team training schedule, the offers tobarter certain Chocolate Frog cards for others, theWeasleys’ new advertisement for testers, the dates ofthe Hogsmeade weekends, and the lost-and-foundnotices. The new sign was printed in large blackletters and there was a highly official-looking seal atthe bottom beside a neat and curly signature.

— BY ORDER OF —

THE HIGH INQUISITOR OF HOGWARTS

All Student Organizations, Societies, Teams, Groups,and Clubs are henceforth disbanded.

Page | 449Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

An Organization, Society, Team, Group, or Club ishereby defined as a regular meeting of three or morestudents.

Permission to re-form may be sought from the HighInquisitor (Professor Umbridge).

No Student Organization, Society, Team, Group, orClub may exist without the knowledge and approvalof the High Inquisitor.

Any student found to have formed, or to belong to, anOrganization, Society, Team, Group, or Club that hasnot been approved by the High Inquisitor will beexpelled.

The above is in accordance withEducational Decree Number Twenty-four.

Signed:

Dolores Jane UmbridgeHIGH INQUISITOR

Harry and Ron read the notice over the heads of someanxious-looking second years.

“Does this mean they’re going to shut down theGobstones Club?” one of them asked his friend.

“I reckon you’ll be okay with Gobstones,” Ron saiddarkly, making the second year jump. “I don’t thinkwe’re going to be as lucky, though, do you?” he askedHarry as the second years hurried away.

Page | 450Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry was reading the notice through again. Thehappiness that had filled him since Saturday wasgone. His insides were pulsing with rage.

“This isn’t a coincidence,” he said, his hands formingfists. “She knows.”

“She can’t,” said Ron at once.

“There were people listening in that pub. And let’sface it, we don’t know how many of the people whoturned up we can trust... Any of them could have runoff and told Umbridge...”

And he had thought they believed him, thought theyeven admired him ...

“Zacharias Smith!” said Ron at once, punching a fistinto his hand. “Or — I thought that Michael Cornerhad a really shifty look too —”

“I wonder if Hermione’s seen this yet?” Harry said,looking around at the door to the girls’ dormitories.

“Let’s go and tell her,” said Ron. He bounded forward,pulled open the door, and set off up the spiralstaircase.

He was on the sixth stair when it happened. Therewas a loud, wailing, klaxonlike sound and the stepsmelted together to make a long, smooth stone slide.There was a brief moment when Ron tried to keeprunning, arms working madly like windmills, then hetoppled over backward and shot down the newlycreated slide, coming to rest on his back at Harry’sfeet.

Page | 451Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Er — I don’t think we’re allowed in the girls’dormitories,” said Harry, pulling Ron to his feet andtrying not to laugh.

Two fourth-year girls came zooming gleefully downthe stone slide.

“Oooh, who tried to get upstairs?” they giggledhappily, leaping to their feet and ogling Harry andRon.

“Me,” said Ron, who was still rather disheveled. “Ididn’t realize that would happen. It’s not fair!” headded to Harry, as the girls headed off for the portraithole, still giggling madly. “Hermione’s allowed in ourdormitory, how come we’re not allowed — ?”

“Well, it’s an old-fashioned rule,” said Hermione, whohad just slid neatly onto a rug in front of them andwas now getting to her feet, “but it says in Hogwarts,A History that the founders thought boys were lesstrustworthy than girls. Anyway, why were you tryingto get in there?”

“To see you — look at this!” said Ron, dragging herover to the notice board.

Hermione’s eyes slid rapidly down the notice. Herexpression became stony.

“Someone must have blabbed to her!” Ron saidangrily.

“They can’t have done,” said Hermione in a low voice.

“You’re so naive,” said Ron, “you think just becauseyou’re all honorable and trustworthy —”

Page | 452Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No, they can’t have done because I put a jinx on thatpiece of parchment we all signed,” said Hermionegrimly. “Believe me, if anyone’s run off and toldUmbridge, well know exactly who they are and theywill really regret it.”

“What’ll happen to them?” said Ron eagerly.

“Well, put it this way,” said Hermione, “it’ll makeEloise Midgen’s acne look like a couple of cutefreckles. Come on, let’s get down to breakfast and seewhat the others think... I wonder whether this hasbeen put up in all the Houses?”

It was immediately apparent on entering the GreatHall that Umbridge’s sign had not only appeared inGryffindor Tower. There was a peculiar intensityabout the chatter and an extra measure of movementin the Hall as people scurried up and down theirtables conferring on what they had read. Harry, Ron,and Hermione had barely taken their seats whenNeville, Dean, Fred, George, and Ginny descendedupon them.

“Did you see it?”

“D’you reckon she knows?”

“What are we going to do?”

They were all looking at Harry. He glanced around tomake sure there were no teachers near them.

“We’re going to do it anyway, of course,” he saidquietly.

“Knew you’d say that,” said George, beaming andthumping Harry on the arm.

Page | 453Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“The prefects as well?” said Fred, looking quizzicallyat Ron and Hermione.

“Of course,” said Hermione coolly.

“Here comes Ernie and Hannah Abbott,” said Ron,looking over his shoulder. “And those Ravenclawblokes and Smith ... and no one looks very spotty.”

Hermione looked alarmed.

“Never mind spots, the idiots can’t come over herenow, it’ll look really suspicious — sit down!” shemouthed to Ernie and Hannah, gesturing franticallyto them to rejoin the Hufflepuff table. “Later! We’ll —talk — to — you — lateri”

“I’ll tell Michael,” said Ginny impatiently, swingingherself off her bench. “The fool, honestly ...”

She hurried off toward the Ravenclaw table; Harrywatched her go. Cho was sitting not far away, talkingto the curly-haired friend she had brought along tothe Hog’s Head. Would Umbridge’s notice scare her offmeeting them again?

But the full repercussions of the sign were not feltuntil they were leaving the Great Hall for History ofMagic.

“Harry! Ron\”

It was Angelina and she was hurrying toward themlooking perfectly desperate.

“It’s okay,” said Harry quietly, when she was nearenough to hear him. “We’re still going to —”

Page | 454Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You realize she’s including Quidditch in this?”Angelina said over him. “We have to go and askpermission to re-form the Gryffindor team!”

“What?” said Harry.

“No way,” said Ron, appalled.

“You read the sign, it mentions teams too! So listen,Harry ... I am saying this for the last time... Please,please don’t lose your temper with Umbridge again orshe might not let us play anymore!”

“Okay, okay,” said Harry, for Angelina looked asthough she was on the verge of tears. “Don’t worry, I’llbehave myself...”

“Bet Umbridge is in History of Magic,” said Rongrimly, as they set off for Binns’s lesson. “She hasn’tinspected Binns yet... Bet you anything she’s there...”

But he was wrong; the only teacher present whenthey entered was Professor Binns, floating an inch orso above his chair as usual and preparing to continuehis monotonous drone on giant wars. Harry did noteven attempt to follow what he was saying today; hedoodled idly on his parchment ignoring Hermione’sfrequent glares and nudges, until a particularlypainful poke in the ribs made him look up angrily.

“What?”

She pointed at the window. Harry looked around.Hedwig was perched on the narrow window ledge,gazing through the thick glass at him, a letter tied toher leg. Harry could not understand it; they had justhad breakfast, why on earth hadn’t she delivered theletter then, as usual? Many of his classmates werepointing out Hedwig to each other too.

Page | 455Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, I’ve always loved that owl, she’s so beautiful,”Harry heard Lavender sigh to Parvati.

He glanced around at Professor Binns who continuedto read his notes, serenely unaware that the class’sattention was even less focused upon him than usual.Harry slipped quietly off his chair, crouched down,and hurried along the row to the window, where heslid the catch and opened it very slowly.

He had expected Hedwig to hold out her leg so that hecould remove the letter and then fly off to the Owlery,but the moment the window was open wide enoughshe hopped inside, hooting dolefully. He closed thewindow with an anxious glance at Professor Binns,crouched low again, and sped back to his seat withHedwig on his shoulder. He regained his seat,transferred Hedwig to his lap, and made to removethe letter tied to her leg.

It was only then that he realized that Hedwig’sfeathers were oddly ruffled; some were bent the wrongway, and she was holding one of her wings at an oddangle.

“She’s hurt!” Harry whispered, bending his head lowover her. Hermione and Ron leaned in closer;Hermione even put down her quill. “Look — there’ssomething wrong with her wing —”

Hedwig was quivering; when Harry made to touch thewing she gave a little jump, all her feathers on end asthough she was inflating herself, and gazed at himreproachfully.

“Professor Binns,” said Harry loudly, and everyone inthe class turned to look at him. “I’m not feeling well.”

Page | 456Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Professor Binns raised his eyes from his notes,looking amazed, as always, to find the room in frontof him full of people.

“Not feeling well?” he repeated hazily.

“Not at all well,” said Harry firmly, getting to his feetwhile concealing Hedwig behind his back. “So I thinkI’ll need to go to the hospital wing.”

“Yes,” said Professor Binns, clearly very much wrong-footed. “Yes ... yes, hospital wing ... well, off you go,then, Perkins ...”

Once outside the room Harry returned Hedwig to hisshoulder and hurried off up the corridor, pausing tothink only when he was out of sight of Binns’s door.His first choice of somebody to cure Hedwig wouldhave been Hagrid, of course, but as he had no ideawhere Hagrid was, his only remaining option was tofind Professor Grubbly-Plank and hope she wouldhelp.

He peered out of a window at the blustery, overcastgrounds. There was no sign of her anywhere nearHagrid’s cabin; if she was not teaching, she wasprobably in the staffroom. He set off downstairs,Hedwig hooting feebly as she swayed on his shoulder.

Two stone gargoyles flanked the staffroom door. AsHarry approached, one of them croaked, “You shouldbe in class, sunny Jim.”

“This is urgent,” said Harry curtly.

“Ooooh, urgent, is it?” said the other gargoyle in ahigh-pitched voice. “Well, that’s put us in our place,hasn’t it?”

Page | 457Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry knocked; he heard footsteps and then the dooropened and he found himself face-to-face withProfessor McGonagall.

“You haven’t been given another detention!” she saidat once, her square spectacles flashing alarmingly.

“No, Professor!” said Harry hastily.

“Well then, why are you out of class?”

“It’s urgent, apparently,” said the second gargoylesnidely.

“I’m looking for Professor Grubbly-Plank,” Harryexplained. “It’s my owl, she’s injured.”

“Injured owl, did you say?”

Professor Grubbly-Plank appeared at ProfessorMcGonagall’s shoulder, smoking a pipe and holding acopy of the Daily Prophet

“Yes,” said Harry, lifting Hedwig carefully off hisshoulder, “she turned up after the other post owlsand her wing’s all funny, look —”

Professor Grubbly-Plank stuck her pipe firmlybetween her teeth and took Hedwig from Harry whileProfessor McGonagall watched.

“Hmm,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank, her pipewaggling slightly as she talked. “Looks likesomething’s attacked her. Can’t think what wouldhave done it, though... Thestrals will sometimes go forbirds, of course, but Hagrid’s got the Hogwartsthestrals well trained not to touch owls ...”

Page | 458Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry neither knew nor cared what thestrals were, hejust wanted to know that Hedwig was going to be allright. Professor McGonagall, however, looked sharplyat Harry and said, “Do you know how far this owl’straveled, Potter?”

“Er,” said Harry. “From London, I think.”

He met her eyes briefly and knew that she understood“London” to mean “number twelve, Grimmauld Place”by the way her eyebrows had joined in the middle.

Professor Grubbly-Plank pulled a monocle out of theinside of her robes and screwed it into her eye toexamine Hedwig’s wing closely. “I should be able tosort this out if you leave her with me, Potter,” shesaid. “She shouldn’t be flying long distances for a fewdays, in any case.”

“Er — right — thanks,” said Harry, just as the bellrang for break.

“No problem,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank gruffly,turning back into the staffroom.

“Just a moment, Wilhelmina!” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “Potter’s letter!”

“Oh yeah!” said Harry, who had momentarilyforgotten the scroll tied to Hedwig’s leg. ProfessorGrubbly-Plank handed it over and then disappearedinto the staffroom carrying Hedwig, who was staringat Harry as though unable to believe he would giveher away like this. Feeling slightly guilty, he turned togo, but Professor McGonagall called him back.

“Potter!”

“Yes, Professor?”

Page | 459Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She glanced up and down the corridor; there werestudents coming from both directions.

“Bear in mind,” she said quickly and quietly, her eyeson the scroll in his hand, “that channels ofcommunication in and out of Hogwarts may be beingwatched, won’t you?”

“I —” said Harry, but the flood of students rollingalong the corridor was almost upon him. ProfessorMcGonagall gave him a curt nod and retreated intothe staffroom, leaving Harry to be swept out into thecourtyard with the crowd. Here he spotted Ron andHermione already standing in a sheltered corner,their cloak collars turned up against the wind. Harryslit open the scroll as he hurried toward them andfound five words in Sirius’s handwriting:

Today, same time, same place.

“Is Hedwig okay?” asked Hermione anxiously, themoment he was within earshot.

“Where did you take her?” asked Ron.

“To Grubbly-Plank,” said Harry. “And I metMcGonagall... Listen...”

And he told them what Professor McGonagall hadsaid. To his surprise, neither of the others lookedshocked; on the contrary, they exchanged significantlooks.

“What?” said Harry, looking from Ron to Hermioneand back again.

“Well, I was just saying to Ron ... what if someonehad tried to intercept Hedwig? I mean, she’s neverbeen hurt on a flight before, has she?”

Page | 460Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Who’s the letter from anyway?” asked Ron, takingthe note from Harry.

“Snuffles,” said Harry quietly.

“ ‘Same time, same place’? Does he mean the fire inthe common room?”

“Obviously,” said Hermione, also reading the note.

She looked uneasy. “I just hope nobody else has readthis...”

“But it was still sealed and everything,” said Harry,trying to convince himself as much as her. “Andnobody would understand what it meant if they didn’tknow where we’d spoken to him before, would they?”

“I don’t know,” said Hermione anxiously, hitching herbag back over her shoulder as the bell rang again. “Itwouldn’t be exactly difficult to reseal the scroll bymagic... And if anyone’s watching the Floo Network ...but I don’t really see how we can warn him not tocome without that being intercepted too!”

They trudged down the stone steps to the dungeonsfor Potions, all three of them lost in thought, but asthey reached the bottom of the stairs they wererecalled to themselves by the voice of Draco Malfoy,who was standing just outside Snape’s classroomdoor, waving around an official-looking piece ofparchment and talking much louder than wasnecessary so that they could hear every word.

“Yeah, Umbridge gave the Slytherin Quidditch teampermission to continue playing straightaway, I wentto ask her first thing this morning. Well, it was prettymuch automatic, I mean, she knows my father reallywell, he’s always popping in and out of the Ministry...

Page | 461Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It’ll be interesting to see whether Gryffindor areallowed to keep playing, wont it?”

“Don’t rise,” Hermione whispered imploringly to Harryand Ron, who were both watching Malfoy, faces setand fists clenched. “It’s what he wants...”

“I mean,” said Malfoy, raising his voice a little more,his gray eyes glittering malevolently in Harry andRon’s direction, “if it’s a question of influence with theMinistry, I don’t think they’ve got much chance...

From what my father says, they’ve been looking for anexcuse to sack Arthur Weasley for years... And as forPotter ... My father says it’s a matter of time beforethe Ministry has him carted off to St. Mungo’s...apparently they’ve got a special ward for people whosebrains have been addled by magic...”

Malfoy made a grotesque face, his mouth saggingopen and his eyes rolling. Crabbe and Goyle gavetheir usual grunts of laughter, Pansy Parkinsonshrieked with glee.

Something collided hard with Harry’s shoulder,knocking him sideways. A split second later herealized that Neville had just charged past him,heading straight for Malfoy.

“Neville, no!”

Harry leapt forward and seized the back of Neville’srobes; Neville struggled frantically, his fists flailing,trying desperately to get at Malfoy who looked, for amoment, extremely shocked.

“Help me!” Harry flung at Ron, managing to get anarm around Neville’s neck and dragging himbackward, away from the Slytherins. Crabbe andGoyle were now flexing their arms, closing in front of

Page | 462Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy, ready for the fight. Ron hurried forward andseized Neville’s arms; together, he and Harrysucceeded in dragging Neville back into the Gryffindorline. Neville’s face was scarlet; the pressure Harry wasexerting on his throat rendered him quiteincomprehensible, but odd words spluttered from hismouth.

“Not... funny ... don’t ... Mungo’s ... show ... him ...”

The dungeon door opened. Snape appeared there. Hisblack eyes swept up the Gryffindor line to the pointwhere Harry and Ron were wrestling with Neville.

“Fighting, Potter, Weasley, Longbottom?” Snape saidin his cold, sneering voice. “Ten points fromGryffindor. Release Longbottom, Potter, or it will bedetention. Inside, all of you.”

Harry let go of Neville, who stood panting and glaringat him.

“I had to stop you,” Harry gasped, picking up his bag.“Crabbe and Goyle would’ve torn you apart.”

Neville said nothing, he merely snatched up his ownbag and stalked off into the dungeon.

“What in the name of Merlin,” said Ron slowly, asthey followed Neville, “was that about?”

Harry did not answer. He knew exactly why thesubject of people who were in St. Mungo’s because ofmagical damage to their brains was highly distressingto Neville, but he had sworn to Dumbledore that hewould not tell anyone Neville’s secret. Even Neville didnot know that Harry knew.

Page | 463Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry, Ron, and Hermione took their usual seats atthe back of the class and pulled out parchment,quills, and their copies of One Thousand MagicalHerbs and Fungi. The class around them waswhispering about what Neville had just done, butwhen Snape closed the dungeon door with an echoingbang everybody fell silent immediately.

“You will notice,” said Snape in his low, sneeringvoice, “that we have a guest with us today.”

He gestured toward the dim corner of the dungeon,and Harry saw Professor Umbridge sitting there,clipboard on her knee. He glanced sideways at Ronand Hermione, his eyebrows raised. Snape andUmbridge, the two teachers he hated most ... it washard to decide which he wanted to triumph over theother.

“We are continuing with our Strengthening Solutionstoday, you will find your mixtures as you left themlast lesson, if correctly made they should havematured well over the weekend — instructions” — hewaved his wand again — “on the board. Carry on.”

Professor Umbridge spent the first half hour of thelesson making notes in her corner. Harry was veryinterested in hearing her question Snape, sointerested, that he was becoming careless with hispotion again.

“Salamander blood, Harry!” Hermione moaned,grabbing his wrist to prevent him adding the wrongingredient for the third time. “Not pomegranate juice!”

“Right,” said Harry vaguely, putting down the bottleand continuing to watch the corner. Umbridge hadjust gotten to her feet. “Ha,” he said softly, as she

Page | 464Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

strode between two lines of desks toward Snape, whowas bending over Dean Thomas’s cauldron.

“Well, the class seems fairly advanced for their level,”she said briskly to Snape’s back. “Though I wouldquestion whether it is advisable to teach them apotion like the Strengthening Solution. I think theMinistry would prefer it if that was removed from thesyllabus.”

Snape straightened up slowly and turned to look ather.

“Now ... how long have you been teaching atHogwarts?” she asked, her quill poised over herclipboard.

“Fourteen years,” Snape replied. His expression wasunfathomable. His eyes on Snape, Harry added a fewdrops to his potion; it hissed menacingly and turnedfrom turquoise to orange.

“You applied first for the Defense Against the DarkArts post, I believe?” Professor Umbridge askedSnape.

“Yes,” said Snape quietly.

“But you were unsuccessful?”

Snape’s lip curled.

“Obviously.”

Professor Umbridge scribbled on her clipboard.

“And you have applied regularly for the DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts post since you first joined theschool, I believe?”

Page | 465Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Snape quietly, barely moving his lips. Helooked very angry.

“Do you have any idea why Dumbledore hasconsistently refused to appoint you?” askedUmbridge.

“I suggest you ask him,” said Snape jerkily.

“Oh I shall,” said Professor Umbridge with a sweetsmile.

“I suppose this is relevant?” Snape asked, his blackeyes narrowed.

“Oh yes,” said Professor Umbridge. “Yes, the Ministrywants a thorough understanding of teachers’ — er —backgrounds...”

She turned away, walked over to Pansy Parkinsonand began questioning her about the lessons. Snapelooked around at Harry and their eyes met for asecond. Harry hastily dropped his gaze to his potion,which was now congealing foully and giving off astrong smell of burned rubber.

“No marks again, then, Potter,” said Snapemaliciously, emptying Harry’s cauldron with a wave ofhis wand. “You will write me an essay on the correctcomposition of this potion, indicating how and whyyou went wrong, to be handed in next lesson, do youunderstand?”

“Yes,” said Harry furiously. Snape had already giventhem homework, and he had Quidditch practice thisevening; this would mean another couple of sleeplessnights. It did not seem possible that he had awokenthat morning feeling very happy. All he felt now was afervent desire for this day to end as soon as possible.Page | 466Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Maybe I’ll skive off Divination,” he said glumly asthey stood again in the courtyard after lunch, thewind whipping at the hems of robes and brims ofhats. “I’ll pretend to be ill and do Snape’s essayinstead, then I won’t have to stay up half the night...”

“You can’t skive off Divination,” said Hermioneseverely.

“Hark who’s talking, you walked out of Divination,you hate Trelawney!” said Ron indignantly.

“I don’t hate her,” said Hermione loftily. “I just thinkshe’s an absolutely appalling teacher and a real oldfraud... But Harry’s already missed History of Magicand I don’t think he ought to miss anything elsetoday!”

There was too much truth in this to ignore, so half anhour later Harry took his seat in the hot, over-perfumed atmosphere of the Divination classroomfeeling angry at everybody. Professor Trelawney washanding out copies of The Dream Oracle yet again; hewould surely be much better employed doing Snape’spunishment essay than sitting here trying to findmeaning in a lot of made-up dreams.

It seemed, however, that he was not the only personin Divination who was in a temper. ProfessorTrelawney slammed a copy of the Oracle down on thetable between Harry and Ron and swept away, herlips pursed; she threw the next copy of the Oracle atSeamus and Dean, narrowly avoiding Seamus’s head,and thrust the final one into Neville’s chest with suchforce that he slipped off his pouf.

“Well, carry on!” said Professor Trelawney loudly, hervoice high pitched and somewhat hysterical. “You

Page | 467Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

know what to do! Or am I such a substandard teacherthat you have never learned how to open a book?”

The class stared perplexedly at her and then at eachother. Harry, however, thought he knew what was thematter. As Professor Trelawney flounced back to thehigh-backed teacher’s chair, her magnified eyes full ofangry tears, he leaned his head closer to Ron’s andmuttered, “I think she’s got the results of herinspection back.”

“Professor?” said Parvati Patil in a hushed voice (sheand Lavender had always rather admired ProfessorTrelawney). “Professor, is there anything — er —wrong?”

“Wrong!” cried Professor Trelawney in a voicethrobbing with emotion. “Certainly not! I have beeninsulted, certainly... Insinuations have been madeagainst me... Unfounded accusations levelled ... butno, there is nothing wrong, certainly not...”

She took a great shuddering breath and looked awayfrom Parvati, angry tears spilling from under herglasses.

“I say nothing,” she choked, “of sixteen years’ devotedservice... It has passed, apparently, unnoticed... But Ishall not be insulted, no, I shall not!”

“But Professor, who’s insulting you?” asked Parvatitimidly.

“The establishment!” said Professor Trelawney in adeep, dramatic, wavering voice. “Yes, those with eyestoo clouded by the Mundane to See as I See, to Knowas I Know ... Of course, we Seers have always beenfeared, always persecuted... It is — alas — our fate...”

Page | 468Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She gulped, dabbed at her wet cheeks with the end ofher shawl, and then pulled a small, embroideredhandkerchief from her sleeve, into which she blew hernose very hard with a sound like Peeves blowing araspberry. Ron sniggered. Lavender shot him adisgusted look.

“Professor,” said Parvati, “do you mean ... is itsomething Professor Umbridge ... ?”

“Do not speak to me about that woman!” criedProfessor Trelawney, leaping to her feet, her beadsrattling and her spectacles flashing. “Kindly continuewith your work!”

And she spent the rest of the lesson striding amongthem, tears still leaking from behind her glasses,muttering what sounded like threats under herbreath.

"... may well choose to leave ... the indignity of it ... onprobation ... we shall see ... how she dares ...”

“You and Umbridge have got something in common,”Harry told Hermione quietly when they met again inDefense Against the Dark Arts. “She obviouslyreckons Trelawney’s an old fraud too... Looks likeshe’s put her on probation.”

Umbridge entered the room as he spoke, wearing herblack velvet bow and an expression of greatsmugness.

“Good afternoon, class.”

“Good afternoon, Professor Umbridge,” they chanteddrearily.

“Wands away, please ...”

Page | 469Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But there was no answering flurry of movement thistime; nobody had bothered to take out their wands.

“Please turn to page thirty-four of Defensive MagicalTheory and read the third chapter, entitled The Casefor Non-Offensive Responses to Magical Attack.’ Therewill be —”

“— no need to talk,” Harry, Ron, and Hermione saidtogether under their breaths.

“No Quidditch practice,” said Angelina in hollow toneswhen Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered the commonroom that night after dinner.

“But I kept my temper!” said Harry, horrified. “I didn’tsay anything to her, Angelina, I swear, I —”

“I know, I know,” said Angelina miserably. “She justsaid she needed a bit of time to consider.”

“Consider what?” said Ron angrily. “She’s given theSlytherins permission, why not us?”

But Harry could imagine how much Umbridge wasenjoying holding the threat of no Gryffindor Quidditchteam over their heads and could easily understandwhy she would not want to relinquish that weaponover them too soon.

“Well,” said Hermione, “look on the bright side — atleast now you’ll have time to do Snape’s essay!”

“That’s a bright side, is it?” snapped Harry, while Ronstared incredulously at Hermione. “No Quidditchpractice and extra Potions?”

Harry slumped down into a chair, dragged his Potionsessay reluctantly from his bag, and set to work.

Page | 470Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It was very hard to concentrate; even though he knewthat Sirius was not due in the fire until much later hecould not help glancing into the flames every fewminutes just in case. There was also an incredibleamount of noise in the room: Fred and Georgeappeared finally to have perfected one type of SkivingSnackbox, which they were taking turns todemonstrate to a cheering and whooping crowd.

First, Fred would take a bite out of the orange end ofa chew, at which he would vomit spectacularly into abucket they had placed in front of them. Then hewould force down the purple end of the chew, atwhich the vomiting would immediately cease. LeeJordan, who was assisting the demonstration, waslazily vanishing the vomit at regular intervals with thesame Vanishing Spell Snape kept using on Harry’spotions.

What with the regular sounds of retching, cheering,and Fred and George taking advance orders from thecrowd, Harry was finding it exceptionally difficult tofocus on the correct method for StrengtheningSolutions. Hermione was not helping matters; thecheers and sound of vomit hitting the bottom of Fredand George’s bucket were punctuated by loud anddisapproving sniffs that Harry found, if anything,more distracting.

“Just go and stop them, then!” he said irritably, aftercrossing out the wrong weight of powdered griffinclaw for the fourth time.

“I can’t, they’re not technically doing anything wrong,”said Hermione through gritted teeth. “They’re quitewithin their rights to eat the foul things themselves,and I can’t find a rule that says the other idiots aren’tentitled to buy them, not unless they’re proven to be

Page | 471Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

dangerous in some way, and it doesn’t look as thoughthey are...”

She, Harry, and Ron watched George projectile-vomitinto the bucket, gulp down the rest of the chew, andstraighten up, beaming with his arms wide toprotracted applause.

“You know, I don’t get why Fred and George only gotthree O.W.L.s each,” said Harry, watching as Fred,George, and Lee collected gold from the eager crowd.“They really know their stuff...”

“Oh, they only know flashy stuff that’s no real use toanyone,” said Hermione disparagingly.

“No real use?” said Ron in a strained voice.

“Hermione, they’ve got about twenty-six Galleonsalready...”

It was a long while before the crowd around theWeasleys dispersed, and then Fred, Lee, and Georgesat up counting their takings even longer, so that itwas well past midnight when Harry, Ron, andHermione finally had the common room to themselvesagain. At long last, Fred closed the doorway to theboys’ dormitories behind him, rattling his box ofGalleons ostentatiously so that Hermione scowled.Harry, who was making very little progress with hisPotions essay, decided to give it up for the night. Ashe put his books away, Ron, who was dozing lightly inan armchair, gave a muffled grunt, awoke, lookedblearily into the fire and said, “Sirius!”

Harry whipped around; Sirius’s untidy dark head wassitting in the fire again.

“Hi,” he said, grinning.

Page | 472Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Hi,” chorused Harry, Ron, and Hermione, all threekneeling down upon the hearthrug. Crookshankspurred loudly and approached the fire, trying, despitethe heat, to put his face close to Sirius’s.

“How’re things?” said Sirius.

“Not that good,” said Harry, as Hermione pulledCrookshanks back to stop him singeing his whiskers.“The Ministry’s forced through another decree, whichmeans we’re not allowed to have Quidditch teams —”

“— or secret Defense Against the Dark Arts groups?”said Sirius.

There was a short pause.

“How did you know about that?” Harry demanded.

“You want to choose your meeting places morecarefully,” said Sirius, grinning still more broadly.“The Hog’s Head, I ask you ...”

“Well, it was better than the Three Broomsticks!” saidHermione defensively. “That’s always packed withpeople —”

“— which means you’d have been harder to overhear,”said Sirius. “You’ve got a lot to learn, Hermione.”

“Who overheard us?” Harry demanded.

“Mundungus, of course,” said Sirius, and when theyall looked puzzled he laughed. “He was the witchunder the veil.”

“That was Mundungus?” Harry said, stunned. “Whatwas he doing in the Hog’s Head?”

Page | 473Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What do you think he was doing?” said Siriusimpatiently. “Keeping an eye on you, of course.”

“I’m still being followed?” asked Harry angrily.

“Yeah, you are,” said Sirius, “and just as well, isn’t it,if the first thing you’re going to do on your weekendoff is organize an illegal defense group.”

But he looked neither angry nor worried; on thecontrary, he was looking at Harry with distinct pride.

“Why was Dung hiding from us?” asked Ron,sounding disappointed. “We’d’ve liked to’ve seen him.”

“He was banned from the Hog’s Head twenty yearsago,” said Sirius, “and that barman’s got a longmemory. We lost Moody’s spare Invisibility Cloakwhen Sturgis was arrested, so Dung’s been dressingas a witch a lot lately... Anyway ... First of all, Ron —I’ve sworn to pass on a message from your mother.”

“Oh yeah?” said Ron, sounding apprehensive.

“She says on no account whatsoever are you to takepart in an illegal secret Defense Against the Dark Artsgroup. She says you’ll be expelled for sure and yourfuture will be ruined. She says there will be plenty oftime to learn how to defend yourself later and thatyou are too young to be worrying about that rightnow. She also” — Sirius’s eyes turned to the other two— “advises Harry and Hermione not to proceed withthe group, though she accepts that she has noauthority over either of them and simply begs them toremember that she has their best interests at heart.She would have written all this to you, but if the owlhad been intercepted you’d all have been in realtrouble, and she can’t say it for herself because she’son duty tonight.”

Page | 474Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“On duty doing what?” said Ron quickly.

“Never you mind, just stuff for the Order,” said Sirius.“So it’s fallen to me to be the messenger and makesure you tell her I passed it all on, because I don’tthink she trusts me to.”

There was another pause in which Crookshanks,mewing, attempted to paw Sirius’s head, and Ronfiddled with a hole in the hearthrug.

“So you want me to say I’m not going to take part inthe defense group?” he muttered finally.

“Me? Certainly not!” said Sirius, looking surprised. “Ithink it’s an excellent idea!”

“You do?” said Harry, his heart lifting.

“Of course I do!” said Sirius. “D’you think your fatherand I would’ve lain down and taken orders from anold hag like Umbridge?”

“But — last term all you did was tell me to be carefuland not take risks —”

“Last year all the evidence was that someone insideHogwarts was trying to kill you, Harry!” said Siriusimpatiently. “This year we know that there’s someoneoutside Hogwarts who’d like to kill us all, so I thinklearning to defend yourselves properly is a very goodidea!”

“And if we do get expelled?” Hermione asked, aquizzical look on her face.

“Hermione, this whole thing was your idea!” saidHarry, staring at her.

Page | 475Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I know it was... I just wondered what Siriusthought,” she said, shrugging.

“Well, better expelled and able to defend yourselvesthan sitting safely in school without a clue,” saidSirius.

“Hear, hear,” said Harry and Ron enthusiastically.

“So,” said Sirius, “how are you organizing this group?Where are you meeting?”

“Well, that’s a bit of a problem now,” said Harry.“Dunno where we’re going to be able to go...”

“How about the Shrieking Shack?” suggested Sirius.

“Hey, that’s an idea!” said Ron excitedly, butHermione made a skeptical noise and all three ofthem looked at her, Sirius’s head turning in theflames.

“Well, Sirius, it’s just that there were only four of youmeeting in the Shrieking Shack when you were atschool,” said Hermione, “and all of you couldtransform into animals and I suppose you could allhave squeezed under a single Invisibility Cloak ifyou’d wanted to. But there are twenty-eight of us andnone of us is an Animagus, so we wouldn’t need somuch an Invisibility Cloak as an Invisibility Marquee

“Fair point,” said Sirius, looking slightly crestfallen.“Well, I’m sure you’ll come up with somewhere...There used to be a pretty roomy secret passagewaybehind that big mirror on the fourth floor, you mighthave enough space to practice jinxes in there —”

Page | 476Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Fred and George told me it’s blocked,” said Harry,shaking his head. “Caved in or something.”

“Oh ...” said Sirius, frowning. “Well, 111 have a thinkand get back to —”

He broke off. His face was suddenly tense, alarmed.He turned sideways, apparently looking into the solidbrick wall of the fireplace.

“Sirius?” said Harry anxiously.

But he had vanished. Harry gaped at the flames for amoment, then turned to look at Ron and Hermione.

“Why did he — ?”

Hermione gave a horrified gasp and leapt to her feet,still staring at the fire.

A hand had appeared amongst the flames, groping asthough to catch hold of something; a stubby, short-fingered hand covered in ugly old-fashioned rings...

The three of them ran for it; at the door of the boys’dormitory Harry looked back. Umbridge’s hand wasstill making snatching movements amongst theflames, as though she knew exactly where Sirius’shair had been moments before and was determined toseize it.

Page | 477Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





DUMBLEDORE’S ARMY

“Umbridge has been reading your mail, Harry. There’sno other explanation.”

“You think Umbridge attacked Hedwig?” he said,outraged.

“I’m almost certain of it,” said Hermione grimly.

“Watch your frog, it’s escaping.”

Harry pointed his wand at the bullfrog that had beenhopping hopefully toward the other side of the table— “Acciol”— and it zoomed gloomily back into hishand.

Charms was always one of the best lessons in whichto enjoy a private chat: There was generally so muchmovement and activity that the danger of beingoverheard was very slight. Today, with the room full ofcroaking bullfrogs and cawing ravens, and with aheavy downpour of rain clattering and poundingagainst the classroom windows, Harry, Ron, andHermione’s whispered discussion about howPage | 478Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Umbridge had nearly caught Sirius went quiteunnoticed.

“I’ve been suspecting this ever since Filch accusedyou of ordering Dungbombs, because it seemed sucha stupid lie,” Hermione whispered. “I mean, once yourletter had been read, it would have been quite clearyou weren’t ordering them, so you wouldn’t have beenin trouble at all — it’s a bit of a feeble joke, isn’t it?But then I thought, what if somebody just wanted anexcuse to read your mail? Well then, it would be aperfect way for Umbridge to manage it — tip off Filch,let him do the dirty work and confiscate the letter,then either find a way of stealing it from him or elsedemand to see it — I don’t think Filch would object,when’s he ever stuck up for a student’s rights? Harry,you’re squashing your frog.”

Harry looked down; he was indeed squeezing hisbullfrog so tightly its eyes were popping; he replacedit hastily upon the desk.

“It was a very, very close call last night,” saidHermione. “I just wonder if Umbridge knows howclose it was. Silenciol”

The bullfrog on which she was practicing herSilencing Charm was struck dumb mid-croak andglared at her reproachfully.

“If she’d caught Snuffles ...”

Harry finished the sentence for her.

“He’d probably be back in Azkaban this morning.” Hewaved his wand without really concentrating; hisbullfrog swelled like a green balloon and emitted ahigh-pitched whistle.

Page | 479Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Silenciol” said Hermione hastily, pointing her wandat Harry’s frog, which deflated silently before them.“Well, he mustn’t do it again, that’s all. I just don’tknow how we’re going to let him know. We can’t sendhim an owl.”

“I don’t reckon he’ll risk it again,” said Ron. “He’s notstupid, he knows she nearly got him. Silenciol”

The large and ugly raven in front of him let out aderisive caw.

“Silenciol SILENCIO”

The raven cawed more loudly.

“It’s the way you’re moving your wand,” saidHermione, watching Ron critically. “You don’t want towave it, it’s more a sharp jab.”

“Ravens are harder than frogs,” said Ron testily.

“Fine, let’s swap,” said Hermione, seizing Ron’s ravenand replacing it with her own fat bullfrog. “Silencio\”The raven continued to open and close its sharp beak,but no sound came out.

“Very good, Miss Granger!” said Professor Flitwick’ssqueaky little voice and Harry, Ron, and Hermione alljumped. “Now, let me see you try, Mr. Weasley!”

“Wha — ? Oh — oh, right,” said Ron, very flustered.“Er — Silenciol”

He jabbed at the bullfrog so hard that he poked it inthe eye; the frog gave a deafening croak and leapt offthe desk.

Page | 480Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It came as no surprise to any of them that Harry andRon were given additional practice of the SilencingCharm for homework.

They were allowed to remain inside over break due tothe downpour outside. They found seats in a noisyand overcrowded classroom on the first floor in whichPeeves was floating dreamily up near the chandelier,occasionally blowing an ink pellet at the top ofsomebody’s head. They had barely sat down whenAngelina came struggling toward them through thegroups of gossiping students.

“I’ve got permission!” she said. “To re-form theQuidditch team!”

“Excellent.” said Ron and Harry together.

“Yeah,” said Angelina, beaming. “I went toMcGonagall and I think she might have appealed toDumbledore — anyway, Umbridge had to give in. Ha!So I want you down at the pitch at seven o’clocktonight, all right, because we’ve got to make up time,you realize we’re only three weeks away from our firstmatch?”

She squeezed away from them, narrowly dodged anink pellet from Peeves, which hit a nearby first yearinstead, and vanished from sight.

Ron’s smile slipped slightly as he looked out of thewindow, which was now opaque with hammeringrain.

“Hope this clears up ... What’s up with you,Hermione?”

Page | 481Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She too was gazing at the window, but not as thoughshe really saw it. Her eyes were unfocused and therewas a frown on her face.

“Just thinking ...” she said, still frowning at the rain-washed window.

“About Siri ... Snuffles?” said Harry.

“No ... not exactly ...” said Hermione slowly. “More ...wondering ... I suppose we’re doing the right thing ...

I think ... aren’t we?

Harry and Ron looked at each other.

“Well, that clears that up,” said Ron. “It would’ve beenreally annoying if you hadn’t explained yourselfproperly.”

Hermione looked at him as though she had only justrealized he was there.

“I was just wondering,” she said, her voice strongernow, “whether we’re doing the right thing, startingthis Defense Against the Dark Arts group.”

“What!” said Harry and Ron together.

“Hermione, it was your idea in the first place!” saidRon indignantly.

“I know,” said Hermione, twisting her fingers together.“But after talking to Snuffles ...”

“But he’s all for it!” said Harry.

“Yes,” said Hermione, staring at the window again.“Yes, that’s what made me think maybe it wasn’t agood idea after all...”

Page | 482Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Peeves floated over them on his stomach, peashooterat the ready; automatically all three of them liftedtheir bags to cover their heads until he had passed.

“Let’s get this straight,” said Harry angrily, as theyput their bags back on the floor, “Sirius agrees withus, so you don’t think we should do it anymore?”

Hermione looked tense and rather miserable. Nowstaring at her own hands she said, “Do you honestlytrust his judgment?”

“Yes, I do!” said Harry at once. “He’s always given usgreat advice!”

An ink pellet whizzed past them, striking Katie Bellsquarely in the ear. Hermione watched Katie leap toher feet and start throwing things at Peeves; it was afew moments before Hermione spoke again and itsounded as though she was choosing her words verycarefully.

“You don’t think he has become ... sort of ... reckless... since he’s been cooped up in Grimmauld Place?

You don’t think he’s ... kind of ... living through us?”

“What d’you mean, ‘living through us’?” Harryretorted.

“I mean ... well, I think he’d love to be forming secretdefense societies right under the nose of someonefrom the Ministry... I think he’s really frustrated athow little he can do where he is ... so I think he’skeen to kind of ... egg us on.”

Ron looked utterly perplexed.

“Sirius is right,” he said, “you do sound just like mymother.”

Page | 483Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hermione bit her lip and did not answer. The bellrang just as Peeves swooped down upon Katie andemptied an entire ink bottle over her head.

The weather did not improve as the day wore on, sothat at seven o’clock that evening, when Harry andRon went down to the Quidditch pitch for practice,they were soaked through within minutes, their feetslipping and sliding on the sodden grass. The sky wasa deep, thundery gray and it was a relief to gain thewarmth and light of the changing rooms, even if theyknew the respite was only temporary. They foundFred and George debating whether to use one of theirown Skiving Snackboxes to get out of flying.

“— but I bet she’d know what we’d done,” Fred saidout of the corner of his mouth. “If only I hadn’t offeredto sell her some Puking Pastilles yesterday —”

“We could try the Fever Fudge,” George muttered, “noone’s seen that yet —”

“Does it work?” inquired Ron hopefully, as thehammering of rain on the roof intensified and windhowled around the building.

“Well, yeah,” said Fred, “your temperature’ll go rightup —”

“— but you get these massive pus-filled boils too,”said George, “and we haven’t worked out how to getrid of them yet.”

“I can’t see any boils,” said Ron, staring at the twins.

“No, well, you wouldn’t,” said Fred darkly, “they’re notin a place we generally display to the public —”

Page | 484Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“— but they make sitting on a broom a right pain inthe —”

“All right, everyone, listen up,” said Angelina loudly,emerging from the Captain’s office. “I know it’s notideal weather, but there’s a good chance we’ll beplaying Slytherin in conditions like this so it’s a goodidea to work out how we’re going to cope with them.Harry, didn’t you do something to your glasses to stopthe rain fogging them up when we played Hufflepuffin that storm?”

“Hermione did it,” said Harry. He pulled out his wand,tapped his glasses and said, “Imperviusl”

“I think we all ought to try that,” said Angelina. “If wecould just keep the rain off our faces it would reallyhelp visibility — all together, come on — ImperviuslOkay. Let’s go.”

They all stowed their wands back in the insidepockets of their robes, shouldered their brooms, andfollowed Angelina out of the changing rooms.

They squelched through the deepening mud to themiddle of the pitch; visibility was still very poor evenwith the Impervius Charm; light was fading fast andcurtains of rain were sweeping the grounds.

“All right, on my whistle,” shouted Angelina.

Harry kicked off from the ground, spraying mud in alldirections, and shot upward, the wind pulling himslightly off course. He had no idea how he was goingto see the Snitch in this weather; he was havingenough difficulty seeing the one Bludger with whichthey were practicing; a minute into the practice italmost unseated him and he had to use the SlothGrip Roll to avoid it. Unfortunately Angelina did notPage | 485Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

see this; in fact, she did not appear to be able to seeanything; none of them had a clue what the otherswere doing. The wind was picking up; even at adistance Harry could hear the swishing, poundingsounds of the rain pummeling the surface of the lake.

Angelina kept them at it for nearly an hour beforeconceding defeat. She led her sodden and disgruntledteam back into the changing rooms, insisting that thepractice had not been a waste of time, though withoutany real conviction in her voice. Fred and George werelooking particularly annoyed; both were bandy-leggedand winced with every movement. Harry could hearthem complaining in low voices as he toweled his hairdry.

“I think a few of mine have ruptured,” said Fred in ahollow voice.

“Mine haven’t,” said George, wincing. “They’rethrobbing like mad ... feel bigger if anything ...”

“OUCH!” said Harry.

He pressed the towel to his face, his eyes screwedtight with pain. The scar on his forehead had searedagain, more painfully than in months.

“What’s up?” said several voices.

Harry emerged from behind his towel; the changingroom was blurred because he was not wearing hisglasses; but he could still tell that everyone’s face wasturned toward him.

“Nothing,” he muttered, “I — poked myself in the eye,that’s all...”

Page | 486Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But he gave Ron a significant look and the two ofthem hung back as the rest of the team filed backoutside, muffled in their cloaks, their hats pulled lowover their ears.

“What happened?” said Ron, the moment that Aliciahad disappeared through the door. “Was it yourscar?”

Harry nodded.

“But ...” Looking scared, Ron strode across to thewindow and stared out into the rain, “He — he can’tbe near us now, can he?”

“No,” Harry muttered, sinking onto a bench andrubbing his forehead. “He’s probably miles away. Ithurt because ... he’s ... angry.”

Harry had not meant to say that at all, and heard thewords as though a stranger had spoken them — yethe knew at once that they were true. He did not knowhow he knew it, but he did; Voldemort, wherever hewas, whatever he was doing, was in a toweringtemper.

“Did you see him?” said Ron, looking horrified. “Didyou ... get a vision, or something?”

Harry sat quite still, staring at his feet, allowing hismind and his memory to relax in the aftermath of thepain...

A confused tangle of shapes, a howling rush of voices

“He wants something done, and it’s not happeningfast enough,” he said.

Page | 487Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Again, he felt surprised to hear the words coming outof his mouth, and yet quite certain that they weretrue.

“But ... how do you know?” said Ron.

Harry shook his head and covered his eyes with hishands, pressing down upon them with his palms.Little stars erupted in them. He felt Ron sit down onthe bench beside him and knew Ron was staring athim.

“Is this what it was about last time?” said Ron in ahushed voice. “When your scar hurt in Umbridge’soffice? You-Know-Who was angry?”

Harry shook his head.

“What is it, then?”

Harry was thinking himself back. He had beenlooking into Umbridge’s face... His scar had hurt ...and he had had that odd feeling in his stomach ... astrange, leaping feeling ... a happy feeling... But, ofcourse, he had not recognized it for what it was, as hehad been feeling so miserable himself...

“Last time, it was because he was pleased,” he said.“Really pleased.

“He thought ... something good was going to happen.And the night before we came back to Hogwarts ...”

He thought back to the moment when his scar hadhurt so badly in his and Ron’s bedroom inGrimmauld Place. “He was furious...”

He looked around at Ron, who was gaping at him.

Page | 488Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You could take over from Trelawney, mate,” he saidin an awed voice.

“I’m not making prophecies,” said Harry.

“No, you know what you’re doing?” Ron said,sounding both scared and impressed. “Harry, you’rereading You-Know-Who’s mind...”

“No,” said Harry, shaking his head. “It’s more like ...his mood, I suppose. I’m just getting flashes of whatmood he’s in... Dumbledore said something like thiswas happening last year... He said that whenVoldemort was near me, or when he was feelinghatred, I could tell. Well, now I’m feeling it when he’spleased too...”

There was a pause. The wind and rain lashed at thebuilding.

“You’ve got to tell someone,” said Ron.

“I told Sirius last time.”

“Well, tell him about this time!”

“Can’t, can I?” said Harry grimly. “Umbridge iswatching the owls and the fires, remember?”

“Well then, Dumbledore —”

“I’ve just told you, he already knows,” said Harryshortly, getting to his feet, taking his cloak off his peg,and swinging it around himself. “There’s no pointtelling him again.”

Ron did up the fastening of his own cloak, watchingHarry thoughtfully.

Page | 489Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Dumbledore’d want to know,” he said.

Harry shrugged.

“C’mon ... we’ve still got Silencing Charms to practice

They hurried back through the dark grounds, slidingand stumbling up the muddy lawns, not talking.

Harry was thinking hard. What was it that Voldemortwanted done that was not happening quickly enough?

“He’s got other plans ... plans he can put into operationvery quietly indeed ... stuff he can only get by stealth... like a weapon. Something he didn’t have last time.”

He had not thought about those words in weeks; hehad been too absorbed in what was going on atHogwarts, too busy dwelling on the ongoing battleswith Umbridge, the injustice of all the Ministryinterference... But now they came back to him andmade him wonder... Voldemort’s anger would makesense if he was no nearer laying hands on theweapon, whatever it was... Had the Order thwartedhim, stopped him from seizing it? Where was it kept?Who had it now?

“Mimbulus mimbletonia,” said Ron’s voice and Harrycame back to his senses just in time to clamberthrough the portrait hole into the common room.

It appeared that Hermione had gone to bed early,leaving Crookshanks curled in a nearby chair and anassortment of knobbly, knitted elf hats lying on atable by the fire. Harry was rather grateful that shewas not around because he did not much want todiscuss his scar hurting and have her urge him to goto Dumbledore too. Ron kept throwing him anxiousglances, but Harry pulled out his Potions book andPage | 490Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

set to work to finish his essay, though he was onlypretending to concentrate and, by the time that Ronsaid he was going to bed too, had written hardlyanything.

Midnight came and went while Harry was reading andrereading a passage about the uses of scurvy-grass,lovage, and sneezewort and not taking in a word ofit...

These plantes are moste efficacious in the inflamingof the braine, and are therefore much used inConfusing and Befuddlement Draughts, where thewizard is desirous of producing hot-headedness andrecklessness...

... Hermione said Sirius was becoming recklesscooped up in Grimmauld Place...

... moste efficacious in the inflaming of the braine, andare therefore much used ...

... the Daily Prophet would think his brain wasinflamed if they found out that he knew whatVoldemort was feeling ...

... therefore much used in Confusing andBefuddlement Draughts ...

... confusing was the word, all right; why did he knowwhat Voldemort was feeling? What was this weirdconnection between them, which Dumbledore hadnever been able to explain satisfactorily?

... where the wizard is desirous ...

... how he would like to sleep ...

...of producing hot-headedness ...

Page | 491Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

... It was warm and comfortable in his armchairbefore the fire, with the rain still beating heavily onthe windowpanes and Crookshanks purring and thecrackling of the flames...

The book slipped from Harry’s slack grip and landedwith a dull thud on the hearthrug. His head fellsideways...

He was walking once more along a windowlesscorridor, his footsteps echoing in the silence. As thedoor at the end of the passage loomed larger his heartbeat fast with excitement... If he could only open it ...enter beyond ...

He stretched out his hand... His fingertips wereinches from it...

“Harry Potter, sir!”

He awoke with a start. The candles had all beenextinguished in the common room, but there wassomething moving close by.

“Whozair?” said Harry, sitting upright in his chair.

The fire was almost extinguished, the room very dark.

“Dobby has your owl, sir!” said a squeaky voice.

“Dobby?” said Harry thickly, peering through thegloom toward the source of the voice.

Dobby the house-elf was standing beside the table onwhich Hermione had left her half a dozen knittedhats. His large, pointed ears were now sticking outfrom beneath what looked like all the hats thatHermione had ever knitted; he was wearing one ontop of the other, so that his head seemed elongated by

Page | 492Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

two or three feet, and on the very topmost bobble satHedwig, hooting serenely and obviously cured.

“Dobby volunteered to return Harry Potter’s owl!” saidthe elf squeakily, with a look of positive adoration onhis face. “Professor Grubbly-Plank says she is all wellnow, sir!”

He sank into a deep bow so that his pencil-like nosebrushed the threadbare surface of the hearthrug andHedwig gave an indignant hoot and fluttered onto thearm of Harry’s chair.

“Thanks, Dobby!” said Harry, stroking Hedwig’s headand blinking hard, trying to rid himself of the imageof the door in his dream... It had been very vivid...Looking back at Dobby, he noticed that the elf wasalso wearing several scarves and innumerable socks,so that his feet looked far too big for his body.

“Er ... have you been taking all the clothesHermione’s been leaving out?”

“Oh no, sir,” said Dobby happily, “Dobby has beentaking some for Winky too, sir.”

“Yeah, how is Winky?” asked Harry.

Dobby’s ears drooped slightly.

“Winky is still drinking lots, sir,” he said sadly, hisenormous round green eyes, large as tennis balls,downcast. “She still does not care for clothes, HarryPotter. Nor do the other house-elves. None of themwill clean Gryffindor Tower anymore, not with thehats and socks hidden everywhere, they finds theminsulting, sir. Dobby does it all himself, sir, butDobby does not mind, sir, for he always hopes to meetHarry Potter and tonight, sir, he has got his wish!”Page | 493Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Dobby sank into a deep bow again. “But Harry Potterdoes not seem happy,” Dobby went on, straighteningup again and looking timidly at Harry. “Dobby heardhim muttering in his sleep. Was Harry Potter havingbad dreams?”

“Not really bad,” said Harry, yawning and rubbing hiseyes. “I’ve had worse.”

The elf surveyed Harry out of his vast, orblike eyes.Then he said very seriously, his ears drooping,

“Dobby wishes he could help Harry Potter, for HarryPotter set Dobby free and Dobby is much, muchhappier now...”

Harry smiled.

“You can’t help me, Dobby, but thanks for the offer...”

He bent and picked up his Potions book. He’d have totry and finish the essay tomorrow. He closed the bookand as he did so the firelight illuminated the thinwhite scars on the back of his hand — the result ofhis detention with Umbridge.

“Wait a moment — there is something you can do forme, Dobby,” said Harry slowly.

The elf looked around, beaming.

“Name it, Harry Potter, sir!”

“I need to find a place where twenty-eight people canpractice Defense Against the Dark Arts without beingdiscovered by any of the teachers. Especially,” Harryclenched his hand on the book, so that the scarsshone pearly white, “Professor Umbridge.”

Page | 494Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He expected the elf’s smile to vanish, his ears todroop; he expected him to say that this wasimpossible, or else that he would try, but his hopeswere not high... What he had not expected was forDobby to give a little skip, his ears waggling happily,and clap his hands together.

“Dobby knows the perfect place, sir!” he said happily.“Dobby heard tell of it from the other house-elveswhen he came to Hogwarts, sir. It is known by us asthe Come and Go Room, sir, or else as the Room ofRequirement!”

“Why?” said Harry curiously.

“Because it is a room that a person can only enter,”said Dobby seriously, “when they have real need of it.Sometimes it is there, and sometimes it is not, butwhen it appears, it is always equipped for the seeker’sneeds. Dobby has used it, sir,” said the elf, droppinghis voice and looking guilty, “when Winky has beenvery drunk. He has hidden her in the Room ofRequirement and he has found antidotes tobutterbeer there, and a nice elf-sized bed to settle heron while she sleeps it off, sir... And Dobby knows Mr.Filch has found extra cleaning materials there whenhe has run short, sir, and —”

“— and if you really needed a bathroom,” said Harry,suddenly remembering something Dumbledore hadsaid at the Yule Ball the previous Christmas, “wouldit fill itself with chamber pots?”

“Dobby expects so, sir,” said Dobby, noddingearnestly. “It is a most amazing room, sir.”

“How many people know about it?” said Harry, sittingup straighter in his chair.

Page | 495Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Very few, sir. Mostly people stumbles across it whenthey needs it, sir, but often they never finds it again,for they do not know that it is always there waiting tobe called into service, sir.”

“It sounds brilliant,” said Harry, his heart racing. “Itsounds perfect, Dobby. When can you show me whereit is?”

“Anytime, Harry Potter, sir,” said Dobby, lookingdelighted at Harry’s enthusiasm. “We could go now, ifyou like!”

For a moment Harry was tempted to go now; he washalfway out of his seat, intending to hurry upstairsfor his Invisibility Cloak when, not for the first time, avoice very much like Hermione’s whispered in his ear:reckless. It was, after all, very late, he was exhaustedand had Snape’s essay to finish.

“Not tonight, Dobby,” said Harry reluctantly, sinkingback into his chair. “This is really important... I don’twant to blow it, it’ll need proper planning... Listen,can you just tell me exactly where this Room ofRequirement is and how to get in there?”

Their robes billowed and swirled around them as theysplashed across the flooded vegetable patch to doubleHerbology, where they could hardly hear whatProfessor Sprout was saying over the hammering ofraindrops hard as hailstones on the greenhouse roof.The afternoon’s Care of Magical Creatures lesson wasto be relocated from the storm-swept grounds to afree classroom on the ground floor and, to theirintense relief, Angelina sought out her team at lunchto tell them that Quidditch practice was canceled.

“Good,” said Harry quietly, when she told him,“because we’ve found somewhere to have our first

Page | 496Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Defense meeting. Tonight, eight o’clock, seventh flooropposite that tapestry of Barnabas the Barmy beingclubbed by those trolls. Can you tell Katie andAlicia?”

She looked slightly taken aback but promised to tellthe others; Harry returned hungrily to his sausagesand mash. When he looked up to take a drink ofpumpkin juice, he found Hermione watching him.

“What?” he said thickly.

“Well ... it’s just that Dobby’s plans aren’t always thatsafe. Don’t you remember when he lost you all thebones in your arm?”

“This room isn’t just some mad idea of Dobby’s;Dumbledore knows about it too, he mentioned it tome at the Yule Ball.”

Hermione’s expression cleared.

“Dumbledore told you about it?”

“Just in passing,” said Harry, shrugging.

“Oh well, that’s all right then,” said Hermione brisklyand she raised no more objections.

Together with Ron they had spent most of the dayseeking out those people who had signed their namesto the list in the Hog’s Head and telling them where tomeet that evening. Somewhat to Harry’sdisappointment, it was Ginny who managed to findCho Chang and her friend first; however, by the endof dinner he was confident that the news had beenpassed to every one of the twenty-five people who hadturned up in the Hog’s Head.

Page | 497Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

At half-past seven Harry, Ron, and Hermione left theGryffindor common room, Harry clutching a certainpiece of aged parchment in his hand. Fifth years wereallowed to be out in the corridors until nine o’clock,but all three of them kept looking around nervouslyas they made their way up to the seventh floor.

“Hold it,” said Harry warningly, unfolding the piece ofparchment at the top of the last staircase, tapping itwith his wand, and muttering, “I solemnly swear thatI am up to no good.”

A map of Hogwarts appeared upon the blank surfaceof the parchment. Tiny black moving dots, labeledwith names, showed where various people were.

“Filch is on the second floor,” said Harry, holding themap close to his eyes and scanning it closely, “andMrs. Norris is on the fourth.”

“And Umbridge?” said Hermione anxiously.

“In her office,” said Harry, pointing. “Okay, let’s go.”

They hurried along the corridor to the place Dobbyhad described to Harry, a stretch of blank wallopposite an enormous tapestry depicting Barnabasthe Barmy’s foolish attempt to train trolls for theballet.

“Okay,” said Harry quietly, while a moth-eaten trollpaused in his relentless clubbing of the would-beballet teacher to watch. “Dobby said to walk past thisbit of wall three times, concentrating hard on what weneed.”

They did so, turning sharply at the window justbeyond the blank stretch of wall, then at the man-sizevase on its other side. Ron had screwed up his eyes in

Page | 498Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

concentration, Hermione was whispering somethingunder her breath, Harry’s fists were clenched as hestared ahead of him.

We need somewhere to learn to fight... he thought.

Just give us a place to practice ... somewhere theycan’t find us ...

“Harry,” said Hermione sharply, as they wheeledaround after their third walk past.

A highly polished door had appeared in the wall. Ronwas staring at it, looking slightly wary. Harry reachedout, seized the brass handle, pulled open the door,and led the way into a spacious room lit withflickering torches like those that illuminated thedungeons eight floors below.

The walls were lined with wooden bookcases, andinstead of chairs there were large silk cushions on thefloor. A set of shelves at the far end of the roomcarried a range of instruments such as Sneakoscopes,Secrecy Sensors, and a large, cracked Foe-Glass thatHarry was sure had hung, the previous year, in thefake Moody’s office.

“These will be good when we’re practicing Stunning,”said Ron enthusiastically, prodding one of thecushions with his foot.

“And just look at these books!” said Hermioneexcitedly, running a finger along the spines of thelarge leather-bound tomes. “A Compendium ofCommon Curses and Their Counter-Actions ... TheDark Arts Outsmarted ... Self-Defensive Spellwork ...wow ...” She looked around at Harry, her faceglowing, and he saw that the presence of hundreds ofbooks had finally convinced Hermione that what they

Page | 499Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

were doing was right. “Harry, this is wonderful,there’s everything we need here!”

And without further ado she slid Jinxes for the Jinxedfrom its shelf, sank onto the nearest cushion, andbegan to read.

There was a gentle knock on the door. Harry lookedaround; Ginny, Neville, Lavender, Parvati, and Deanhad arrived.

“Whoa,” said Dean, staring around, impressed. “Whatis this place?”

Harry began to explain, but before he had finishedmore people had arrived, and he had to start all overagain. By the time eight o’clock arrived, every cushionwas occupied. Harry moved across to the door andturned the key protruding from the lock; it clicked ina satisfyingly loud way and everybody fell silent,looking at him. Hermione carefully marked her pageof Jinxes for the Jinxed and set the book aside.

“Well,” said Harry, slightly nervously. “This is theplace we’ve found for practices, and you’ve — er —obviously found it okay —”

“It’s fantastic!” said Cho, and several peoplemurmured their agreement.

“It’s bizarre,” said Fred, frowning around at it. “Weonce hid from Filch in here, remember, George? But itwas just a broom cupboard then...”

“Hey, Harry, what’s this stuff?” asked Dean from therear of the room, indicating the Sneakoscopes and theFoe-Glass.

Page | 500Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Dark Detectors,” said Harry, stepping between thecushions to reach them. “Basically they all showwhen Dark wizards or enemies are around, but youdon’t want to rely on them too much, they can befooled...”

He gazed for a moment into the cracked Foe-Glass;shadowy figures were moving around inside it, thoughnone was recognizable. He turned his back on it.

“Well, I’ve been thinking about the sort of stuff weought to do first and — er —” He noticed a raisedhand. “What, Hermione?”

“I think we ought to elect a leader,” said Hermione.

“Harry’s leader,” said Cho at once, looking atHermione as though she were mad, and Harry’sstomach did yet another back flip.

“Yes, but I think we ought to vote on it properly,” saidHermione, unperturbed. “It makes it formal and itgives him authority. So — everyone who thinks Harryought to be our leader?”

Everybody put up their hands, even Zacharias Smith,though he did it very halfheartedly.

“Er — right, thanks,” said Harry, who could feel hisface burning. “And — what, Hermione?”

“I also think we ought to have a name,” she saidbrightly, her hand still in the air. “It would promote afeeling of team spirit and unity, don’t you think?”

“Can we be the Anti-Umbridge League?” said Angelinahopefully.

Page | 501Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Or the Ministry of Magic Are Morons Group?”suggested Fred.

“I was thinking,” said Hermione, frowning at Fred,“more of a name that didn’t tell everyone what wewere up to, so we can refer to it safely outsidemeetings.”

“The Defense Association?” said Cho. “The D.A. forshort, so nobody knows what we’re talking about?”

“Yeah, the D.A.’s good,” said Ginny. “Only let’s makeit stand for Dumbledore’s Army because that’s theMinistry’s worst fear, isn’t it?”

There was a good deal of appreciative murmuring andlaughter at this.

“All in favor of the D.A.?” said Hermione bossily,kneeling up on her cushion to count. “That’s amajority — motion passed!”

She pinned the piece of paper with all of their nameson it on the wall and wrote DUMBLEDORE’S ARMYacross the top in large letters.

“Right,” said Harry, when she had sat down again,“shall we get practicing then? I was thinking, the firstthing we should do is Expelliarmus, you know, theDisarming Charm. I know it’s pretty basic but I’vefound it really useful —”

“Oh please,” said Zacharias Smith, rolling his eyesand folding his arms. “I don’t think Expelliarmus isexactly going to help us against You-Know-Who, doyou?”

“I’ve used it against him,” said Harry quietly. “It savedmy life last June.”

Page | 502Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Smith opened his mouth stupidly. The rest of theroom was very quiet.

“But if you think it’s beneath you, you can leave,”Harry said.

Smith did not move. Nor did anybody else.

“Okay,” said Harry, his mouth slightly drier thanusual with all those eyes upon him, “I reckon weshould all divide into pairs and practice.”

It felt very odd to be issuing instructions, but notnearly as odd as seeing them followed. Everybody gotto their feet at once and divided up. Predictably,Neville was left partnerless.

“You can practice with me,” Harry told him. “Right —on the count of three, then — one, two, three —”

The room was suddenly full of shouts of“Expelliarmusl”: Wands flew in all directions, missedspells hit books on shelves and sent them flying intothe air. Harry was too quick for Neville, whose wandwent spinning out of his hand, hit the ceiling in ashower of sparks, and landed with a clatter on top ofa bookshelf, from which Harry retrieved it with aSummoning Charm. Glancing around he thought hehad been right to suggest that they practice thebasics first; there was a lot of shoddy spellwork goingon; many people were not succeeding in disarmingtheir opponents at all, but merely causing them tojump backward a few paces or wince as the feeblespell whooshed over them.

“Expelliarmusl” said Neville, and Harry, caughtunawares, felt his wand fly out of his hand.

Page | 503Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I DID IT!” said Neville gleefully. “I’ve never done itbefore — I DID IT!”

“Good one!” said Harry encouragingly, deciding not topoint out that in a real duel situation Neville’sopponent was unlikely to be staring in the oppositedirection with his wand held loosely at his side.“Listen, Neville, can you take it in turns to practicewith Ron and Hermione for a couple of minutes so Ican walk around and see how the rest are doing?”

Harry moved off into the middle of the room.Something very odd was happening to ZachariasSmith; every time he opened his mouth to disarmAnthony Goldstein, his own wand would fly out of hishand, yet Anthony did not seem to be making asound. Harry did not have to look far for the solutionof the mystery, however; Fred and George wereseveral feet from Smith and taking it in turns to pointtheir wands at his back.

“Sorry, Harry,” said George hastily, when Harrycaught his eye. “Couldn’t resist ...”

Harry walked around the other pairs, trying to correctthose who were doing the spell wrong. Ginny wasteamed with Michael Corner; she was doing very well,whereas Michael was either very bad or unwilling tojinx her. Ernie Macmillan was flourishing his wandunnecessarily, giving his partner time to get in underhis guard; the Creevey brothers were enthusiastic buterratic and mainly responsible for all the booksleaping off the shelves around them. Luna Lovegoodwas similarly patchy, occasionally sending JustinFinch-Fletchley’s wand spinning out of his hand, atother times merely causing his hair to stand on end.

“Okay, stop!” Harry shouted. “Stop\ STOP.”

Page | 504Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

I need a whistle, he thought, and immediately spottedone lying on top of the nearest row of books. Hecaught it up and blew hard. Everyone lowered theirwands.

“That wasn’t bad,” said Harry, “but there’s definiteroom for improvement.” Zacharias Smith glared athim. “Let’s try again...”

He moved off around the room again, stopping hereand there to make suggestions. Slowly the generalperformance improved. He avoided going near Choand her friend for a while, but after walking twicearound every other pair in the room felt he could notignore them any longer.

“Oh no,” said Cho rather wildly as he approached.

“Expelliarmiousl I mean, Exnellimellius\ I — oh, sorry,Marietta!”

Her curly-haired friend’s sleeve had caught fire;Marietta extinguished it with her own wand andglared at Harry as though it was his fault.

“You made me nervous, I was doing all right beforethen!” Cho told Harry ruefully.

“That was quite good,” Harry lied, but when sheraised her eyebrows he said, “Well, no, it was lousy,but I know you can do it properly, I was watchingfrom over there...”

She laughed. Her friend Marietta looked at themrather sourly and turned away.

“Don’t mind her,” Cho muttered. “She doesn’t reallywant to be here but I made her come with me. Herparents have forbidden her to do anything that might

Page | 505Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

upset Umbridge, you see — her mum works for theMinistry.”

“What about your parents?” asked Harry.

“Well, they’ve forbidden me to get on the wrong side ofUmbridge too,” said Cho, drawing herself up proudly.“But if they think I’m not going to fight You-Know-Who after what happened to Cedric —”

She broke off, looking rather confused, and anawkward silence fell between them; Terry Boot’s wandwent whizzing past Harry’s ear and hit Alicia Spinnethard on the nose.

“Well, my father is very supportive of any anti-Ministry action!” said Luna Lovegood proudly fromjust behind Harry; evidently she had beeneavesdropping on his conversation while JustinFinch-Fletchley attempted to disentangle himself fromthe robes that had flown up over his head. “He’salways saying he’d believe anything of Fudge, I mean,the number of goblins Fudge has had assassinated!And of course he uses the Department of Mysteries todevelop terrible poisons, which he feeds secretly toanybody who disagrees with him. And then there’s hisUmgubular Slashkilter —”

“Don’t ask,” Harry muttered to Cho as she opened hermouth, looking puzzled. She giggled.

“Hey, Harry,” Hermione called from the other end ofthe room, “have you checked the time?”

He looked down at his watch and received a shock —it was already ten past nine, which meant theyneeded to get back to their common roomsimmediately or risk being caught and punished byFilch for being out-of-bounds. He blew his whistle;Page | 506Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

everybody stopped shouting, “Expelliarmusl” and thelast couple of wands clattered to the floor.

“Well, that was pretty good,” said Harry, “but we’veoverrun, we’d better leave it here. Same time, sameplace next week?”

“Sooner!” said Dean Thomas eagerly and many peoplenodded in agreement.

Angelina, however, said quickly, “The Quidditchseason’s about to start, we need team practices too!”

“Let’s say next Wednesday night, then,” said Harry,“and we can decide on additional meetings then...Come on, we’d better get going...”

He pulled out the Marauder’s Map again and checkedit carefully for signs of teachers on the seventh floor.He let them all leave in threes and fours, watchingtheir tiny dots anxiously to see that they returnedsafely to their dormitories: the Hufflepuffs to thebasement corridor that also led to the kitchens, theRavenclaws to a tower on the west side of the castle,and the Gryffindors along the corridor to the seventhfloor and the Fat Lady’s portrait.

“That was really, really good, Harry,” said Hermione,when finally it was just her, Harry, and Ron left.

“Yeah, it was!” said Ron enthusiastically, as theyslipped out of the door and watched it melt back intostone behind them. “Did you see me disarmHermione, Harry?”

“Only once,” said Hermione, stung. “I got you loadsmore than you got me —”

Page | 507Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I did not only get you once, I got you at least threetimes —”

“Well, if you’re counting the one where you trippedover your own feet and knocked the wand out of myhand —”

They argued all the way back to the common room,but Harry was not listening to them. He had one eyeon the Marauder’s Map, but he was also thinking ofhow Cho had said he made her nervous...

Page | 508Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE LION AND THE SERPENT

Harry felt as though he were carrying some kind oftalisman inside his chest over the following twoweeks, a glowing secret that supported him throughUmbridge’s classes and even made it possible for himto smile blandly as he looked into her horrible bulgingeyes. He and the D.A. were resisting her under hervery nose, doing the very thing that she and theMinistry most feared, and whenever he was supposedto be reading Wilbert Slinkhard’s book during herlessons he dwelled instead on satisfying memories oftheir most recent meetings, remembering how Nevillehad successfully disarmed Hermione, how ColinCreevey had mastered the Impediment Jinx afterthree meetings’ hard effort, how Parvati Patil hadproduced such a good Reductor Curse that she hadreduced the table carrying all the Sneakoscopes todust.

He was finding it almost impossible to fix a regularnight of the week for D.A. meetings, as they had toaccommodate three separate Quidditch teams’practices, which were often rearranged depending on

Page | 509Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

the weather conditions; but Harry was not sorryabout this, he had a feeling that it was probablybetter to keep the timing of their meetingsunpredictable. If anyone was watching them, it wouldbe hard to make out a pattern.

Hermione soon devised a very clever method ofcommunicating the time and date of the next meetingto all the members in case they needed to change it atshort notice, because it would look so suspicious ifpeople from different Houses were seen crossing theGreat Hall to talk to each other too often. She gaveeach of the members of the D.A. a fake Galleon (Ronbecame very excited when he saw the basket at first,convinced that she was actually giving out gold).

“You see the numerals around the edge of the coins?”Hermione said, holding one up for examination at theend of their fourth meeting. The coin gleamed fat andyellow in the light from the torches. “On real Galleonsthat’s just a serial number referring to the goblin whocast the coin. On these fake coins, though, thenumbers will change to reflect the time and date ofthe next meeting. The coins will grow hot when thedate changes, so if you’re carrying them in a pocketyou’ll be able to feel them. We take one each, andwhen Harry sets the date of the next meeting he’llchange the numbers on his coin, and because I’ve puta Protean Charm on them, they’ll all change to mimichis.”

A blank silence greeted Hermione’s words. She lookedaround at all the faces upturned to her, ratherdisconcerted.

“Well — I thought it was a good idea,” she saiduncertainly, “I mean, even if Umbridge asked us toturn out our pockets, there’s nothing fishy about

Page | 510Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

carrying a Galleon, is there? But ... well, if you don’twant to use them ...”

“You can do a Protean Charm?” said Terry Boot.

“Yes,” said Hermione.

“But that’s ... that’s N.E.W.T. standard, that is,” hesaid weakly.

“Oh,” said Hermione, trying to look modest. “Oh ...well ... yes, I suppose it is...”

“How come you’re not in Ravenclaw?” he demanded,staring at Hermione with something close to wonder.“With brains like yours?”

“Well, the Sorting Hat did seriously consider puttingme in Ravenclaw during my Sorting,” said Hermionebrightly, “but it decided on Gryffindor in the end. Sodoes that mean we’re using the Galleons?”

There was a murmur of assent and everybody movedforward to collect one from the basket. Harry lookedsideways at Hermione.

“You know what these remind me of?”

“No, what’s that?”

“The Death Eaters’ scars. Voldemort touches one ofthem, and all their scars burn, and they know they’vegot to join him.”

“Well ... yes,” said Hermione quietly. “That is where Igot the idea ... but you’ll notice I decided to engravethe date on bits of metal rather than on our members’skin...”

Page | 511Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah ... I prefer your way,” said Harry, grinning, ashe slipped his Galleon into his pocket. “I suppose theonly danger with these is that we might accidentallyspend them.”

“Fat chance,” said Ron, who was examining his ownfake Galleon with a slightly mournful air. “I haven’tgot any real Galleons to confuse it with.”

As the first Quidditch match of the season, Gryffindorversus Slytherin, drew nearer, their D.A. meetingswere put on hold because Angelina insisted on almostdaily practices. The fact that the Quidditch Cup hadnot been held for so long added considerably to theinterest and excitement surrounding the forthcominggame. The Ravenclaws and Hufflepuffs were taking alively interest in the outcome, for they, of course,would be playing both teams over the coming year;and the Heads of House of the competing teams,though they attempted to disguise it under a decentpretense of sportsmanship, were determined to seetheir side’s victory. Harry realized how muchProfessor McGonagall cared about beating Slytherinwhen she abstained from giving them homework inthe week leading up to the match.

“I think you’ve got enough to be getting on with at themoment,” she said loftily. Nobody could quite believetheir ears until she looked directly at Harry and Ronand said grimly, “I’ve become accustomed to seeingthe Quidditch Cup in my study, boys, and I reallydon’t want to have to hand it over to Professor Snape,so use the extra time to practice, won’t you?”

Snape was no less obviously partisan: He had bookedthe Quidditch pitch for Slytherin practice so oftenthat the Gryffindors had difficulty getting on it toplay. He was also turning a deaf ear to the manyreports of Slytherin attempts to hex GryffindorPage | 512Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

players in the corridors. When Alicia Spinnet turnedup in the hospital wing with her eyebrows growing sothick and fast that they obscured her vision andobstructed her mouth, Snape insisted that she musthave attempted a Hair-Thickening Charm on herselfand refused to listen to the fourteen eyewitnesses whoinsisted that they had seen the Slytherin Keeper,

Miles Bletchley, hit her from behind with a jinx whileshe worked in the library.

Harry felt optimistic about Gryffindor’s chances; theyhad, after all, never lost to Malfoy’s team. AdmittedlyRon was still not performing to Wood’s standard, buthe was working extremely hard to improve. Hisgreatest weakness was a tendency to lose confidencewhen he made a blunder; if he let in one goal hebecame flustered and was therefore likely to missmore. On the other hand, Harry had seen Ron makesome truly spectacular saves when he was on form:During one memorable practice, he had hung one-handed from his broom and kicked the Quaffle sohard away from the goal hoop that it soared thelength of the pitch and through the center hoop at theother end. The rest of the team felt this savecompared favorably with one made recently by BarryRyan, the Irish International Keeper, against Poland’stop Chaser, Ladislaw Zamojski. Even Fred had saidthat Ron might yet make him and George proud, andthat they were seriously considering admitting that hewas related to them, something he assured Ron theyhad been trying to deny for four years.

The only thing really worrying Harry was how muchRon was allowing the tactics of the Slytherin team toupset him before they even got onto the pitch. Harry,of course, had endured their snide comments formore than four years, so whispers of, “Hey, Potty, Iheard Warrington’s sworn to knock you off yourbroom on Saturday,” far from chilling his blood, madePage | 513Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

him laugh. “Warrington’s aim’s so pathetic I’d bemore worried if he was aiming for the person next tome,” he retorted, which made Ron and Hermionelaugh and wiped the smirk off Pansy Parkinson’s face.

But Ron had never endured a relentless campaign ofinsults, jeers, and intimidation. When Slytherins,some of them seventh years and considerably largerthan he was, muttered as they passed in thecorridors, “Got your bed booked in the hospital wing,Weasley?” he did not laugh, but turned a delicateshade of green. When Draco Malfoy imitated Rondropping the Quaffle (which he did whenever theywere within sight of each other), Ron’s ears glowedred and his hands shook so badly that he was likelyto drop whatever he was holding at the time too.

October extinguished itself in a rush of howling windsand driving rain and November arrived, cold as frozeniron, with hard frosts every morning and icy draftsthat bit at exposed hands and faces. The skies andthe ceiling of the Great Hall turned a pale, pearlygray, the mountains around Hogwarts becamesnowcapped, and the temperature in the castledropped so far that many students wore their thickprotective dragon skin gloves in the corridors betweenlessons.

The morning of the match dawned bright and cold.When Harry awoke he looked around at Ron’s bedand saw him sitting bolt upright, his arms around hisknees, staring fixedly into space.

“You all right?” said Harry.

Ron nodded but did not speak. Harry was remindedforcibly of the time that Ron had accidentally put aslug-vomiting charm on himself. He looked just as

Page | 514Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

pale and sweaty as he had done then, not to mentionas reluctant to open his mouth.

“You just need some breakfast,” Harry said bracingly.“C’mon.”

The Great Hall was filling up fast when they arrived,the talk louder and the mood more exuberant thanusual. As they passed the Slytherin table there wasan upsurge of noise; Harry looked around and sawthat nearly everyone there was wearing, in addition tothe usual green-and-silver scarves and hats, silverbadges in the shape of what seemed to be crowns. Forsome reason many of them waved at Ron, laughinguproariously. Harry tried to see what was written onthe badges as he walked by, but he was tooconcerned to get Ron past their table quickly to lingerlong enough to read them.

They received a rousing welcome at the Gryffindortable, where everyone was wearing red and gold, butfar from raising Ron’s spirits the cheers seemed tosap the last of his morale; he collapsed onto thenearest bench looking as though he were facing hisfinal meal.

“I must’ve been mental to do this,” he said in a croakywhisper. “Mental.”

“Don’t be thick,” said Harry firmly, passing him achoice of cereals. “You’re going to be fine. It’s normalto be nervous.”

“I’m rubbish,” croaked Ron. “I’m lousy. I can’t play tosave my life. What was I thinking?”

“Get a grip,” said Harry sternly. “Look at that saveyou made with your foot the other day, even Fred andGeorge said it was brilliant —”

Page | 515Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Ron turned a tortured face to Harry.

“That was an accident,” he whispered miserably. “Ididn’t mean to do it — I slipped off my broom whennone of you were looking and I was trying to get backon and I kicked the Quaffle by accident.”

“Well,” said Harry, recovering quickly from thisunpleasant surprise, “a few more accidents like thatand the game’s in the bag, isn’t it?”

Hermione and Ginny sat down opposite them wearingred-and-gold scarves, gloves, and rosettes.

“How’re you feeling?” Ginny asked Ron, who was nowstaring into the dregs of milk at the bottom of hisempty cereal bowl as though seriously consideringattempting to drown himself in them.

“He’s just nervous,” said Harry.

“Well, that’s a good sign, I never feel you perform aswell in exams if you’re not a bit nervous,” saidHermione heartily.

“Hello,” said a vague and dreamy voice from behindthem. Harry looked up: Luna Lovegood had driftedover from the Ravenclaw table. Many people werestaring at her and a few openly laughing andpointing; she had managed to procure a hat shapedlike a life-size lion’s head, which was perchedprecariously on her head.

“I’m supporting Gryffindor,” said Luna, pointingunnecessarily at her hat. “Look what it does...”

She reached up and tapped the hat with her wand. Itopened its mouth wide and gave an extremely realisticroar that made everyone in the vicinity jump.

Page | 516Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It’s good, isn’t it?” said Luna happily. “I wanted tohave it chewing up a serpent to represent Slytherin,you know, but there wasn’t time. Anyway ... goodluck, Ronald!”

She drifted away. They had not quite recovered fromthe shock of Luna’s hat before Angelina camehurrying toward them, accompanied by Katie andAlicia, whose eyebrows had mercifully been returnedto normal by Madam Pomfrey.

“When you’re ready,” she said, “we’re going to gostraight down to the pitch, check out conditions andchange.”

“We’ll be there in a bit,” Harry assured her. “Ron’sjust got to have some breakfast.”

It became clear after ten minutes, however, that Ronwas not capable of eating anything more and Harrythought it best to get him down to the changingrooms. As they rose from the table, Hermione got uptoo, and taking Harry’s arm, she drew him to oneside.

“Don’t let Ron see what’s on those Slytherins’badges,” she whispered urgently.

Harry looked questioningly at her, but she shook herhead warningly; Ron had just ambled over to them,looking lost and desperate.

“Good luck, Ron,” said Hermione, standing on tiptoeand kissing him on the cheek. “And you, Harry —”

Ron seemed to come to himself slightly as theywalked back across the Great Hall. He touched thespot on his face where Hermione had kissed him,looking puzzled, as though he was not quite sure

Page | 517Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

what had just happened. He seemed too distracted tonotice much around him, but Harry cast a curiousglance at the crown-shaped badges as they passedthe Slytherin table, and this time he made out thewords etched onto them:

WEASLEY

IS OUR KING

With an unpleasant feeling that this could meannothing good, he hurried Ron across the entrancehall, down the stone steps, and out into the icy air.

The frosty grass crunched under their feet as theyhurried down the sloping lawns toward the stadium.There was no wind at all and the sky was a uniformpearly white, which meant that visibility would begood without the drawback of direct sunlight in theeyes. Harry pointed out these encouraging factors toRon as they walked, but he was not sure that Ronwas listening.

Angelina had changed already and was talking to therest of the team when they entered. Harry and Ronpulled on their robes (Ron attempted to do his upback-to-front for several minutes before Alicia tookpity on him and went to help) and then sat down tolisten to the pre-match talk while the babble of voicesoutside grew steadily louder as the crowd camepouring out of the castle toward the pitch.

“Okay, Eve only just found out the final lineup forSlytherin,” said Angelina, consulting a piece ofparchment. “Last year’s Beaters, Derrick and Bole,have left now, but it looks as though Montague’sreplaced them with the usual gorillas, rather thananyone who can fly particularly well. They’re two

Page | 518Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

blokes called Crabbe and Goyle, I don’t know muchabout them —”

“We do,” said Harry and Ron together.

“Well, they don’t look bright enough to tell one end ofa broom from another,” said Angelina, pocketing herparchment, “but then I was always surprised Derrickand Bole managed to find their way onto the pitchwithout signposts.”

“Crabbe and Goyle are in the same mold,” Harryassured her.

They could hear hundreds of footsteps mounting thebanked benches of the spectators’ stands now. Somepeople were singing, though Harry could not makeout the words. He was starting to feel nervous, but heknew his butterflies were as nothing to Ron’s, whowas clutching his stomach and staring straight aheadagain, his jaw set and his complexion pale gray.

“It’s time,” said Angelina in a hushed voice, looking ather watch. “C’mon everyone ... good luck.”

The team rose, shouldered their brooms, andmarched in single file out of the changing room andinto the dazzling sunlight. A roar of sound greetedthem in which Harry could still hear singing, thoughit was muffled by the cheers and whistles.

The Slytherin team were standing waiting for them.They too were wearing those silver crown-shapedbadges. The new captain, Montague, was built alongthe same lines as Dudley, with massive forearms likehairy hams. Behind him lurked Crabbe and Goyle,almost as large, blinking stupidly in the sunlight,swinging their new Beaters’ bats. Malfoy stood to oneside, the sunlight gleaming on his white-blond head.Page | 519Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He caught Harry’s eye and smirked, tapping thecrown-shaped badge on his chest.

“Captains shake hands,” ordered the umpire, MadamHooch, as Angelina and Montague reached eachother. Harry could tell that Montague was trying tocrush Angelina’s fingers, though she did not wince.“Mount your brooms...”

Madam Hooch placed her whistle in her mouth andblew.

The balls were released and the fourteen players shotupward; out of the corner of his eye Harry saw Ronstreak off toward the goal hoops. He zoomed higher,dodging a Bludger, and set off on a wide lap of thepitch, gazing around for a glint of gold; on the otherside of the stadium, Draco Malfoy was doing exactlythe same.

“And it’s Johnson, Johnson with the Quaffle, what aplayer that girl is, I’ve been saying it for years but shestill won’t go out with me —”

“JORDAN!” yelled Professor McGonagall.

“Just a fun fact, Professor, adds a bit of interest —and she’s ducked Warrington, she’s passedMontague, she’s — ouch — been hit from behind by aBludger from Crabbe... Montague catches the Quaffle,Montague heading back up the pitch and — niceBludger there from George Weasley, that’s a Bludgerto the head for Montague, he drops the Quaffle,caught by Katie Bell, Katie Bell of Gryffindor reversepasses to Alicia Spinnet and Spinnet’s away —”

Lee Jordan’s commentary rang through the stadiumand Harry listened as hard as he could through the

Page | 520Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

wind whistling in his ears and the din of the crowd,all yelling and booing and singing —

“— dodges Warrington, avoids a Bludger — close call,Alicia — and the crowd are loving this, just listen tothem, what’s that they’re singing?”

And as Lee paused to listen the song rose loud andclear from the sea of green and silver in the Slytherinsection of the stands:

Weasley cannot save a thing,

He cannot block a single ring,

That’s why Slytherins all sing:

Weasley is our King.

Weasley was born in a bin,

He always lets the Quaffle in,

Weasley will make sure we win,

Weasley is our King.

“— and Alicia passes back to Angelina!” Lee shouted,and as Harry swerved, his insides boiling at what hehad just heard, he knew Lee was trying to drown outthe sound of the singing. “Come on now, Angelina —looks like she’s got just the Keeper to beat! — SHESHOOTS — SHE — aaaah ...”

Bletchley, the Slytherin Keeper, had saved the goal;he threw the Quaffle to Warrington who sped off withit, zigzagging in between Alicia and Katie; the singingfrom below grew louder and louder as he drew nearerand nearer Ron —

Weasley is our King,

Weasley is our King,

He always lets the Quaffle in,

Weasley is our King.

Page | 521Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry could not help himself: Abandoning his searchfor the Snitch, he turned his Firebolt toward Ron, alone figure at the far end of the pitch, hovering beforethe three goal hoops while the massive Warringtonpelted toward him ...

“— and it’s Warrington with the Quaffle, Warringtonheading for goal, he’s out of Bludger range with justthe Keeper ahead —”

A great swell of song rose from the Slytherin standsbelow:

Weasley cannot save a thing,

He cannot block a single ring ...

“— so it’s the first test for new Gryffindor Keeper,Weasley, brother of Beaters, Fred and George, and apromising new talent on the team — come on, Ron!”

But the scream of delight came from the Slytherinend: Ron had dived wildly, his arms wide, and theQuaffle had soared between them, straight throughRon’s central hoop.

“Slytherin score!” came Lee’s voice amid the cheeringand booing from the crowds below. “So that’s ten-nilto Slytherin — bad luck, Ron ...”

The Slytherins sang even louder:

WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN,

HE ALWAYS LETS THE QUAFFLE IN ...

“— and Gryffindor back in possession and it’s KatieBell tanking up the pitch —” cried Lee valiantly,though the singing was now so deafening that hecould hardly make himself heard above it.

Page | 522Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

WEASLEY WILL MAKE SURE WE WIN,

WEASLEY IS OUR KING ...

“Harry, WHAT ARE YOU DOING?” screamed Angelina,soaring past him to keep up with Katie. “GETGOING!”

Harry realized that he had been stationary in midairfor more than a minute, watching the progress of thematch without sparing a thought for the whereaboutsof the Snitch; horrified, he went into a dive andstarted circling the pitch again, staring around, tryingto ignore the chorus now thundering through thestadium:

WEASLEY IS OUR KING,

WEASLEY IS OUR KING ...

There was no sign of the Snitch anywhere he looked;Malfoy was still circling the stadium just like Harry.They passed midway around the pitch going inopposite directions and Harry heard Malfoy singingloudly,

WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN ...

“— and it’s Warrington again,” bellowed Lee, “whopasses to Pucey, Pucey’s off past Spinnet, come onnow Angelina, you can take him — turns out youcan’t — but nice Bludger from Fred Weasley, I mean,George Weasley, oh who cares, one of them anyway,and Warrington drops the Quaffle and Katie Bell — er— drops it too — so that’s Montague with the Quaffle,Slytherin Captain Montague takes the Quaffle, andhe’s off up the pitch, come on now Gryffindor, blockhim!”

Harry zoomed around the end of the stadium behindthe Slytherin goal hoops, willing himself not to look at

Page | 523Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

what was going on at Ron’s end; as he sped past theSlytherin Keeper, he heard Bletchley singing alongwith the crowd below,

WEASLEY CANNOT SAVE A THING ...

“— and Pucey’s dodged Alicia again, and he’s headingstraight for goal, stop it, Ron!”

Harry did not have to look to see what had happened:There was a terrible groan from the Gryffindor end,coupled with fresh screams and applause from theSlytherins. Looking down, Harry saw the pug-facedPansy Parkinson right at the front of the stands, herback to the pitch as she conducted the Slytherinsupporters who were roaring:

THAT’S WHY SLYTHERINS ALL SING:

WEASLEY IS OUR KING.

But twenty-nil was nothing, there was still time forGryffindor to catch up or catch the Snitch, a few goalsand they would be in the lead as usual, Harryassured himself, bobbing and weaving through theother players in pursuit of something shiny thatturned out to be Montague’s watch strap...

But Ron let in two more goals. There was an edge ofpanic in Harry’s desire to find the Snitch now. If hecould just get it soon and finish the game quickly ...

“— and Katie Bell of Gryffindor dodges Pucey, ducksMontague, nice swerve, Katie, and she throws toJohnson, Angelina Johnson takes the Quaffle, she’spast Warrington, she’s heading for goal, come on nowAngelina — GRYFFINDOR SCORE! It’s forty-ten, forty-ten to Slytherin and Pucey has the Quaffle...”

Page | 524Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry could hear Luna’s ludicrous lion hat roaringamidst the Gryffindor cheers and felt heartened; onlythirty points in it, that was nothing, they could pullback easily. Harry ducked a Bludger that Crabbe hadsent rocketing in his direction and resumed hisfrantic scouring of the pitch for the Snitch, keepingone eye on Malfoy in case he showed signs of havingspotted it, but Malfoy, like him, was continuing tosoar around the stadium, searching fruitlessly ...

“— Pucey throws to Warrington, Warrington toMontague, Montague back to Pucey — Johnsonintervenes, Johnson takes the Quaffle, Johnson toBell, this looks good — I mean bad — Bell’s hit by aBludger from Goyle of Slytherin and it’s Pucey inpossession again ...”

WEASLEY WAS BORN IN A BIN,

HE ALWAYS LETS THE QUAFFLE IN,

WEASLEY WILL MAKE SURE WE WIN —

But Harry had seen it at last: The tiny flutteringGolden Snitch was hovering feet from the ground atthe Slytherin end of the pitch.

He dived...

In a matter of seconds, Malfoy was streaking out ofthe sky on Harry’s left, a green-and-silver blur lyingflat on his broom...

The Snitch skirted the foot of one of the goal hoopsand scooted off toward the other side of the stands;its change of direction suited Malfoy, who was nearer.Harry pulled his Firebolt around, he and Malfoy werenow neck and neck ...

Page | 525Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Feet from the ground, Harry lifted his right hand fromhis broom, stretching toward the Snitch ... to hisright, Malfoy’s arm extended too, reaching, groping ...

It was over in two breathless, desperate, windsweptseconds — Harry’s fingers closed around the tiny,struggling ball — Malfoy’s fingernails scrabbled theback of Harry’s hand hopelessly — Harry pulled hisbroom upward, holding the struggling ball in hishand and the Gryffindor spectators screamed theirapproval...

They were saved, it did not matter that Ron had let inthose goals, nobody would remember as long asGryffindor had won —

WHAM

A Bludger hit Harry squarely in the small of the backand he flew forward off his broom; luckily he was onlyfive or six feet above the ground, having dived so lowto catch the Snitch, but he was winded all the sameas he landed flat on his back on the frozen pitch. Heheard Madam Hooch’s shrill whistle, an uproar in thestands compounded of catcalls, angry yells andjeering, a thud, then Angelina’s frantic voice.

“Are you all right?”

“ ’Course I am,” said Harry grimly, taking her handand allowing her to pull him to his feet. MadamHooch was zooming toward one of the Slytherinplayers above him, though he could not see who itwas at this angle.

“It was that thug, Crabbe,” said Angelina angrily. “Hewhacked the Bludger at you the moment he saw you’dgot the Snitch — but we won, Harry, we won!”

Page | 526Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry heard a snort from behind him and turnedaround, still holding the Snitch tightly in his hand:Draco Malfoy had landed close by; white-faced withfury, he was still managing to sneer.

“Saved Weasley’s neck, haven’t you?” he said toHarry. “I’ve never seen a worse Keeper ... but then hewas born in a bin... Did you like my lyrics, Potter?”

Harry did not answer; he turned away to meet therest of the team who were now landing one by one,yelling and punching the air in triumph, all exceptRon, who had dismounted from his broom over by thegoalposts and was making his way slowly back to thechanging rooms alone.

“We wanted to write another couple of verses!” Malfoycalled, as Katie and Alicia hugged Harry. “But wecouldn’t find rhymes for fat and ugly — we wanted tosing about his mother, see —”

“Talk about sour grapes,” said Angelina, castingMalfoy a disgusted look.

“— we couldn’t fit in useless loser either — for hisfather, you know —”

Fred and George had realized what Malfoy was talkingabout. Halfway through shaking Harry’s hand theystiffened, looking around at Malfoy.

“Leave it,” said Angelina at once, taking Fred by thearm. “Leave it, Fred, let him yell, he’s just sore helost, the jumped-up little —”

“— but you like the Weasleys, don’t you, Potter?” saidMalfoy, sneering. “Spend holidays there andeverything, don’t you? Can’t see how you stand the

Page | 527Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

stink, but I suppose when you’ve been dragged up byMuggles even the Weasleys’ hovel smells okay —”

Harry grabbed hold of George; meanwhile it wastaking the combined efforts of Angelina, Alicia, andKatie to stop Fred leaping on Malfoy, who waslaughing openly. Harry looked around for MadamHooch, but she was still berating Crabbe for his illegalBludger attack.

“Or perhaps,” said Malfoy, leering as he backed away,“you can remember what your mother’s house stanklike, Potter, and Weasley’s pigsty reminds you of it —”

Harry was not aware of releasing George, all he knewwas that a second later both of them were sprinting atMalfoy. He had completely forgotten the fact that allthe teachers were watching: All he wanted to do wascause Malfoy as much pain as possible. With no timeto draw out his wand, he merely drew back the fistclutching the Snitch and sank it as hard as he couldinto Malfoy’s stomach —

“Harry! HARRY! GEORGE! 1VO!”

He could hear girls’ voices screaming, Malfoy yelling,George swearing, a whistle blowing, and the bellowingof the crowd around him, but he did not care, notuntil somebody in the vicinity yelled “IMPEDIMENTA!”and only when he was knocked over backward by theforce of the spell did he abandon the attempt topunch every inch of Malfoy he could reach...

“What do you think you’re doing?” screamed MadamHooch, as Harry leapt to his feet again; it was shewho had hit him with the Impediment Jinx. She washolding her whistle in one hand and a wand in theother, her broom lay abandoned several feet away.Malfoy was curled up on the ground, whimpering andPage | 528Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

moaning, his nose bloody; George was sporting aswollen lip; Fred was still being forcibly restrained bythe three Chasers, and Crabbe was cackling in thebackground. “I’ve never seen behavior like it — backup to the castle, both of you, and straight to yourHead of House’s office! Go! Now\”

Harry and George marched off the pitch, bothpanting, neither saying a word to each other. Thehowling and jeering of the crowd grew fainter andfainter until they reached the entrance hall, wherethey could hear nothing except the sound of their ownfootsteps. Harry became aware that something wasstill struggling in his right hand, the knuckles ofwhich he had bruised against Malfoy’s jaw; lookingdown he saw the Snitch’s silver wings protrudingfrom between his fingers, struggling for release.

They had barely reached the door of ProfessorMcGonagall’s office when she came marching alongthe corridor behind them. She was wearing aGryffindor scarf, but tore it from her throat withshaking hands as she strode toward them, lookinglivid.

“In!” she said furiously, pointing to the door. Harryand George entered. She strode around behind herdesk and faced them, quivering with rage as shethrew the Gryffindor scarf aside onto the floor.

“Well?” she said. “I have never seen such a disgracefulexhibition. Two onto one! Explain yourselves!”

“Malfoy provoked us,” said Harry stiffly.

“Provoked you?” shouted Professor McGonagall,slamming a fist onto her desk so that her tartanbiscuit tin slid sideways off it and burst open, litteringthe floor with Ginger Newts. “He’d just lost, hadn’t he,

Page | 529Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

of course he wanted to provoke you! But what onearth he can have said that justified what you two —”

“He insulted my parents,” snarled George. “AndHarry’s mother.”

“But instead of leaving it to Madam Hooch to sort out,you two decided to give an exhibition of Muggledueling, did you?” bellowed Professor McGonagall.“Have you any idea what you’ve — ?”

“Hem, hem.”

George and Harry both spun around. DoloresUmbridge was standing in the doorway wrapped in agreen tweed cloak that greatly enhanced herresemblance to a giant toad, and smiling in thehorribly sickly, ominous way that Harry had come toassociate with imminent misery.

“May I help, Professor McGonagall?” asked ProfessorUmbridge in her most poisonously sweet voice.

Blood rushed into Professor McGonagall’s face.

“Help?” she repeated in a constricted voice. “What doyou mean, ‘help’?”

Professor Umbridge moved forward into the office, stillsmiling her sickly smile.

“Why, I thought you might be grateful for a little extraauthority.”

Harry would not have been surprised to see sparks flyfrom Professor McGonagall’s nostrils.

“You thought wrong,” she said, turning her back onUmbridge. “Now, you two had better listen closely. I

Page | 530Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

do not care what provocation Malfoy offered you, I donot care if he insulted every family member youpossess, your behavior was disgusting and I amgiving each of you a week’s worth of detention! Do notlook at me like that, Potter, you deserve it! And ifeither of you ever —”

“Hem, hem.”

Professor McGonagall closed her eyes as thoughpraying for patience as she turned her face towardProfessor Umbridge again.

“ Yes?”

“I think they deserve rather more than detentions,”said Umbridge, smiling still more broadly.

Professor McGonagall’s eyes flew open. “Butunfortunately,” she said, with an attempt at areciprocal smile that made her look as though shehad lockjaw, “it is what I think that counts, as theyare in my House, Dolores.”

“Well, actually, Minerva,” simpered Umbridge, “I thinkyou’ll find that what I think does count. Now, whereis it? Cornelius just sent it... I mean,” she gave a littlefalse laugh as she rummaged in her handbag, “theMinister just sent it... Ah yes ...”

She had pulled out a piece of parchment that she nowunfurled, clearing her throat fussily before starting toread what it said.

“Hem, hem ... ‘Educational Decree Number Twenty-five ...’”

“Not another one!” exclaimed Professor McGonagallviolently.

Page | 531Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, yes,” said Umbridge, still smiling. “As a matterof fact, Minerva, it was you who made me see that weneeded a further amendment... You remember howyou overrode me, when I was unwilling to allow theGryffindor Quidditch team to re-form? How you tookthe case to Dumbledore, who insisted that the teambe allowed to play? Well, now, I couldn’t have that. Icontacted the Minister at once, and he quite agreedwith me that the High Inquisitor has to have thepower to strip pupils of privileges, or she — that is tosay, I — would have less authority than commonteachers! And you see now, don’t you, Minerva, howright I was in attempting to stop the Gryffindor teamre-forming? Dreadful tempers ... Anyway, I wasreading out our amendment ... hem, hem ... The HighInquisitor will henceforth have supreme authorityover all punishments, sanctions, and removal ofprivileges pertaining to the students of Hogwarts, andthe power to alter such punishments, sanctions, andremovals of privileges as may have been ordered byother staff members. Signed, Cornelius Fudge,Minister of Magic, Order of Merlin First Class, etc.,etc...’”

She rolled up the parchment and put it back into herhandbag, still smiling.

“So ... I really think I will have to ban these two fromplaying Quidditch ever again,” she said, looking fromHarry to George and back again.

Harry felt the Snitch fluttering madly in his hand.

“Ban us?” he said, and his voice sounded strangelydistant. “From playing ... ever again?”

“Yes, Mr. Potter, I think a lifelong ban ought to do thetrick,” said Umbridge, her smile widening still furtheras she watched him struggle to comprehend what she

Page | 532Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

had said. “You and Mr. Weasley here. And I think, tobe safe, this young man’s twin ought to be stoppedtoo — if his teammates had not restrained him, I feelsure he would have attacked young Mr. Malfoy aswell. I will want their broomsticks confiscated, ofcourse; I shall keep them safely in my office, to makesure there is no infringement of my ban. But I am notunreasonable, Professor McGonagall,” she continued,turning back to Professor McGonagall who was nowstanding as still as though carved from ice, staring ather. “The rest of the team can continue playing, I sawno signs of violence from any of them. Well ... goodafternoon to you.” And with a look of the utmostsatisfaction Umbridge left the room, leaving ahorrified silence in her wake.

“Banned,” said Angelina in a hollow voice, late thatevening in the common room. “Banned. No Seekerand no Beaters ... What on earth are we going to do?”

It did not feel as though they had won the match atall. Everywhere Harry looked there were disconsolateand angry faces; the team themselves were slumpedaround the fire, all apart from Ron, who had not beenseen since the end of the match.

“It’s just so unfair,” said Alicia numbly. “I mean, whatabout Crabbe and that Bludger he hit after thewhistle had been blown? Has she banned him?”

“No,” said Ginny miserably; she and Hermione weresitting on either side of Harry. “He just got lines, Iheard Montague laughing about it at dinner.”

“And banning Fred when he didn’t even do anything!”said Alicia furiously, pummeling her knee with herfist.

Page | 533Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It’s not my fault I didn’t,” said Fred, with a very uglylook on his face. “I would’ve pounded the littlescumbag to a pulp if you three hadn’t been holdingme back.”

Harry stared miserably at the dark window. Snow wasfalling. The Snitch he had caught earlier was nowzooming around and around the common room;people were watching its progress as thoughhypnotized and Crookshanks was leaping from chairto chair, trying to catch it.

“I’m going to bed,” said Angelina, getting slowly to herfeet.

“Maybe this will all turn out to have been a baddream... Maybe I’ll wake up tomorrow and find wehaven’t played yet...”

She was soon followed by Alicia and Katie. Fred andGeorge sloped off to bed some time later, glowering ateveryone they passed, and Ginny went not long afterthat. Only Harry and Hermione were left beside thefire.

“Have you seen Ron?” Hermione asked in a low voice.Harry shook his head.

“I think he’s avoiding us,” said Hermione. “Where doyou think he — ?”

But at that precise moment, there was a creakingsound behind them as the Fat Lady swung forwardand Ron came clambering through the portrait hole.He was very pale indeed and there was snow in hishair. When he saw Harry and Hermione he stoppeddead in his tracks.

Page | 534Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Where have you been?” said Hermione anxiously,springing up.

“Walking,” Ron mumbled. He was still wearing hisQuidditch things.

“You look frozen,” said Hermione. “Come and sitdown!”

Ron walked to the fireside and sank into the chairfarthest from Harry’s, not looking at him. The stolenSnitch zoomed over their heads.

“I’m sorry,” Ron mumbled, looking at his feet.

“What for?” said Harry.

“For thinking I can play Quidditch,” said Ron. “I’mgoing to resign first thing tomorrow.”

“If you resign,” said Harry testily, “there’ll only bethree players left on the team.” And when Ron lookedpuzzled, he said, “I’ve been given a lifetime ban. So’veFred and George.”

“What?” Ron yelped.

Hermione told him the full story; Harry could not bearto tell it again. When she had finished, Ron lookedmore anguished than ever.

“This is all my fault —”

“You didn’t make me punch Malfoy,” said Harryangrily.

“— if I wasn’t so lousy at Quidditch —”

“— it’s got nothing to do with that —”

Page | 535Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“— it was that song that wound me up —”

“— it would’ve wound anyone up —”

Hermione got up and walked to the window, awayfrom the argument, watching the snow swirling downagainst the pane.

“Look, drop it, will you!” Harry burst out. “It’s badenough without you blaming yourself for everything!”

Ron said nothing but sat gazing miserably at thedamp hem of his robes. After a while he said in a dullvoice, “This is the worst I’ve ever felt in my life.”

“Join the club,” said Harry bitterly.

“Well,” said Hermione, her voice trembling slightly. “Ican think of one thing that might cheer you both up.”

“Oh yeah?” said Harry skeptically.

“Yeah,” said Hermione, turning away from the pitch-black, snow-flecked window, a broad smile spreadingacross her face. “Hagrid’s back.”

Page | 536Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



HAGRID’S TALE

Harry sprinted up to the boys’ dormitory to fetch theInvisibility Cloak and the Marauder’s Map from histrunk; he was so quick that he and Ron were ready toleave at least five minutes before Hermione hurriedback down from the girls’ dormitories, wearing scarf,gloves, and one of her own knobbly elf hats.

“Well, it’s cold out there!” she said defensively, as Ronclicked his tongue impatiently.

They crept through the portrait hole and coveredthemselves hastily in the cloak — Ron had grown somuch he now needed to crouch to prevent his feetshowing — then, moving slowly and cautiously, theyproceeded down the many staircases, pausing atintervals to check the map for signs of Filch or Mrs.Norris. They were lucky; they saw nobody but NearlyHeadless Nick, who was gliding along absentmindedlyhumming something that sounded horribly like“Weasley Is Our King.” They crept across the entrancehall and then out into the silent, snowy grounds.

With a great leap of his heart, Harry saw little goldensquares of light ahead and smoke coiling up from

Page | 537Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid’s chimney. He set off at a quick march, theother two jostling and bumping along behind him,and they crunched excitedly through the thickeningsnow until at last they reached the wooden front door;when Harry raised his fist and knocked three times, adog started barking frantically inside.

“Hagrid, it’s us!” Harry called through the keyhole.

“Shoulda known!” said a gruff voice.

They beamed at one another under the cloak; theycould tell that Hagrid’s voice was pleased. “Bin homethree seconds ... Out the way, Fang ... Out the way,yeh dozy dog ...”

The bolt was drawn back, the door creaked open, andHagrid’s head appeared in the gap.

Hermione screamed.

“Merlin’s beard, keep it down!” said Hagrid hastily,staring wildly over their heads. “Under that cloak, areyeh? Well, get in, get in!”

“I’m sorry!” Hermione gasped, as the three of themsqueezed past Hagrid into the house and pulled thecloak off themselves so he could see them. “I just —oh, Hagrid).”

“It’s nuthin’, it’s nuthin’!” said Hagrid hastily,shutting the door behind them and hurrying to closeall the curtains, but Hermione continued to gaze upat him in horror.

Hagrid’s hair was matted with congealed blood, andhis left eye had been reduced to a puffy slit amid amass of purple-and-black bruises. There were manycuts on his face and hands, some of them still

Page | 538Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

bleeding, and he was moving gingerly, which madeHarry suspect broken ribs. It was obvious that he hadonly just got home; a thick black traveling cloak layover the back of a chair and a haversack large enoughto carry several small children leaned against the wallinside the door. Hagrid himself, twice the size of anormal man and three times as broad, was nowlimping over to the fire and placing a copper kettleover it.

“What happened to you?” Harry demanded, whileFang danced around them all, trying to lick theirfaces.

“Told yeh, nuthinsaid Hagrid firmly. “Want acuppa?”

“Come off it,” said Ron, “you’re in a right state!”

“I’m tellin’yeh, I’m fine,” said Hagrid, straighteningup and turning to beam at them all, but wincing.“Blimey, it’s good ter see you three again — had goodsummers, did yeh?”

“Hagrid, you’ve been attacked!” said Ron.

“Fer the las’ time, it’s nuthin’!” said Hagrid firmly.

“Would you say it was nothing if one of us turned upwith a pound of mince instead of a face?” Rondemanded.

“You ought to go and see Madam Pomfrey, Hagrid,”said Hermione anxiously. “Some of those cuts looknasty.”

“I’m dealin’ with it, all righ’?” said Hagrid repressively.

Page | 539Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He walked across to the enormous wooden table thatstood in the middle of his cabin and twitched aside atea towel that had been lying on it. Underneath was araw, bloody, green-tinged steak slightly larger thanthe average car tire.

“You’re not going to eat that, are you, Hagrid?” saidRon, leaning in for a closer look. “It looks poisonous.”

“It’s s’posed ter look like that, it’s dragon meat,”Hagrid said. “An’ I didn’ get it ter eat.”

He picked up the steak and slapped it over the leftside of his face. Greenish blood trickled down into hisbeard as he gave a soft moan of satisfaction.

“Tha’s better. It helps with the stingin’, yeh know.”

“So are you going to tell us what’s happened to you?”Harry asked.

“Can’, Harry. Top secret. More’n me job’s worth tertell yeh that.”

“Did the giants beat you up, Hagrid?” asked Hermionequietly.

Hagrid’s fingers slipped on the dragon steak, and itslid squelchily onto his chest.

“Giants?” said Hagrid, catching the steak before itreached his belt and slapping it back over his face.“Who said anythin’ abou’ giants? Who yeh bin talkin’to? Who’s told yeh what I’ve — who’s said I’ve bin —eh?”

“We guessed,” said Hermione apologetically.

Page | 540Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, yeh did, did yeh?” said Hagrid, fixing her sternlywith the eye that was not hidden by the steak.

“It was kind of ... obvious,” said Ron. Harry nodded.

Hagrid glared at them, then snorted, threw the steakonto the table again and strode back to the kettle,which was now whistling.

“Never known kids like you three fer knowin’ more’nyeh oughta,” he muttered, splashing boiling waterinto three of his bucket-shaped mugs. “An’ I’m notcomplimentin’ yeh, neither. Nosy, some’d call it.Interferin’.”

But his beard twitched.

“So you have been to look for giants?” said Harry,grinning as he sat down at the table.

Hagrid set tea in front of each of them, sat down,picked up his steak again, and slapped it back overhis face.

“Yeah, all righ’,” he grunted, “I have.”

“And you found them?” said Hermione in a hushedvoice.

“Well, they’re not that difficult ter find, ter be honest,”said Hagrid. “Pretty big, see.”

“Where are they?” said Ron.

“Mountains,” said Hagrid unhelpfully.

“So why don’t Muggles — ?”

Page | 541Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“They do,” said Hagrid darkly. “O’ny their deaths arealways put down ter mountaineerin’ accidents, aren’they?”

He adjusted the steak a little so that it covered theworst of the bruising.

“Come on, Hagrid, tell us what you’ve been up to!”said Ron. “Tell us about being attacked by the giantsand Harry can tell you about being attacked by thedementors —”

Hagrid choked in his mug and dropped his steak atthe same time; a large quantity of spit, tea, anddragon blood was sprayed over the table as Hagridcoughed and spluttered and the steak slid, with a softsplat, onto the floor.

“Whadda yeh mean, attacked by dementors?” growledHagrid.

“Didn’t you know?” Hermione asked him, wide-eyed.

“I don’ know anything that’s been happenin’ since Ileft. I was on a secret mission, wasn’ I, didn’ wan’owls followin’ me all over the place — ruddydementors! Yeh’re not serious?”

“Yeah, I am, they turned up in Little Whinging andattacked my cousin and me, and then the Ministry ofMagic expelled me —”

“WHAT?”

“— and I had to go to a hearing and everything, buttell us about the giants first.”

“You were expelled?”

Page | 542Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Tell us about your summer and I’ll tell you aboutmine.”

Hagrid glared at him through his one open eye. Harrylooked right back, an expression of innocentdetermination on his face.

“Oh, all righ’,” Hagrid said in a resigned voice.

He bent down and tugged the dragon steak out ofFang’s mouth.

“Oh, Hagrid, don’t, it’s not hygien —” Hermionebegan, but Hagrid had already slapped the meat backover his swollen eye. He took another fortifying gulp oftea and then said, “Well, we set off righ’ after termended —”

“Madame Maxime went with you, then?” Hermioneinterjected.

“Yeah, tha’s right,” said Hagrid, and a softenedexpression appeared on the few inches of face thatwere not obscured by beard or green steak. “Yeah, itwas jus’ the pair of us. An’ I’ll tell yeh this, she’s notafraid of roughin’ it, Olympe. Yeh know, she’s a fine,well-dressed woman, an’ knowin’ where we was goin’ Iwondered ’ow she’d feel abou’ clamberin’ overboulders an’ sleepin’ in caves an’ tha’, bu’ she nevercomplained once.”

“You knew where you were going?” Harry asked. “Youknew where the giants were?”

“Well, Dumbledore knew, an’ he told us,” said Hagrid.

“Are they hidden?” asked Ron. “Is it a secret, wherethey are?”

Page | 543Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Not really,” said Hagrid, shaking his shaggy head.

“It’s jus’ that mos’ wizards aren’ bothered where theyare, s’ long as it’s a good long way away. But wherethey are’s very difficult ter get ter, fer humansanyway, so we needed Dumbledore’s instructions.Took us abou’ a month ter get there —”

“A month?” said Ron, as though he had never heard ofa journey lasting such a ridiculously long time. “But— why couldn’t you just grab a Portkey orsomething?”

There was an odd expression in Hagrid’s unobscuredeye as he squinted at Ron; it was almost pitying.

“We’re bein’ watched, Ron,” he said gruffly.

“What d’you mean?”

“Yeh don’ understand,” said Hagrid. “The Ministry’skeepin’ an eye on Dumbledore an’ anyone theyreckon’s in league with him, an’ —”

“We know about that,” said Harry quickly, keen tohear the rest of Hagrid’s story. “We know about theMinistry watching Dumbledore —”

“So you couldn’t use magic to get there?” asked Ron,looking thunderstruck. “You had to act like Mugglesall the way?”

“Well, not exactly all the way,” said Hagrid cagily. “Wejus’ had ter be careful, ’cause Olympe an’ me, westick out a bit —”

Ron made a stifled noise somewhere between a snortand a sniff and hastily took a gulp of tea.

Page | 544Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“— so we’re not hard ter follow. We was pretendin’ wewas goin’ on holiday together, so we got inter Francean’ we made like we was headin’ fer where Olympe’sschool is, ’cause we knew we was bein’ tailed bysomeone from the Ministry. We had to go slow, ’causeI’m not really s’posed ter use magic an’ we knew theMinistry’d be lookin’ fer a reason ter run us in. Butwe managed ter give the berk tailin’ us the slip roundabou’ Dee-John —”

“Ooooh, Dijon?” said Hermione excitedly. “I’ve beenthere on holiday, did you see — ?”

She fell silent at the look on Ron’s face.

“We chanced a bit o’ magic after that, and it wasn’ abad journey. Ran inter a couple o’ mad trolls on thePolish border, an’ I had a sligh’ disagreement with avampire in a pub in Minsk, but apart from tha’,couldn’t’a bin smoother.

“An’ then we reached the place, an’ we startedtrekkin’ up through the mountains, lookin’ fer signsof ’em ...

“We had ter lay off the magic once we got near ’em.Partly ’cause they don’ like wizards an’ we didn’ wantter put their backs up too soon, and partly ’causeDumbledore had warned us You-Know-Who wasbound ter be after the giants an’ all. Said it was oddson he’d sent a messenger off ter them already. Told uster be very careful of drawin’ attention ter ourselvesas we got nearer in case there was Death Eatersaround.”

Hagrid paused for a long draft of tea.

“Go on!” said Harry urgently.

Page | 545Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Found ’em,” said Hagrid baldly. “Went over a ridgeone nigh’ an’ there they was, spread ou’ underneathus. Little fires burnin’ below an’ huge shadows ... Itwas like watchin’ bits o’ the mountain movin’.”

“How big are they?” asked Ron in a hushed voice.

“ T3out twenty feet,” said Hagrid casually. “Some o’the bigger ones mighta bin twenty-five.”

“And how many were there?” asked Harry.

“I reckon abou’ seventy or eighty,” said Hagrid.

“Is that all?” said Hermione.

“Yep,” said Hagrid sadly, “eighty left, an’ there wasloads once, musta bin a hundred diff’rent tribes fromall over the world. But they’ve bin dyin’ out fer ages.Wizards killed a few, o’ course, but mostly they killedeach other, an’ now they’re dyin’ out faster than ever.They’re not made ter live bunched up together liketha’. Dumbledore says it’s our fault, it was thewizards who forced ’em to go an’ made ’em live a goodlong way from us an’ they had no choice but ter sticktogether fer their own protection.”

“So,” said Harry, “you saw them and then what?”

“Well, we waited till morning, didn’ want ter gosneakin’ up on ’em in the dark, fer our own safety,”said Hagrid. “ ’Bout three in the mornin’ they fellasleep jus’ where they was sittin’. We didn’ dare sleep.Fer one thing, we wanted ter make sure none of ’emwoke up an’ came up where we were, an’ fer another,the snorin’ was unbelievable. Caused an avalanchenear mornin’.

“Anyway, once it was light we wen’ down ter see ’em.”

Page | 546Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Just like that?” said Ron, looking awestruck. “Youjust walked right into a giant camp?”

“Well, Dumbledore’d told us how ter do it,” saidHagrid. “Give the Gurg gifts, show some respect, yehknow.”

“Give the what gifts?” asked Harry.

“Oh, the Gurg — means the chief.”

“How could you tell which one was the Gurg?” askedRon.

Hagrid grunted in amusement.

“No problem,” he said. “He was the biggest, theugliest, an’ the laziest. Sittin’ there waitin’ ter bebrought food by the others. Dead goats an’ such like.Name o’ Karkus. I’d put him at twenty-two, twenty-three feet, an’ the weight of a couple o’ bull elephants.Skin like rhino hide an’ all.”

“And you just walked up to him?” said Hermionebreathlessly.

“Well ... down ter him, where he was lyin’ in thevalley. They was in this dip between four pretty highmountains, see, beside a mountain lake, an’ Karkuswas lyin’ by the lake roarin’ at the others ter feed himan’ his wife. Olympe an’ I went down themountainside —”

“But didn’t they try and kill you when they saw you?”asked Ron incredulously.

“It was def’nitely on some of their minds,” saidHagrid, shrugging, “but we did what Dumbledore toldus ter do, which was ter hold our gift up high an’

Page | 547Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

keep our eyes on the Gurg an’ ignore the others. Sotha’s what we did. An’ the rest of ’em went quiet an’watched us pass an’ we got right up ter Karkus’s feetan’ we bowed an’ put our present down in front o’him.”

“What do you give a giant?” asked Ron eagerly.

“Food?”

“Nah, he can get food all righ’ fer himself,” saidHagrid. “We took him magic. Giants like magic, jus’don’t like us usin’ it against ’em. Anyway, that firs’day we gave him a branch o’ Gubraithian fire.”

Hermione said “wow” softly, but Harry and Ron bothfrowned in puzzlement.

“A branch of — ?”

“Everlasting fire,” said Hermione irritably, “you oughtto know that by now, Professor Flitwick’s mentioned itat least twice in class!”

“Well anyway,” said Hagrid quickly, intervening beforeRon could answer back, “Dumbledore’d bewitchedthis branch to burn evermore, which isn’ somethin’any wizard could do, an’ so I lies it down in the snowby Karkus’s feet and says, ‘A gift to the Gurg of thegiants from Albus Dumbledore, who sends hisrespectful greetings.’ ”

“And what did Karkus say?” asked Harry eagerly.“Nothin’,” said Hagrid. “Didn’ speak English.”

“You’re kidding!”

“Didn’ matter,” said Hagrid imperturbably,“Dumbledore had warned us tha’ migh’ happen.

Page | 548Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Karkus knew enough to yell fer a couple o’ giants whoknew our lingo an’ they translated fer us.”

“And did he like the present?” asked Ron.

“Oh yeah, it went down a storm once they understoodwhat it was,” said Hagrid, turning his dragon steakover to press the cooler side to his swollen eye. “Verypleased. So then I said, Altars Dumbledore asks theGurg to speak with his messenger when he returnstomorrow with another gift.’ ”

“Why couldn’t you speak to them that day?” askedHermione.

“Dumbledore wanted us ter take it very slow,” saidHagrid. “Let ’em see we kept our promises. We’ll comeback tomorrow with another present, an’ then we docome back with another present — gives a goodimpression, see? An’ gives them time ter test out thefirs’ present an’ find out it’s a good one, an’ get ’emeager fer more. In any case, giants like Karkus —overload ’em with information an’ they’ll kill yeh jus’to simplify things. So we bowed outta the way an’went off an’ found ourselves a nice little cave terspend that night in, an’ the followin’ mornin’ we wentback an’ this time we found Karkus sittin’ up waitin’fer us lookin’ all eager.”

“And you talked to him?”

“Oh yeah. Firs’ we presented him with a nice battlehelmet — goblin-made an’ indestructible, yeh know —an’ then we sat down an’ we talked.”

“What did he say?”

“Not much,” said Hagrid. “Listened mostly. But therewere good signs. He’d heard o’ Dumbledore, heard

Page | 549Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

he’d argued against the killin’ of the last giants inBritain. Karkus seemed ter be quite int’rested in whatDumbledore had ter say. An’ a few o’ the others,’specially the ones who had some English, theygathered round an’ listened too. We were hopefulwhen we left that day. Promised ter come back nextday with another present.

“But that night it all wen’ wrong.”

“What d’you mean?” said Ron quickly.

“Well, like I say, they’re not meant ter live together,giants,” said Hagrid sadly. “Not in big groups likethat. They can’ help themselves, they half kill eachother every few weeks. The men fight each other an’the women fight each other, the remnants of the oldtribes fight each other, an’ that’s even withoutsquabbles over food an’ the best fires an’ sleepin’spots. Yeh’d think, seein’ as how their whole race isabou’ finished, they’d lay off each other, but ...”

Hagrid sighed deeply

“That night a fight broke out, we saw it from themouth of our cave, lookin’ down on the valley. Wenton fer hours, yeh wouldn’ believe the noise. An’ whenthe sun came up the snow was scarlet an’ his headwas lyin’ at the bottom o’ the lake.”

“Whose head?” gasped Hermione.

“Karkus’s,” said Hagrid heavily. “There was a newGurg, Golgomath.” He sighed deeply. “Well, we hadn’bargained on a new Gurg two days after we’d madefriendly contact with the firs’ one, an’ we had a funnyfeelin’ Golgomath wouldn’ be so keen ter listen to us,but we had ter try.”

Page | 550Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You went to speak to him?” asked Ron incredulously.“After you’d watched him rip off another giant’shead?”

“ ’Course we did,” said Hagrid, “we hadn’ gone all thatway ter give up after two days! We wen’ down with thenext present we’d meant ter give ter Karkus.

“I knew it was no go before I’d opened me mouth. Hewas sitting there wearin’ Karkus’s helmet, leerin’ atus as we got nearer. He’s massive, one o’ the biggestones there. Black hair an’ matchin’ teeth an’ anecklace o’ bones. Human-lookin’ bones, some of ’em.Well, I gave it a go — held out a great roll o’ dragonskin — an’ said A gift fer the Gurg of the giants —’Nex’ thing I knew, I was hangin’ upside down in theair by me feet, two of his mates had grabbed me.”

Hermione clapped her hands to her mouth.

“How did you get out of that?” asked Harry.

“Wouldn’ta done if Olympe hadn’ bin there,” saidHagrid. “She pulled out her wand an’ did some o’ thefastes’ spellwork I’ve ever seen. Ruddy marvelous. Hitthe two holdin’ me right in the eyes withConjunctivitus Curses an’ they dropped mestraightaway — bu’ we were in trouble then, ’causewe’d used magic against ’em, an’ that’s what giantshate abou’ wizards. We had ter leg it an’ we knewthere was no way we was going ter be able ter marchinter camp again.”

“Blimey, Hagrid,” said Ron quietly.

“So how come it’s taken you so long to get home if youwere only there for three days?” asked Hermione.

Page | 551Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“We didn’ leave after three days!” said Hagrid, lookingoutraged. “Dumbledore was relyin’ on us!”

“But you’ve just said there was no way you could goback!”

“Not by daylight, we couldn’, no. We just had terrethink a bit. Spent a couple o’ days lyin’ low up inthe cave an’ watchin’. An’ wha’ we saw wasn’ good.”

“Did he rip off more heads?” asked Hermione,sounding squeamish.

“No,” said Hagrid. “I wish he had.”

“What d’you mean?”

“I mean we soon found out he didn’ object ter allwizards —just us.”

“Death Eaters?” said Harry quickly.

“Yep,” said Hagrid darkly. “Couple of ’em were visitin’him ev’ry day, bringin’ gifts ter the Gurg, an’ he wasn’dangling them upside down.”

“How d’you know they were Death Eaters?” said Ron.

“Because I recognized one of ’em,” Hagrid growled.“Macnair, remember him? Bloke they sent ter killBuckbeak? Maniac, he is. Likes killin’ as much asGolgomath, no wonder they were gettin’ on so well.”

“So Macnair’s persuaded the giants to join You-Know-Who?” said Hermione desperately.

“Hold yer hippogriffs, I haven’ finished me story yet!”said Hagrid indignantly, who, considering he had notwanted to tell them anything in the first place, now

Page | 552Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

seemed to be rather enjoying himself. “Me an’ Olympetalked it over an’ we agreed, jus’ ’cause the Gurglooked like favorin’ You-Know-Who didn’ mean all of’em would. We had ter try an’ persuade some o’ theothers, the ones who hadn’ wanted Golgomath asGurg.”

“How could you tell which ones they were?” askedRon.

“Well, they were the ones bein’ beaten to a pulp,weren’ they?” said Hagrid patiently. “The ones withany sense were keepin’ outta Golgomath’s way, hidin’out in caves roun’ the gully jus’ like we were. So wedecided we’d go pokin’ round the caves by night an’see if we couldn’ persuade a few o’ them.”

“You went poking around dark caves looking forgiants?” said Ron with awed respect in his voice.

“Well, it wasn’ the giants who worried us most,” saidHagrid. “We were more concerned abou’ the DeathEaters. Dumbledore had told us before we wen’ notter tangle with ’em if we could avoid it, an’ the troublewas they knew we was around — ’spect Golgomathtold him abou’ us. At night when the giants weresleepin’ an’ we wanted ter be creepin’ inter the caves,Macnair an’ the other one were sneakin’ round themountains lookin’ fer us. I was hard put to stopOlympe jumpin’ out at them,” said Hagrid, thecorners of his mouth lifting his wild beard. “She wasrarin’ ter attack ’em... she’s somethin’ when she’sroused, Olympe... Fiery, yeh know ... ’spect it’s theFrench in her ...”

Hagrid gazed misty-eyed into the fire. Harry allowedhim thirty seconds’ reminiscence before clearing histhroat loudly.

Page | 553Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“So what happened? Did you ever get near any of theother giants?”

“What? Oh ... oh yeah, we did. Yeah, on the thirdnight after Karkus was killed, we crept outta the cavewe’d bin hidin’ in and headed back down inter thegully, keepin’ our eyes skinned fer the Death Eaters.Got inside a few o’ the caves, no go — then, in abou’the sixth one, we found three giants hidin’.”

“Cave must’ve been cramped,” said Ron.

“Wasn’ room ter swing a kneazle,” said Hagrid.

“Didn’t they attack you when they saw you?” askedHermione.

“Probably woulda done if they’d bin in any condition,”said Hagrid, “but they was badly hurt, all three o’them. Golgomath’s lot had beaten ’em unconscious;they’d woken up an’ crawled inter the nearest shelterthey could find. Anyway, one o’ them had a bit ofEnglish an’ ’e translated fer the others, an’ what wehad ter say didn’ seem ter go down too badly. So wekep’ goin’ back, visitin’ the wounded... I reckon wehad abou’ six or seven o’ them convinced at onepoin’.”

“Six or seven?” said Ron eagerly. “Well that’s not bad— are they going to come over here and start fightingYou-Know-Who with us?”

But Hermione said, “What do you mean ‘at one point,’Hagrid?”

Hagrid looked at her sadly.

Page | 554Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Golgomath’s lot raided the caves. The ones tha’survived didn’ wan’ no more ter to do with us afterthat.”

“So ... so there aren’t any giants coming?” said Ron,looking disappointed.

“Nope,” said Hagrid, heaving a deep sigh as he turnedover his steak again and applied the cooler side to hisface, “but we did wha’ we meant ter do, we gave ’emDumbledore’s message an’ some o’ them heard it an’ I’spect some o’ them’ll remember it. Jus’ maybe, themthat don’ want ter stay around Golgomath’ll moveoutta the mountains, an’ there’s gotta be a chancethey’ll remember Dumbledore’s friendly to ’em...

Could be they’ll come ...”

Snow was filling up the window now. Harry becameaware that the knees of his robes were soakedthrough; Fang was drooling with his head in Harry’slap.

“Hagrid?” said Hermione quietly after a while.

“Mmm?”

“Did you ... was there any sign of ... did you hearanything about your ... your ... mother while you werethere?”

Hagrid’s unobscured eye rested upon her, andHermione looked rather scared.

“I’m sorry ... I ... forget it —”

“Dead,” Hagrid grunted. “Died years ago. They toldme.”

Page | 555Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh ... I’m ... I’m really sorry,” said Hermione in avery small voice.

Hagrid shrugged his massive shoulders. “No need,” hesaid shortly. “Can’ remember her much. Wasn’ a greatmother.”

They were silent again. Hermione glanced nervouslyat Harry and Ron, plainly wanting them to speak.

“But you still haven’t explained how you got in thisstate, Hagrid,” Ron said, gesturing toward Hagrid’sbloodstained face.

“Or why you’re back so late,” said Harry. “Sirius saysMadame Maxime got back ages ago —”

“Who attacked you?” said Ron.

“I haven’ bin attacked!” said Hagrid emphatically. “I —

But the rest of his words were drowned in a suddenoutbreak of rapping on the door. Hermione gasped;her mug slipped through her fingers and smashed onthe floor; Fang yelped. All four of them stared at thewindow beside the doorway. The shadow of somebodysmall and squat rippled across the thin curtain.

“It’s her\” Ron whispered.

“Get under here!” Harry said quickly; seizing theInvisibility Cloak he whirled it over himself andHermione while Ron tore around the table and divedbeneath the cloak as well. Huddled together theybacked away into a corner. Fang was barking madlyat the door. Hagrid looked thoroughly confused.

“Hagrid, hide our mugs!”

Page | 556Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid seized Harry’s and Ron’s mugs and shovedthem under the cushion in Fang’s basket. Fang wasnow leaping up at the door; Hagrid pushed him out ofthe way with his foot and pulled it open.

Professor Umbridge was standing in the doorwaywearing her green tweed cloak and a matching hatwith earflaps. Lips pursed, she leaned back so as tosee Hagrid’s face; she barely reached his navel.

“So,” she said slowly and loudly, as though speakingto somebody deaf. “You’re Hagrid, are you?”

Without waiting for an answer she strolled into theroom, her bulging eyes rolling in every direction.

“Get away,” she snapped, waving her handbag atFang, who had bounded up to her and wasattempting to lick her face.

“Er — I don’ want ter be rude,” said Hagrid, staring ather, “but who the ruddy hell are you?”

“My name is Dolores Umbridge.”

Her eyes were sweeping the cabin. Twice they stareddirectly into the corner where Harry stood,sandwiched between Ron and Hermione.

“Dolores Umbridge?” Hagrid said, soundingthoroughly confused. “I thought you were one o’ themMinistry — don’ you work with Fudge?”

“I was Senior Undersecretary to the Minister, yes,”said Umbridge, now pacing around the cabin, takingin every tiny detail within, from the haversack againstthe wall to the abandoned traveling cloak. “I am nowthe Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher —”

Page | 557Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Tha’s brave of yeh,” said Hagrid, “there’s not many’dtake tha’ job anymore —”

“— and Hogwarts High Inquisitor,” said Umbridge,giving no sign that she had heard him.

“Wha’s that?” said Hagrid, frowning.

“Precisely what I was going to ask,” said Umbridge,pointing at the broken shards of china on the floorthat had been Hermione’s mug.

“Oh,” said Hagrid, with a most unhelpful glancetoward the corner where Harry, Ron, and Hermionestood hidden, “oh, tha’was ... was Fang. He broke amug. So I had ter use this one instead.”

Hagrid pointed to the mug from which he had beendrinking, one hand still clamped over the dragonsteak pressed to his eye. Umbridge stood facing himnow, taking in every detail of his appearance insteadof the cabin’s.

“I heard voices,” she said quietly.

“I was talkin’ ter Fang,” said Hagrid stoutly.

“And was he talking back to you?”

“Well ... in a manner o’ speakin’,” said Hagrid, lookinguncomfortable. “I sometimes say Fang’s near enoughhuman —”

“There are three sets of footprints in the snow leadingfrom the castle doors to your cabin,” said Umbridgesleekly.

Hermione gasped; Harry clapped a hand over hermouth. Luckily, Fang was sniffing loudly around the

Page | 558Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

hem of Professor Umbridge’s robes, and she did notappear to have heard.

“Well, I on’y jus’ got back,” said Hagrid, waving anenormous hand at the haversack. “Maybe someonecame ter call earlier an’ I missed em.

“There are no footsteps leading away from your cabindoor.”

“Well I ... I don’ know why that’d be...” said Hagrid,tugging nervously at his beard and again glancingtoward the corner where Harry, Ron, and Hermionestood, as though asking for help. “Erm ...”

Umbridge wheeled around and strode the length ofthe cabin, looking around carefully. She bent andpeered under the bed. She opened Hagrid’scupboards. She passed within two inches of whereHarry, Ron, and Hermione stood pressed against thewall; Harry actually pulled in his stomach as shewalked by. After looking carefully inside theenormous cauldron Hagrid used for cooking shewheeled around again and said, “What has happenedto you? How did you sustain those injuries?”

Hagrid hastily removed the dragon steak from hisface, which in Harry’s opinion was a mistake, becausethe black-and-purple bruising all around his eye wasnow clearly visible, not to mention the large amountof fresh and congealed blood on his face. “Oh, I ... hada bit of an accident,” he said lamely.

“What sort of accident?”

“I-I tripped.”

“You tripped,” she repeated coolly.

Page | 559Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, tha’s right. Over ... over a friends broomstick. Idon’ fly, meself. Well, look at the size o’ me, I don’reckon there’s a broomstick that’d hold me. Friend o’mine breeds Abraxan horses, I dunno if you’ve everseen ’em, big beasts, winged, yeh know, I’ve had a bitof a ride on one o’ them an’ it was —”

“Where have you been?” asked Umbridge, cuttingcoolly through Hagrid’s babbling.

“Where’ve I ... ?”

“Been, yes,” she said. “Term started more than twomonths ago. Another teacher has had to cover yourclasses. None of your colleagues has been able to giveme any information as to your whereabouts. You leftno address. Where have you been?”

There was a pause in which Hagrid stared at her withhis newly uncovered eye. Harry could almost hear hisbrain working furiously.

“I — I’ve been away for me health,” he said.

“For your health,” said Umbridge. Her eyes traveledover Hagrid’s discolored and swollen face; dragonblood dripped gently onto his waistcoat in the silence.“I see.”

“Yeah,” said Hagrid, “bit o’ — o’ fresh air, yeh know —

“Yes, as gamekeeper fresh air must be so difficult tocome by,” said Umbridge sweetly. The small patch ofHagrid’s face that was not black or purple flushed.

“Well — change o’ scene, yeh know —”

“Mountain scenery?” said Umbridge swiftly.

Page | 560Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She knows, Harry thought desperately.

“Mountains?” Hagrid repeated, clearly thinking fast.“Nope, South of France fer me. Bit o’ sun an’ ... an’sea.”

“Really?” said Umbridge. “You don’t have much of atan.”

“Yeah ... well ... sensitive skin,” said Hagrid,attempting an ingratiating smile. Harry noticed thattwo of his teeth had been knocked out. Umbridgelooked at him coldly; his smile faltered. Then shehoisted her handbag a little higher into the crook ofher arm and said, “I shall, of course, be informing theMinister of your late return.”

“Righ’,” said Hagrid, nodding.

“You ought to know too that as High Inquisitor it ismy unfortunate but necessary duty to inspect myfellow teachers. So I daresay we shall meet again soonenough.”

She turned sharply and marched back to the door.

“You’re inspectin’ us?” Hagrid echoed blankly, lookingafter her.

“Oh yes,” said Umbridge softly, looking back at himwith her hand on the door handle. “The Ministry isdetermined to weed out unsatisfactory teachers,Hagrid. Good night.”

She left, closing the door behind her with a snap.Harry made to pull off the Invisibility Cloak butHermione seized his wrist.

Page | 561Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Not yet,” she breathed in his ear. “She might not begone yet.”

Hagrid seemed to be thinking the same way; hestumped across the room and pulled back the curtainan inch or so.

“She’s goin’ back ter the castle,” he said in a lowvoice. “Blimey ... inspectin’ people, is she?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, pulling the cloak off. “Trelawney’son probation already...”

“Um ... what sort of thing are you planning to do withus in class, Hagrid?” asked Hermione.

“Oh, don’ you worry abou’ that, I’ve got a great load o’lessons planned,” said Hagrid enthusiastically,scooping up his dragon steak from the table andslapping it over his eye again. “I’ve bin keepin’ acouple o’ creatures saved fer yer O.W.L. year, youwait, they’re somethin’ really special.”

“Erm ... special in what way?” asked Hermionetentatively.

“I’m not sayin’,” said Hagrid happily. “I don’ want terspoil the surprise.”

“Look, Hagrid,” said Hermione urgently, dropping allpretense, “Professor Umbridge won’t be at all happy ifyou bring anything to class that’s too dangerous —”

“Dangerous?” said Hagrid, looking genially bemused.“Don’ be silly, I wouldn’ give yeh anythin’ dangerous! Imean, all righ’, they can look after themselves —”

“Hagrid, you’ve got to pass Umbridge’s inspection,and to do that it would really be better if she saw you

Page | 562Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

teaching us how to look after porlocks, how to tell thedifference between knarls and hedgehogs, stuff likethat!” said Hermione earnestly.

“But tha’s not very interestin’, Hermione,” saidHagrid. “The stuff I’ve got’s much more impressive,

I’ve bin bringin’ ’em on fer years, I reckon I’ve got theon’y domestic herd in Britain —”

“Hagrid ... please ...” said Hermione, a note of realdesperation in her voice. “Umbridge is looking for anyexcuse to get rid of teachers she thinks are too closeto Dumbledore. Please, Hagrid, teach us somethingdull that’s bound to come up in our O.W.L...”

But Hagrid merely yawned widely and cast a one-eyedlook of longing toward the vast bed in the corner.

“Lis’en, it’s bin a long day an’ it’s late,” he said,patting Hermione gently on the shoulder, so that herknees gave way and hit the floor with a thud. “Oh —sorry —” He pulled her back up by the neck of herrobes. “Look, don’you go worryin’ abou’ me, I promiseyeh I’ve got really good stuff planned fer yer lessonsnow I’m back... Now you lot had better get back up tothe castle, an’ don’ forget ter wipe yer footprints outbehind yeh!”

“I dunno if you got through to him,” said Ron a shortwhile later when, having checked that the coast wasclear, they walked back up to the castle through thethickening snow, leaving no trace behind them due tothe Obliteration Charm Hermione was performing asthey went.

“Then I’ll go back again tomorrow,” said Hermionedeterminedly. “I’ll plan his lessons for him if I have to.I don’t care if she throws out Trelawney but she’s nottaking Hagrid!”

Page | 563Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE EYE OF THE SNAKE

Hermione plowed her way back to Hagrid’s cabinthrough two feet of snow on Sunday morning. Harryand Ron wanted to go with her, but their mountain ofhomework had reached an alarming height again, sothey grudgingly remained in the common room, tryingto ignore the gleeful shouts drifting up from thegrounds outside, where students were enjoyingthemselves skating on the frozen lake, tobogganing,and worst of all, bewitching snowballs to zoom up toGryffindor Tower and rap hard on the windows.

“Oy!” bellowed Ron, finally losing patience andsticking his head out of the window, “I am a prefectand if one more snowball hits this window — OUCH!”

He withdrew his head sharply, his face covered insnow.

“It’s Fred and George,” he said bitterly, slamming thewindow behind him. “Gits ...”

Page | 564Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hermione returned from Hagrid’s just before lunch,shivering slightly, her robes damp to the knees.

“So?” said Ron, looking up when she entered. “Got allhis lessons planned for him?”

“Well, I tried,” she said dully, sinking into a chairbeside Harry. She pulled out her wand and gave it acomplicated little wave so that hot air streamed out ofthe tip; she then pointed this at her robes, whichbegan to steam as they dried out. “He wasn’t eventhere when I arrived, I was knocking for at least halfan hour. And then he came stumping out of the forest

Harry groaned. The Forbidden Forest was teemingwith the kind of creatures most likely to get Hagridthe sack. “What’s he keeping in there? Did he say?”asked Harry.

“No,” said Hermione miserably. “He says he wantsthem to be a surprise. I tried to explain aboutUmbridge, but he just doesn’t get it. He kept sayingnobody in their right mind would rather study knarlsthan chimaeras — oh I don’t think he’s got achimaera,” she added at the appalled look on Harryand Ron’s faces, “but that’s not for lack of trying fromwhat he said about how hard it is to get eggs... I don’tknow how many times I told him he’d be better offfollowing Grubbly-Plank’s plan, I honestly don’t thinkhe listened to half of what I said. He’s in a bit of afunny mood, you know. He still won’t say how he gotall those injuries...”

Hagrid’s reappearance at the staff table at breakfastnext day was not greeted by enthusiasm from allstudents. Some, like Fred, George, and Lee, roaredwith delight and sprinted up the aisle between theGryffindor and Hufflepuff tables to wring Hagrid’sPage | 565Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

enormous hand; others, like Parvati and Lavender,exchanged gloomy looks and shook their heads. Harryknew that many of them preferred Professor Grubbly-Plank’s lessons, and the worst of it was that a verysmall, unbiased part of him knew that they had goodreason: Grubbly-Plank’s idea of an interesting classwas not one where there was a risk that somebodymight have their head ripped off.

It was with a certain amount of apprehension thatHarry, Ron, and Hermione headed down to Hagrid’son Tuesday, heavily muffled against the cold. Harrywas worried, not only about what Hagrid might havedecided to teach them, but also about how the rest ofthe class, particularly Malfoy and his cronies, wouldbehave if Umbridge was watching them.

However, the High Inquisitor was nowhere to be seenas they struggled through the snow toward Hagrid,who stood waiting for them on the edge of the forest.He did not present a reassuring sight; the bruisesthat had been purple on Saturday night were nowtinged with green and yellow and some of his cuts stillseemed to be bleeding. Harry could not understandthis: Had Hagrid perhaps been attacked by somecreature whose venom prevented the wounds itinflicted from healing? As though to complete theominous picture, Hagrid was carrying what lookedlike half a dead cow over his shoulder.

“We’re workin’ in here today!” Hagrid called happily tothe approaching students, jerking his head back atthe dark trees behind him. “Bit more sheltered!Anyway, they prefer the dark...”

“What prefers the dark?” Harry heard Malfoy saysharply to Crabbe and Goyle, a trace of panic in hisvoice. “What did he say prefers the dark — did youhear?”

Page | 566Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry remembered the only occasion on which Malfoyhad entered the forest before now; he had not beenvery brave then either. He smiled to himself; after theQuidditch match anything that caused Malfoydiscomfort was all right with him.

“Ready?” said Hagrid happily, looking around at theclass. “Right, well, I’ve bin savin’ a trip inter the forestfer yer fifth year. Thought we’d go an’ see thesecreatures in their natural habitat. Now, what we’restudyin’ today is pretty rare, I reckon I’m probably theon’y person in Britain who’s managed ter train ’em —”

“And you’re sure they’re trained, are you?” saidMalfoy, the panic in his voice even more pronouncednow. “Only it wouldn’t be the first time you’d broughtwild stuff to class, would it?”

The Slytherins murmured agreement and a fewGryffindors looked as though they thought Malfoy hada fair point too.

“ ’Course they’re trained,” said Hagrid, scowling andhoisting the dead cow a little higher on his shoulder.

“So what happened to your face, then?” demandedMalfoy.

“Mind yer own business!” said Hagrid, angrily. “Now ifyeh’ve finished askin’ stupid questions, follow me!”

He turned and strode straight into the forest. Nobodyseemed much disposed to follow. Harry glanced atRon and Hermione, who sighed but nodded, and thethree of them set off after Hagrid, leading the rest ofthe class.

They walked for about ten minutes until they reacheda place where the trees stood so closely together that

Page | 567Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

it was as dark as twilight and there was no snow onthe ground at all. Hagrid deposited his half a cow witha grunt on the ground, stepped back, and turned toface his class again, most of whom were creepingtoward him from tree to tree, peering aroundnervously as though expecting to be set upon at anymoment.

“Gather roun’, gather roun’,” said Hagridencouragingly. “Now, they’ll be attracted by the smello’ the meat but I’m goin’ ter give ’em a call anyway,’cause they’ll like ter know it’s me...”

He turned, shook his shaggy head to get the hair outof his face, and gave an odd, shrieking cry thatechoed through the dark trees like the call of somemonstrous bird. Nobody laughed; most of themlooked too scared to make a sound.

Hagrid gave the shrieking cry again. A minute passedin which the class continued to peer nervously overtheir shoulders and around trees for a first glimpse ofwhatever it was that was coming. And then, as Hagridshook his hair back for a third time and expanded hisenormous chest, Harry nudged Ron and pointed intothe black space between two gnarled yew trees.

A pair of blank, white, shining eyes were growinglarger through the gloom and a moment later thedragonish face, neck, and then skeletal body of agreat, black, winged horse emerged from thedarkness. It looked around at the class for a fewseconds, swishing its long black tail, then bowed itshead and began to tear flesh from the dead cow withits pointed fangs.

A great wave of relief broke over Harry. Here at lastwas proof that he had not imagined these creatures,that they were real: Hagrid knew about them too. He

Page | 568Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

looked eagerly at Ron, but Ron was still staringaround into the trees and after a few seconds hewhispered, “Why doesn’t Hagrid call again?”

Most of the rest of the class were wearing expressionsas confused and nervously expectant as Ron’s andwere still gazing everywhere but at the horse standingfeet from them. There were only two other people whoseemed to be able to see them: a stringy Slytherin boystanding just behind Goyle was watching the horseeating with an expression of great distaste on his face,and Neville, whose eyes were following the swishingprogress of the long black tail.

“Oh, an’ here comes another one!” said Hagridproudly, as a second black horse appeared out of thedark trees, folded its leathery wings closer to its body,and dipped its head to gorge on the meat. “Now ... putyer hands up, who can see ’em?”

Immensely pleased to feel that he was at last going tounderstand the mystery of these horses, Harry raisedhis hand. Hagrid nodded at him.

“Yeah ... yeah, I knew you’d be able ter, Harry,” hesaid seriously. “An’ you too, Neville, eh? An’ —”

“Excuse me,” said Malfoy in a sneering voice, “butwhat exactly are we supposed to be seeing?”

For answer, Hagrid pointed at the cow carcass on theground. The whole class stared at it for a few seconds,then several people gasped and Parvati squealed.Harry understood why: Bits of flesh strippingthemselves away from the bones and vanishing intothin air had to look very odd indeed.

Page | 569Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What’s doing it?” Parvati demanded in a terrifiedvoice, retreating behind the nearest tree. “What’seating it?”

“Thestrals,” said Hagrid proudly and Hermione gave asoft “oh!” of comprehension at Harry’s shoulder.“Hogwarts has got a whole herd of ’em in here. Now,who knows — ?”

“But they’re really, really unlucky!” interruptedParvati, looking alarmed. “They’re supposed to bringall sorts of horrible misfortune on people who seethem. Professor Trelawney told me once —”

“No, no, no,” said Hagrid, chuckling, “tha’s jus’superstition, that is, they aren’ unlucky, they’re deadclever an’ useful! ’Course, this lot don’ get a lot o’work, it’s mainly jus’ pullin’ the school carriagesunless Dumbledore’s takin’ a long journey an’ don’want ter Apparate — an’ here’s another couple, look

Two more horses came quietly out of the trees, one ofthem passing very close to Parvati, who shivered andpressed herself closer to the tree, saying, “I think I feltsomething, I think it’s near me!”

“Don’ worry, it won’ hurt yeh,” said Hagrid patiently.“Righ’, now, who can tell me why some o’ you can seethem an’ some can’t?”

Hermione raised her hand.

“Go on then,” said Hagrid, beaming at her.

“The only people who can see thestrals,” she said,

“are people who have seen death.”

Page | 570Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Tha’s exactly right,” said Hagrid solemnly, “tenpoints ter Gryffindor. Now, thestrals —”

“Hem, hem.”

Professor Umbridge had arrived. She was standing afew feet away from Harry, wearing her green hat andcloak again, her clipboard at the ready. Hagrid, whohad never heard Umbridge’s fake cough before, wasgazing in some concern at the closest thestral,evidently under the impression that it had made thesound.

“Hem, hem.”

“Oh hello!” Hagrid said, smiling, having located thesource of the noise.

“You received the note I sent to your cabin thismorning?” said Umbridge, in the same loud, slowvoice she had used with him earlier, as though shewas addressing somebody both foreign and very slow.“Telling you that I would be inspecting your lesson?”

“Oh yeah,” said Hagrid brightly. “Glad yeh found theplace all righ’! Well, as you can see — or, I dunno —can you? We’re doin’ thestrals today —”

“I’m sorry?” said Umbridge loudly, cupping her handaround her ear and frowning. “What did you say?”

Hagrid looked a little confused.

“Er — thestralsl” he said loudly. “Big — er — wingedhorses, yeh know!”

He flapped his gigantic arms hopefully. ProfessorUmbridge raised her eyebrows at him and muttered

Page | 571Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

as she made a note on her clipboard, “ ‘has ... to ...resort... to ... crude ... sign ... language ”

“Well ... anyway ...” said Hagrid, turning back to theclass and looking slightly flustered. “Erm ... what wasI sayin’?”

“ ‘Appears ... to ... have ... poor ... short... term ...memory ” muttered Umbridge, loudly enough foreveryone to hear her. Draco Malfoy looked as thoughChristmas had come a month early; Hermione, on theother hand, had turned scarlet with suppressed rage.

“Oh yeah,” said Hagrid, throwing an uneasy glance atUmbridge’s clipboard, but plowing on valiantly. “Yeah,I was gonna tell yeh how come we got a herd. Yeah,so, we started off with a male an’ five females. Thisone,” he patted the first horse to have appeared,

“name o’ Tenebrus, he’s my special favorite, firs’ oneborn here in the forest —”

“Are you aware,” Umbridge said loudly, interruptinghim, “that the Ministry of Magic has classifiedthestrals as ‘dangerous’?”

Harry’s heart sank like a stone, but Hagrid merelychuckled.

“Thestrals aren’ dangerous! All righ, they might take abite outta you if yeh really annoy them —”

“ ‘Shows ... signs ... of... pleasure ... at... idea ...of... violence ... ‘ ” muttered Umbridge, scribbling on herclipboard again.

“No — come on!” said Hagrid, looking a little anxiousnow. “I mean, a dog’ll bite if yeh bait it, won’ it — butthestrals have jus’ got a bad reputation because o’ the

Page | 572Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

death thing — people used ter think they were badomens, didn’ they? Jus’ didn’ understand, did they?”

Umbridge did not answer; she finished writing herlast note, then looked up at Hagrid and said, againvery loudly and slowly, “Please continue teaching asusual. I am going to walk” — she mimed walking —Malfoy and Pansy Parkinson were having silent fits oflaughter — “among the students” — she pointedaround at individual members of the class — “andask them questions.” She pointed at her mouth toindicate talking.

Hagrid stared at her, clearly at a complete loss tounderstand why she was acting as though he did notunderstand normal English. Hermione had tears offury in her eyes now.

“You hag, you evil hag!” she whispered, as Umbridgewalked toward Pansy Parkinson. “I know what you’redoing, you awful, twisted, vicious —”

“Erm ... anyway,” said Hagrid, clearly struggling toregain the flow of his lesson, “so — thestrals. Yeah.Well, there’s loads o’ good stuff abou’ them...”

“Do you find,” said Professor Umbridge in a ringingvoice to Pansy Parkinson, “that you are able tounderstand Professor Hagrid when he talks?”

Just like Hermione, Pansy had tears in her eyes, butthese were tears of laughter; indeed, her answer wasalmost incoherent because she was trying to suppressher giggles. “No ... because ... well ... it sounds ... likegrunting a lot of the time...”

Umbridge scribbled on her clipboard. The fewunbruised bits of Hagrid’s face flushed, but he triedto act as though he had not heard Pansy’s answer.

Page | 573Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Er ... yeah ... good stuff abou’ thestrals. Well, oncethey’re tamed, like this lot, yehll never be lost again.‘Mazin’ senses o’ direction, jus’ tell ’em where yehwant ter go —”

“Assuming they can understand you, of course,” saidMalfoy loudly, and Pansy Parkinson collapsed in a fitof renewed giggles. Professor Umbridge smiledindulgently at them and then turned to Neville.

“You can see the thestrals, Longbottom, can you?”she said.

Neville nodded.

“Whom did you see die?” she asked, her toneindifferent.

“My ... my grandad,” said Neville.

“And what do you think of them?” she said, wavingher stubby hand at the horses, who by now hadstripped a great deal of the carcass down to bone.

“Erm,” said Neville nervously, with a glance at Hagrid.“Well, they’re ... er ... okay...”

“ ‘Students ... are ... too ... intimidated ... to ... admit... they ... are ... frightened...’ ” muttered Umbridge,making another note on her clipboard.

“No!” said Neville, looking upset, “no, I’m not scared ofthem — !”

“It’s quite all right,” said Umbridge, patting Neville onthe shoulder with what she evidently intended to bean understanding smile, though it looked more like aleer to Harry. “Well, Hagrid,” she turned to look up athim again, speaking once more in that loud, slowPage | 574Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

voice, “I think I’ve got enough to be getting alongwith... You will receive” — she mimed takingsomething from the air in front of her — “the resultsof your inspection” — she pointed at the clipboard —“in ten days’ time.” She held up ten stubby littlefingers, then, her smile wider and more toadlike thanever before beneath her green hat, she bustled fromtheir midst, leaving Malfoy and Pansy Parkinson infits of laughter, Hermione actually shaking with fury,and Neville looking confused and upset.

“That foul, lying, twisting old gargoyle!” stormedHermione half an hour later, as they made their wayback up to the castle through the channels they hadmade earlier in the snow. “You see what she’s up to?It’s her thing about half-breeds all over again — she’strying to make out Hagrid’s some kind of dim-wittedtroll, just because he had a giantess for a mother —and oh, it’s not fair, that really wasn’t a bad lesson atall — I mean, all right, if it had been Blast-EndedSkrewts again, but thestrals are fine — in fact, forHagrid, they’re really good!”

“Umbridge said they’re dangerous,” said Ron.

“Well, it’s like Hagrid said, they can look afterthemselves,” said Hermione impatiently, “and Isuppose a teacher like Grubbly-Plank wouldn’tusually show them to us before N.E.W.T. level, but,well, they are very interesting, aren’t they? The waysome people can see them and some can’t! I wish Icould.”

“Do you?” Harry asked her quietly.

She looked horrorstruck.

“Oh Harry — I’m sorry — no, of course I don’t — thatwas a really stupid thing to say —”

Page | 575Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It’s okay,” he said quickly, “don’t worry...”

“I’m surprised so many people could see them,” saidRon. “Three in a class —”

“Yeah, Weasley, we were just wondering,” said amalicious voice nearby. Unheard by any of them inthe muffling snow, Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle werewalking along right behind them. “D’you reckon if yousaw someone snuff it you’d be able to see the Quafflebetter?”

He, Crabbe, and Goyle roared with laughter as theypushed past on their way to the castle and then brokeinto a chorus of “Weasley Is Our King.” Ron’s earsturned scarlet.

“Ignore them, just ignore them,” intoned Hermione,pulling out her wand and performing the charm toproduce hot air again, so that she could melt them aneasier path through the untouched snow betweenthem and the greenhouses.

December arrived, bringing with it more snow and apositive avalanche of homework for the fifth years.

Ron and Hermione’s prefect duties also became moreand more onerous as Christmas approached. Theywere called upon to supervise the decoration of thecastle (“You try putting up tinsel when Peeves has gotthe other end and is trying to strangle you with it,”said Ron), to watch over first and second yearsspending their break times inside because of thebitter cold (“And they’re cheeky little snotrags, youknow, we definitely weren’t that rude when we were infirst year,” said Ron), and to patrol the corridors inshifts with Argus Filch, who suspected that theholiday spirit might show itself in an outbreak ofwizard duels (“He’s got dung for brains, that one,”said Ron furiously). They were so busy that HermionePage | 576Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

had stopped knitting elf hats and was fretting thatshe was down to her last three.

“All those poor elves I haven’t set free yet, having tostay over during Christmas because there aren’tenough hats!”

Harry, who had not had the heart to tell her thatDobby was taking everything she made, bent lowerover his History of Magic essay. In any case, he didnot want to think about Christmas. For the first timein his school career, he very much wanted to spendthe holidays away from Hogwarts. Between hisQuidditch ban and worry about whether or notHagrid was going to be put on probation, he felthighly resentful toward the place at the moment. Theonly thing he really looked forward to were the D.A.meetings, and they would have to stop over theholidays, as nearly everybody in the D.A. would bespending the time with their families. Hermione wasgoing skiing with her parents, something that greatlyamused Ron, who had never before heard of Mugglesstrapping narrow strips of wood to their feet to slidedown mountains. Ron, meanwhile, was going home tothe Burrow. Harry endured several days of jealousybefore Ron said, in response to Harry asking how Ronwas going to get home for Christmas, “But you’recoming too! Didn’t I say? Mum wrote and told me toinvite you weeks ago!”

Hermione rolled her eyes, but Harry’s spirits soared:The thought of Christmas at the Burrow was trulywonderful, only slightly marred by Harry’s guiltyfeeling that he would not be able to spend the holidaywith Sirius. He wondered whether he could possiblypersuade Mrs. Weasley to invite his godfather for thefestivities too, but apart from the fact that he doubtedwhether Dumbledore would permit Sirius to leaveGrimmauld Place, he could not help but feel that Mrs.Page | 577Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Weasley might not want him; they were so often atloggerheads. Sirius had not contacted Harry at allsince his last appearance in the fire, and althoughHarry knew that with Umbridge on the constantwatch it would be unwise to attempt to contact him,he did not like to think of Sirius alone in his mother’sold house, perhaps pulling a lonely cracker withKreacher.

Harry arrived early in the Room of Requirement forthe last D.A. meeting before the holidays and wasvery glad he had, because when the lamps burst intolight he saw that Dobby had taken it upon himself todecorate the place for Christmas. He could tell the elfhad done it, because nobody else would have strung ahundred golden baubles from the ceiling, eachshowing a picture of Harry’s face and bearing thelegend HAVE A VERY HARRY CHRISTMAS!

Harry had only just managed to get the last of themdown before the door creaked open and LunaLovegood entered, looking dreamy as always.

“Hello,” she said vaguely, looking around at whatremained of the decorations. “These are nice, did youput them up?”

“No,” said Harry, “it was Dobby the house-elf.”

“Mistletoe,” said Luna dreamily, pointing at a largeclump of white berries placed almost over Harry’shead. He jumped out from under it. “Good thinking,”said Luna very seriously. “It’s often infested withnargles.”

Harry was saved the necessity of asking what nargleswere by the arrival of Angelina, Katie, and Alicia. Allthree of them were breathless and looked very cold.

Page | 578Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well,” said Angelina dully, pulling off her cloak andthrowing it into a corner, “we’ve replaced you.”

“Replaced me?” said Harry blankly.

“You and Fred and George,” she said impatiently.“We’ve got another Seeker!”

“Who?” said Harry quickly.

“Ginny Weasley,” said Katie.

Harry gaped at her.

“Yeah, I know,” said Angelina, pulling out her wandand flexing her arm. “But she’s pretty good, actually.Nothing on you, of course,” she said, throwing him avery dirty look, “but as we can’t have you ...”

Harry bit back the retort he was longing to utter: Didshe imagine for a second that he did not regret hisexpulsion from the team a hundred times more thanshe did?

“And what about the Beaters?” he asked, trying tokeep his voice even.

“Andrew Kirke,” said Alicia without enthusiasm, “andJack Sloper. Neither of them are brilliant, butcompared with the rest of the idiots who turned up

The arrival of Ron, Hermione, and Neville brought thisdepressing discussion to an end and within fiveminutes, the room was full enough to prevent himseeing Angelina’s burning, reproachful looks.

“Okay,” he said, calling them all to order. “I thoughtthis evening we should just go over the things we’ve

Page | 579Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

done so far, because it’s the last meeting before theholidays and there’s no point starting anything newright before a three-week break —”

“We’re not doing anything new?” said ZachariasSmith, in a disgruntled whisper loud enough to carrythrough the room. “If I’d known that, I wouldn’t havecome...”

“We’re all really sorry Harry didn’t tell you, then,” saidFred loudly.

Several people sniggered. Harry saw Cho laughingand felt the familiar swooping sensation in hisstomach, as though he had missed a step goingdownstairs.

“We can practice in pairs,” said Harry. “Well startwith the Impediment Jinx, just for ten minutes, thenwe can get out the cushions and try Stunning again.”

They all divided up obediently; Harry partneredNeville as usual. The room was soon full ofintermittent cries of “Impedimental” People froze for aminute or so, during which their partners would stareaimlessly around the room watching other pairs atwork, then would unfreeze and take their turn at thejinx.

Neville had improved beyond all recognition. After awhile, when Harry had unfrozen three times in a row,he had Neville join Ron and Hermione again so thathe could walk around the room and watch the others.When he passed Cho she beamed at him; he resistedthe temptation to walk past her several more times.

After ten minutes on the Impediment Jinx, they laidout cushions all over the floor and started practicingStunning again. Space was really too confined to

Page | 580Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

allow them all to work this spell at once; half thegroup observed the others for a while, then swappedover. Harry felt himself positively swelling with prideas he watched them all. True, Neville did Stun PadmaPatil rather than Dean, at whom he had been aiming,but it was a much closer miss than usual, andeverybody else had made enormous progress.

At the end of an hour, Harry called a halt.

“You’re getting really good,” he said, beaming aroundat them. “When we get back from the holidays we canstart doing some of the big stuff — maybe evenPatronuses.”

There was a murmur of excitement. The room beganto clear in the usual twos and threes; most peoplewished Harry a Happy Christmas as they went.

Feeling cheerful, he collected up the cushions withRon and Hermione and stacked them neatly away.

Ron and Hermione left before he did; he hung back alittle, because Cho was still there and he was hopingto receive a Merry Christmas from her.

“No, you go on,” he heard her say to her friendMarietta, and his heart gave a jolt that seemed to takeit into the region of his Adam’s apple.

He pretended to be straightening the cushion pile. Hewas quite sure they were alone now and waited forher to speak. Instead, he heard a hearty sniff.

He turned and saw Cho standing in the middle of theroom, tears pouring down her face.

“Wha — ?”

He didn’t know what to do. She was simply standingthere, crying silently.

Page | 581Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What’s up?” he said feebly.

She shook her head and wiped her eyes on her sleeve.“I’m — sorry,” she said thickly. “I suppose ... it’s just... learning all this stuff... It just makes me ... wonderwhether ... if he’d known it all ... he’d still be alive...”

Harry’s heart sank right back past its usual spot andsettled somewhere around his navel. He ought to haveknown. She wanted to talk about Cedric.

“He did know this stuff,” Harry said heavily. “He wasreally good at it, or he could never have got to themiddle of that maze. But if Voldemort really wants tokill you, you don’t stand a chance.”

She hiccuped at the sound of Voldemort’s name, butstared at Harry without flinching.

“ You survived when you were just a baby,” she saidquietly.

“Yeah, well,” said Harry wearily, moving toward thedoor, “I dunno why, nor does anyone else, so it’snothing to be proud of.”

“Oh don’t go!” said Cho, sounding tearful again. “I’mreally sorry to get all upset like this... I didn’t meanto...”

She hiccuped again. She was very pretty even whenher eyes were red and puffy. Harry felt thoroughlymiserable. He’d have been so pleased just with aMerry Christmas...

“I know it must be horrible for you,” she said,mopping her eyes on her sleeve again. “Mementioning Cedric, when you saw him die... I supposeyou just want to forget about it...”

Page | 582Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry did not say anything to this; it was quite true,but he felt heartless saying it.

“You’re a r-really good teacher, you know,” said Cho,with a watery smile. “I’ve never been able to Stunanything before.”

“Thanks,” said Harry awkwardly.

They looked at each other for a long moment. Harryfelt a burning desire to run from the room and, at thesame time, a complete inability to move his feet.

“Mistletoe,” said Cho quietly, pointing at the ceilingover his head.

“Yeah,” said Harry. His mouth was very dry. “It’sprobably full of nargles, though.”

“What are nargles?”

“No idea,” said Harry. She had moved closer. Hisbrain seemed to have been Stunned. “You’d have toask Loony. Luna, I mean.”

Cho made a funny noise halfway between a sob and alaugh. She was even nearer him now. He could havecounted the freckles on her nose.

“I really like you, Harry.”

He could not think. A tingling sensation wasspreading throughout him, paralyzing his arms, legs,and brain.

She was much too close. He could see every tearclinging to her eyelashes...

Page | 583Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He returned to the common room half an hour later tofind Hermione and Ron in the best seats by the fire;nearly everybody else had gone to bed. Hermione waswriting a very long letter; she had already filled half aroll of parchment, which was dangling from the edgeof the table. Ron was lying on the hearthrug, trying tofinish his Transfiguration homework.

“What kept you?” he asked, as Harry sank into thearmchair next to Hermione’s.

Harry did not answer. He was in a state of shock. Halfof him wanted to tell Ron and Hermione what hadjust happened, but the other half wanted to take thesecret with him to the grave.

“Are you all right, Harry?” Hermione asked, peering athim over the tip of her quill.

Harry gave a halfhearted shrug. In truth, he didn’tknow whether he was all right or not. “What’s up?”said Ron, hoisting himself up on his elbow to get aclearer view of Harry. “What’s happened?”

Harry didn’t quite know how to set about telling them,and still wasn’t sure whether he wanted to. Just as hehad decided not to say anything, Hermione tookmatters out of his hands.

“Is it Cho?” she asked in a businesslike way. “Did shecorner you after the meeting?”

Numbly surprised, Harry nodded. Ron sniggered,breaking off when Hermione caught his eye.

“So — er — what did she want?” he asked in a mockcasual voice.

Page | 584Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“She —” Harry began, rather hoarsely; he cleared histhroat and tried again. “She — er —”

“Did you kiss?” asked Hermione briskly.

Ron sat up so fast that he sent his ink bottle flying allover the rug. Disregarding this completely he staredavidly at Harry.

“Well?” he demanded.

Harry looked from Ron’s expression of mingledcuriosity and hilarity to Hermione’s slight frown, andnodded.

“HA!”

Ron made a triumphant gesture with his fist andwent into a raucous peal of laughter that madeseveral timid-looking second years over beside thewindow jump. A reluctant grin spread over Harry’sface as he watched Ron rolling around on thehearthrug. Hermione gave Ron a look of deep disgustand returned to her letter.

“Well?” Ron said finally, looking up at Harry. “Howwas it?”

Harry considered for a moment.

“Wet,” he said truthfully.

Ron made a noise that might have indicatedjubilation or disgust, it was hard to tell.

“Because she was crying,” Harry continued heavily.

“Oh,” said Ron, his smile fading slightly. “Are you thatbad at kissing?”

Page | 585Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Dunno,” said Harry, who hadn’t considered this, andimmediately felt rather worried. “Maybe I am.”

“Of course you’re not,” said Hermione absently, stillscribbling away at her letter.

“How do you know?” said Ron in a sharp voice.

“Because Cho spends half her time crying thesedays,” said Hermione vaguely. “She does it atmealtimes, in the loos, all over the place.”

“You’d think a bit of kissing would cheer her up,” saidRon, grinning.

“Ron,” said Hermione in a dignified voice, dipping thepoint of her quill into her ink pot, “you are the mostinsensitive wart I have ever had the misfortune tomeet.”

“What’s that supposed to mean?” said Ronindignantly. “What sort of person cries whilesomeone’s kissing them?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, slightly desperately, “who does?”

Hermione looked at the pair of them with an almostpitying expression on her face.

“Don’t you understand how Cho’s feeling at themoment?” she asked.

“No,” said Harry and Ron together.

Hermione sighed and laid down her quill.

“Well, obviously, she’s feeling very sad, because ofCedric dying. Then I expect she’s feeling confusedbecause she liked Cedric and now she likes Harry,

Page | 586Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and she can’t work out who she likes best. Then she’llbe feeling guilty, thinking it’s an insult to Cedric’smemory to be kissing Harry at all, and she’ll beworrying about what everyone else might say abouther if she starts going out with Harry. And sheprobably can’t work out what her feelings towardHarry are anyway, because he was the one who waswith Cedric when Cedric died, so that’s all very mixedup and painful. Oh, and she’s afraid she’s going to bethrown off the Ravenclaw Quidditch team becauseshe’s been flying so badly.”

A slightly stunned silence greeted the end of thisspeech, then Ron said, “One person can’t feel all thatat once, they’d explode.”

“Just because you’ve got the emotional range of ateaspoon doesn’t mean we all have,” said Hermionenastily, picking up her quill again.

“She was the one who started it,” said Harry. “Iwouldn’t’ve — she just sort of came at me — and nextthing she’s crying all over me — I didn’t know what todo —”

“Don’t blame you, mate,” said Ron, looking alarmed atthe very thought.

“You just had to be nice to her,” said Hermione,looking up anxiously. “You were, weren’t you?”

“Well,” said Harry, an unpleasant heat creeping uphis face, “I sort of — patted her on the back a bit.”

Hermione looked as though she was restrainingherself from rolling her eyes with extreme difficulty.

“Well, I suppose it could have been worse,” she said.“Are you going to see her again?”

Page | 587Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll have to, won’t I?” said Harry. “We’ve got D.A.meetings, haven’t we?”

“You know what I mean,” said Hermione impatiently.

Harry said nothing. Hermione’s words opened up awhole new vista of frightening possibilities. He tried toimagine going somewhere with Cho — Hogsmeade,perhaps — and being alone with her for hours at atime. Of course, she would have been expecting himto ask her out after what had just happened... Thethought made his stomach clench painfully.

“Oh well,” said Hermione distantly, buried in herletter once more, “you’ll have plenty of opportunitiesto ask her...”

“What if he doesn’t want to ask her?” said Ron, whohad been watching Harry with an unusually shrewdexpression on his face.

“Don’t be silly,” said Hermione vaguely, “Harry’s likedher for ages, haven’t you, Harry?”

He did not answer. Yes, he had liked Cho for ages,but whenever he had imagined a scene involving thetwo of them it had always featured a Cho who wasenjoying herself, as opposed to a Cho who wassobbing uncontrollably into his shoulder.

“Who’re you writing the novel to anyway?” Ron askedHermione, trying to read the bit of parchment nowtrailing on the floor. Hermione hitched it up out ofsight.

“Viktor.”

“Krum?”

Page | 588Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“How many other Viktors do we know?”

Ron said nothing, but looked disgruntled. They sat insilence for another twenty minutes, Ron finishing hisTransfiguration essay with many snorts of impatienceand crossings-out, Hermione writing steadily to thevery end of the parchment, rolling it up carefully andsealing it, and Harry staring into the fire, wishingmore than anything that Sirius’s head would appearthere and give him some advice about girls. But thefire merely crackled lower and lower, until the red-hotembers crumbled into ash and, looking around, Harrysaw that they were, yet again, the last in the commonroom.

“Well, ’night,” said Hermione, yawning widely, andshe set off up the girls’ staircase.

“What does she see in Krum?” Ron demanded as heand Harry climbed the boys’ stairs.

“Well,” said Harry, considering the matter, “I s’posehe’s older, isn’t he ... and he’s an internationalQuidditch player...”

“Yeah, but apart from that,” said Ron, soundingaggravated. “I mean he’s a grouchy git, isn’t he?”

“Bit grouchy, yeah,” said Harry, whose thoughts werestill on Cho.

They pulled off their robes and put on pajamas insilence; Dean, Seamus, and Neville were alreadyasleep. Harry put his glasses on his bedside table andgot into bed but did not pull the hangings closedaround his four-poster; instead he stared at the patchof starry sky visible through the window next toNeville’s bed. If he had known, this time last night,

Page | 589Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

that in twenty-four hours’ time he would have kissedCho Chang ...

“ ’Night,” grunted Ron, from somewhere to his right.

“ ’Night,” said Harry.

Maybe next time ... if there was a next time ... she’dbe a bit happier. He ought to have asked her out; shehad probably been expecting it and was now reallyangry with him ... or was she lying in bed, still cryingabout Cedric? He did not know what to think.Hermione’s explanation had made it all seem morecomplicated rather than easier to understand.

That’s what they should teach us here, he thought,turning over onto his side, how girls’ brains work ...it’d be more useful than Divination anyway...

Neville snuffled in his sleep. An owl hootedsomewhere out in the night.

Harry dreamed he was back in the D.A. room. Chowas accusing him of luring her there under falsepretenses; she said that he had promised her ahundred and fifty Chocolate Frog cards if she showedup. Harry protested... Cho shouted, “Cedric gave meloads of Chocolate Frog cards, look\” And she pulledout fistfuls of cards from inside her robes and threwthem into the air, and then turned into Hermione,who said, “You did promise her, you know, Harry... Ithink you’d better give her something else instead...How about your Firebolt?” And Harry was protestingthat he could not give Cho his Firebolt becauseUmbridge had it, and anyway the whole thing wasridiculous, he’d only come to the D.A. room to put upsome Christmas baubles shaped like Dobby’s head...

The dream changed...

Page | 590Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

His body felt smooth, powerful, and flexible. He wasgliding between shining metal bars, across dark, coldstone... He was flat against the floor, sliding along onhis belly... It was dark, yet he could see objectsaround him shimmering in strange, vibrant colors...He was turning his head... At first glance, the corridorwas empty ... but no ... a man was sitting on the floorahead, his chin drooping onto his chest, his outlinegleaming in the dark...

Harry put out his tongue... He tasted the man’s scenton the air... He was alive but drowsing ... sitting infront of a door at the end of the corridor ...

Harry longed to bite the man ... but he must masterthe impulse... He had more important work to do...

But the man was stirring ... a silvery cloak fell fromhis legs as he jumped to his feet; and Harry saw hisvibrant, blurred outline towering above him, saw awand withdrawn from a belt... He had no choice... Hereared high from the floor and struck once, twice,three times, plunging his fangs deeply into the man’sflesh, feeling his ribs splinter beneath his jaws, feelingthe warm gush of blood...

The man was yelling in pain ... then he fell silent... Heslumped backward against the wall... Blood wassplattering onto the floor...

His forehead hurt terribly... It was aching fit toburst...

“Harry! HARRY!”

He opened his eyes. Every inch of his body wascovered in icy sweat; his bedcovers were twisted allaround him like a straitjacket; he felt as though awhite-hot poker was being applied to his forehead.

Page | 591Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Harryl”

Ron was standing over him looking extremelyfrightened. There were more figures at the foot ofHarry’s bed. He clutched his head in his hands; thepain was blinding him... He rolled right over andvomited over the edge of the mattress.

“He’s really ill,” said a scared voice. “Should we callsomeone?”

“Harry! Harryl”

He had to tell Ron, it was very important that he tellhim... Taking great gulps of air, Harry pushed himselfup in bed, willing himself not to throw up again, thepain half-blinding him.

“Your dad,” he panted, his chest heaving. “Your dad’s... been attacked...”

“What?” said Ron uncomprehendingly.

“Your dad! He’s been bitten, it’s serious, there wasblood everywhere...”

“I’m going for help,” said the same scared voice, andHarry heard footsteps running out of the dormitory.

“Harry, mate,” said Ron uncertainly, “you ... you werejust dreaming...”

“No!” said Harry furiously; it was crucial that Ronunderstand. “It wasn’t a dream ... not an ordinarydream... I was there, I saw it... I did it...”

He could hear Seamus and Dean muttering but didnot care. The pain in his forehead was subsidingslightly, though he was still sweating and shivering

Page | 592Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

feverishly. He retched again and Ron leapt backwardout of the way.

“Harry, you’re not well,” he said shakily. “Neville’sgone for help...”

“I’m fine!” Harry choked, wiping his mouth on hispajamas and shaking uncontrollably. “There’s nothingwrong with me, it’s your dad you’ve got to worryabout — we need to find out where he is — he’sbleeding like mad — I was — it was a huge snake...”

He tried to get out of bed but Ron pushed him backinto it; Dean and Seamus were still whisperingsomewhere nearby. Whether one minute passed orten, Harry did not know; he simply sat there shaking,feeling the pain recede very slowly from his scar...Then there were hurried footsteps coming up thestairs, and he heard Neville’s voice again.

“Over here, Professor ...”

Professor McGonagall came hurrying into thedormitory in her tartan dressing gown, her glassesperched lopsidedly on the bridge of her bony nose.

“What is it, Potter? Where does it hurt?”

He had never been so pleased to see her; it was amember of the Order of the Phoenix he needed now,not someone fussing over him and prescribing uselesspotions.

“It’s Ron’s dad,” he said, sitting up again. “He’s beenattacked by a snake and it’s serious, I saw it happen.”

“What do you mean, you saw it happen?” saidProfessor McGonagall, her dark eyebrows contracting.

Page | 593Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t know... I was asleep and then I was there...”

“You mean you dreamed this?”

“No!” said Harry angrily. Would none of themunderstand? “I was having a dream at first aboutsomething completely different, something stupid ...and then this interrupted it. It was real, I didn’timagine it, Mr. Weasley was asleep on the floor andhe was attacked by a gigantic snake, there was a loadof blood, he collapsed, someone’s got to find outwhere he is...”

Professor McGonagall was gazing at him through herlopsided spectacles as though horrified at what shewas seeing.

“I’m not lying, and I’m not mad!” Harry told her, hisvoice rising to a shout. “I tell you, I saw it happen!”

“I believe you, Potter,” said Professor McGonagallcurtly. “Put on your dressing-gown — we’re going tosee the headmaster.”

Page | 594Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





&

ST. MUNGO’S HOSPITAL FORMAGICAL MALADIES AND INJURIES

Harry was so relieved that she was taking himseriously that he did not hesitate, but jumped out ofbed at once, pulled on his dressing gown, and pushedhis glasses back onto his nose.

“Weasley, you ought to come too,” said ProfessorMcGonagall.

They followed Professor McGonagall past the silentfigures of Neville, Dean, and Seamus, out of thedormitory, down the spiral stairs into the commonroom, through the portrait hole, and off along the FatLady’s moonlit corridor. Harry felt as though thepanic inside him might spill over at any moment; hewanted to run, to yell for Dumbledore. Mr. Weasleywas bleeding as they walked along so sedately, andwhat if those fangs (Harry tried hard not to think “myfangs”) had been poisonous? They passed Mrs. Norris,who turned her lamplike eyes upon them and hissedfaintly, but Professor McGonagall said, “Shoo!” Mrs.

Page | 595Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Norris slunk away into the shadows, and in a fewminutes they had reached the stone gargoyleguarding the entrance to Dumbledore’s office.

“Fizzing Whizbee,” said Professor McGonagall.

The gargoyle sprang to life and leapt aside; the wallbehind it split in two to reveal a stone staircase thatwas moving continuously upward like a spiralescalator. The three of them stepped onto the movingstairs; the wall closed behind them with a thud, andthey were moving upward in tight circles until theyreached the highly polished oak door with the brassknocker shaped like a griffin.

Though it was now well past midnight, there werevoices coming from inside the room, a positive babbleof them. It sounded as though Dumbledore wasentertaining at least a dozen people.

Professor McGonagall rapped three times with thegriffin knocker, and the voices ceased abruptly asthough someone had switched them all off. The dooropened of its own accord and Professor McGonagallled Harry and Ron inside.

The room was in half darkness; the strange silverinstruments standing on tables were silent and stillrather than whirring and emitting puffs of smoke asthey usually did. The portraits of old headmastersand headmistresses covering the walls were allsnoozing in their frames. Behind the door, amagnificent red-and-gold bird the size of a swandozed on its perch with its head under its wing.

“Oh, it’s you, Professor McGonagall ... and ... ah.”

Dumbledore was sitting in a high-backed chairbehind his desk; he leaned forward into the pool of

Page | 596Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

candlelight illuminating the papers laid out beforehim. He was wearing a magnificently embroideredpurple-and-gold dressing gown over a snowy-whitenightshirt, but seemed wide awake, his penetratinglight-blue eyes fixed intently upon ProfessorMcGonagall.

“Professor Dumbledore, Potter has had a ... well, anightmare,” said Professor McGonagall. “He says ...”

“It wasn’t a nightmare,” said Harry quickly.

Professor McGonagall looked around at Harry,frowning slightly.

“Very well, then, Potter, you tell the headmaster aboutit.” ~

“I ... well, I was asleep...” said Harry and even in histerror and his desperation to make Dumbledoreunderstand he felt slightly irritated that theheadmaster was not looking at him, but examininghis own interlocked fingers. “But it wasn’t an ordinarydream ... it was real... I saw it happen...” He took adeep breath, “Ron’s dad — Mr. Weasley — has beenattacked by a giant snake.”

The words seemed to reverberate in the air after hehad said them, slightly ridiculous, even comic. Therewas a pause in which Dumbledore leaned back andstared meditatively at the ceiling. Ron looked fromHarry to Dumbledore, white-faced and shocked.

“How did you see this?” Dumbledore asked quietly,still not looking at Harry.

“Well ... I don’t know,” said Harry, rather angrily —what did it matter? “Inside my head, I suppose —”

Page | 597Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You misunderstand me,” said Dumbledore, still inthe same calm tone. “I mean ... can you remember —er — where you were positioned as you watched thisattack happen? Were you perhaps standing besidethe victim, or else looking down on the scene fromabove?”

This was such a curious question that Harry gaped atDumbledore; it was almost as though he knew ...

“I was the snake,” he said. “I saw it all from thesnake’s point of view...”

Nobody else spoke for a moment, then Dumbledore,now looking at Ron, who was still whey-faced, said ina new and sharper voice, “Is Arthur seriouslyinjured?”

“ Yes” said Harry emphatically — why were they all soslow on the uptake, did they not realize how much aperson bled when fangs that long pierced their side?And why could Dumbledore not do him the courtesyof looking at him?

But Dumbledore stood up so quickly that Harryjumped, and addressed one of the old portraitshanging very near the ceiling.

“Everard?” he said sharply. “And you too, Dilys!”

A sallow-faced wizard with short, black bangs and anelderly witch with long silver ringlets in the framebeside him, both of whom seemed to have been in thedeepest of sleeps, opened their eyes immediately.

“You were listening?” said Dumbledore.

The wizard nodded, the witch said, “Naturally.”

Page | 598Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“The man has red hair and glasses,” saidDumbledore. “Everard, you will need to raise thealarm, make sure he is found by the right people —”

Both nodded and moved sideways out of their frames,but instead of emerging in neighboring pictures (asusually happened at Hogwarts), neither reappeared;one frame now contained nothing but a backdrop ofdark curtain, the other a handsome leather armchair.Harry noticed that many of the other headmastersand mistresses on the walls, though snoring anddrooling most convincingly, kept sneaking peeks athim under their eyelids, and he suddenly understoodwho had been talking when they had knocked.

“Everard and Dilys were two of Hogwarts’s mostcelebrated Heads,” Dumbledore said, now sweepingaround Harry, Ron, and Professor McGonagall andapproaching the magnificent sleeping bird on hisperch beside the door. “Their renown is such thatboth have portraits hanging in other importantWizarding institutions. As they are free to movebetween their own portraits they can tell us what maybe happening elsewhere...”

“But Mr. Weasley could be anywhere!” said Harry.

“Please sit down, all three of you,” said Dumbledore,as though Harry had not spoken. “Everard and Dilysmay not be back for several minutes... ProfessorMcGonagall, if you could draw up extra chairs ...”

Professor McGonagall pulled her wand from thepocket of her dressing gown and waved it; threechairs appeared out of thin air, straight-backed andwooden, quite unlike the comfortable chintzarmchairs that Dumbledore had conjured back atHarry’s hearing. Harry sat down, watchingDumbledore over his shoulder. Dumbledore was nowPage | 599Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

stroking Fawkes’s plumed golden head with onefinger. The phoenix awoke immediately. He stretchedhis beautiful head high and observed Dumbledorethrough bright, dark eyes.

“We will need,” said Dumbledore very quietly to thebird, “a warning.”

There was a flash of fire and the phoenix had gone.

Dumbledore now swooped down upon one of thefragile silver instruments whose function Harry hadnever known, carried it over to his desk, sat downfacing them again, and tapped it gently with the tip ofhis wand.

The instrument tinkled into life at once with rhythmicclinking noises. Tiny puffs of pale green smoke issuedfrom the minuscule silver tube at the top.

Dumbledore watched the smoke closely, his browfurrowed, and after a few seconds, the tiny puffsbecame a steady stream of smoke that thickened andcoiled in the air... A serpent’s head grew out of theend of it, opening its mouth wide. Harry wonderedwhether the instrument was confirming his story: Helooked eagerly at Dumbledore for a sign that he wasright, but Dumbledore did not look up.

“Naturally, naturally,” murmured Dumbledoreapparently to himself, still observing the stream ofsmoke without the slightest sign of surprise. “But inessence divided?”

Harry could make neither head nor tail of thisquestion. The smoke serpent, however, split itselfinstantly into two snakes, both coiling andundulating in the dark air. With a look of grimsatisfaction Dumbledore gave the instrument anothergentle tap with his wand: The clinking noise slowedPage | 600Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and died, and the smoke serpents grew faint, becamea formless haze, and vanished.

Dumbledore replaced the instrument upon its spindlylittle table; Harry saw many of the old headmasters inthe portraits follow him with their eyes, then, realizingthat Harry was watching them, hastily pretend to besleeping again. Harry wanted to ask what the strangesilver instrument was for, but before he could do so,there was a shout from the top of the wall to theirright; the wizard called Everard had reappeared in hisportrait, panting slightly.

“Dumbledore!”

“What news?” said Dumbledore at once.

“I yelled until someone came running,” said thewizard, who was mopping his brow on the curtainbehind him, “said I’d heard something movingdownstairs — they weren’t sure whether to believe mebut went down to check — you know there are noportraits down there to watch from. Anyway, theycarried him up a few minutes later. He doesn’t lookgood, he’s covered in blood, I ran along to ElfridaCragg’s portrait to get a good view as they left —”

“Good,” said Dumbledore as Ron made a convulsivemovement, “I take it Dilys will have seen him arrive,then —”

And moments later, the silver-ringletted witch hadreappeared in her picture too; she sank, coughing,into her armchair and said, “Yes, they’ve taken him toSt. Mungo’s, Dumbledore... They carried him pastunder my portrait... He looks bad...”

“Thank you,” said Dumbledore. He looked around atProfessor McGonagall.

Page | 601Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Minerva, I need you to go and wake the otherWeasley children.”

“Of course...”

Professor McGonagall got up and moved swiftly to thedoor; Harry cast a sideways glance at Ron, who wasnow looking terrified.

“And Dumbledore — what about Molly?” saidProfessor McGonagall, pausing at the door.

“That will be a job for Fawkes when he has finishedkeeping a lookout for anybody approaching,” saidDumbledore. “But she may already know ... thatexcellent clock of hers ...”

Harry knew Dumbledore was referring to the clockthat told, not the time, but the whereabouts andconditions of the various Weasley family members,and with a pang he thought that Mr. Weasley’s handmust, even now, be pointing at “mortal peril.” But itwas very late... Mrs. Weasley was probably asleep, notwatching the clock... And he felt cold as heremembered Mrs. Weasley’s boggart turning into Mr.Weasley’s lifeless body, his glasses askew, bloodrunning down his face... But Mr. Weasley wasn’tgoing to die... He couldn’t...

Dumbledore was now rummaging in a cupboardbehind Harry and Ron. He emerged from it carrying ablackened old kettle, which he placed carefully uponhis desk. He raised his wand and murmured “Portus”;for a moment the kettle trembled, glowing with an oddblue light, then it quivered to a rest, as solidly blackas ever.

Dumbledore marched over to another portrait, thistime of a clever-looking wizard with a pointed beard,

Page | 602Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

who had been painted wearing the Slytherin colors ofgreen and silver and was apparently sleeping sodeeply that he could not hear Dumbledore’s voicewhen he attempted to rouse him.

“Phineas. Phineas.”

And now the subjects of the portraits lining the roomwere no longer pretending to be asleep; they wereshifting around in their frames, the better to watchwhat was happening. When the clever-looking wizardcontinued to feign sleep, some of them shouted hisname too.

“Phineas! Phineas! PHINEAS!”

He could not pretend any longer; he gave a theatricaljerk and opened his eyes wide.

“Did someone call?”

“I need you to visit your other portrait again,Phineas,” said Dumbledore. “IVe got anothermessage.”

“Visit my other portrait?” said Phineas in a reedyvoice, giving a long, fake yawn (his eyes travelingaround the room and focusing upon Harry). “Oh no,Dumbledore, I am too tired tonight...”

Something about Phineas’s voice was familiar toHarry. Where had he heard it before? But before hecould think, the portraits on the surrounding wallsbroke into a storm of protest.

“Insubordination, sir!” roared a corpulent, red-nosedwizard, brandishing his fists. “Dereliction of duty!”

Page | 603Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“We are honor-bound to give service to the presentHeadmaster of Hogwarts!” cried a frail-looking oldwizard whom Harry recognized as Dumbledore’spredecessor, Armando Dippet. “Shame on you,Phineas!”

“Shall I persuade him, Dumbledore?” called a gimlet-eyed witch, raising an unusually thick wand thatlooked not unlike a birch rod.

“Oh, very well,” said the wizard called Phineas, eyeingthis wand slightly apprehensively, “though he maywell have destroyed my picture by now, he’s donemost of the family —”

“Sirius knows not to destroy your portrait,” saidDumbledore, and Harry realized immediately wherehe had heard Phineas’s voice before: issuing from theapparently empty frame in his bedroom in GrimmauldPlace. “You are to give him the message that ArthurWeasley has been gravely injured and that his wife,children, and Harry Potter will be arriving at hishouse shortly. Do you understand?”

“Arthur Weasley, injured, wife and children and HarryPotter coming to stay,” recited Phineas in a boredvoice. “Yes, yes ... very well...”

He sloped away into the frame of the portrait anddisappeared from view at the very moment that thestudy door opened again. Fred, George, and Ginnywere ushered inside by Professor McGonagall, allthree of them looking disheveled and shocked, still intheir night things.

“Harry — what’s going on?” asked Ginny, who lookedfrightened. “Professor McGonagall says you saw Dadhurt —”

Page | 604Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Your father has been injured in the course of hiswork for the Order of the Phoenix,” said Dumbledorebefore Harry could speak. “He has been taken to St.Mungo’s Hospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries. Iam sending you back to Sirius’s house, which ismuch more convenient for the hospital than theBurrow. You will meet your mother there.”

“How’re we going?” asked Fred, looking shaken. “Floopowder?”

“No,” said Dumbledore, “Floo powder is not safe at themoment, the Network is being watched. You will betaking a Portkey.” He indicated the old kettle lyinginnocently on his desk. “We are just waiting forPhineas Nigellus to report back... I wish to be surethat the coast is clear before sending you —”

There was a flash of flame in the very middle of theoffice, leaving behind a single golden feather thatfloated gently to the floor.

“It is Fawkes’s warning,” said Dumbledore, catchingthe feather as it fell. “She must know you’re out ofyour beds... Minerva, go and head her off— tell herany story —”

Professor McGonagall was gone in a swish of tartan.

“He says he’ll be delighted,” said a bored voice behindDumbledore; the wizard called Phineas hadreappeared in front of his Slytherin banner. “Mygreat-great-grandson has always had odd taste inhouseguests...”

“Come here, then,” Dumbledore said to Harry and theWeasleys. “And quickly, before anyone else joins us

Page | 605Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry and the others gathered around Dumbledore’sdesk.

“You have all used a Portkey before?” askedDumbledore, and they nodded, each reaching out totouch some part of the blackened kettle. “Good. Onthe count of three then ... one ... two ...”

It happened in a fraction of a second: In theinfinitesimal pause before Dumbledore said “three,”Harry looked up at him — they were very closetogether — and Dumbledore’s clear blue gaze movedfrom the Portkey to Harry’s face.

At once, Harry’s scar burned white-hot, as though theold wound had burst open again — and unbidden,unwanted, but terrifyingly strong, there rose withinHarry a hatred so powerful he felt, for that instant,that he would like nothing better than to strike — tobite — to sink his fangs into the man before him —

“... three.”

He felt a powerful jerk behind his navel, the groundvanished from beneath his feet, his hand was glued tothe kettle; he was banging into the others as all spedforward in a swirl of colors and a rush of wind, thekettle pulling them onward and then —

His feet hit the ground so hard that his kneesbuckled, the kettle clattered to the ground andsomewhere close at hand a voice said, “Back again,the blood traitor brats, is it true their father’s dying ...?”

“OUT!” roared a second voice.

Harry scrambled to his feet and looked around; theyhad arrived in the gloomy basement kitchen of

Page | 606Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

number twelve, Grimmauld Place. The only sources oflight were the fire and one guttering candle, whichilluminated the remains of a solitary supper. Kreacherwas disappearing through the door to the hall,looking back at them malevolently as he hitched uphis loincloth; Sirius was hurrying toward them all,looking anxious. He was unshaven and still in his dayclothes; there was also a slightly Mundungus-likewhiff of stale drink about him.

“What’s going on?” he said, stretching out a hand tohelp Ginny up. “Phineas Nigellus said Arthur’s beenbadly injured —”

“Ask Harry,” said Fred.

“Yeah, I want to hear this for myself,” said George.

The twins and Ginny were staring at him. Kreacher’sfootsteps had stopped on the stairs outside.

“It was —” Harry began; this was even worse thantelling McGonagall and Dumbledore. “I had a — akind of— vision...”

And he told them all that he had seen, though healtered the story so that it sounded as though he hadwatched from the sidelines as the snake attacked,rather than from behind the snake’s own eyes... Ron,who was still very white, gave him a fleeting look, butdid not speak. When Harry had finished, Fred,

George, and Ginny continued to stare at him for amoment. Harry did not know whether he wasimagining it or not, but he fancied there wassomething accusatory in their looks. Well, if they weregoing to blame him for just seeing the attack, he wasglad he had not told them that he had been inside thesnake at the time...

Page | 607Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Is Mum here?” said Fred, turning to Sirius.

“She probably doesn’t even know what’s happenedyet,” said Sirius. “The important thing was to get youaway before Umbridge could interfere. I expectDumbledore’s letting Molly know now.”

“We’ve got to go to St. Mungo’s,” said Ginny urgently.She looked around at her brothers; they were ofcourse still in their pajamas. “Sirius, can you lend uscloaks or anything — ?”

“Hang on, you can’t go tearing off to St. Mungo’s!”said Sirius.

“ ’Course we can go to St. Mungo’s if we want,” saidFred, with a mulish expression, “he’s our dad!”

“And how are you going to explain how you knewArthur was attacked before the hospital even let hiswife know?”

“What does that matter?” said George hotly.

“It matters because we don’t want to draw attentionto the fact that Harry is having visions of things thatare happening hundreds of miles away!” said Siriusangrily. “Have you any idea what the Ministry wouldmake of that information?”

Fred and George looked as though they could not careless what the Ministry made of anything. Ron was stillwhite-faced and silent. Ginny said, “Somebody elsecould have told us... We could have heard itsomewhere other than Harry...”

“Like who?” said Sirius impatiently. “Listen, yourdad’s been hurt while on duty for the Order and thecircumstances are fishy enough without his children

Page | 608Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

knowing about it seconds after it happened, youcould seriously damage the Order’s —”

“We don’t care about the dumb Order!” shouted Fred.

“It’s our dad dying we’re talking about!” yelled George.

“Your father knew what he was getting into, and hewon’t thank you for messing things up for the Order!”said Sirius angrily in his turn. “This is how it is —this is why you’re not in the Order — you don’tunderstand — there are things worth dying for!”

“Easy for you to say, stuck here!” bellowed Fred. “Idon’t see you risking your neck!”

The little color remaining in Sirius’s face drained fromit. He looked for a moment as though he would quitelike to hit Fred, but when he spoke, it was in a voiceof determined calm. “I know it’s hard, but we’ve all gotto act as though we don’t know anything yet. We’vegot to stay put, at least until we hear from yourmother, all right?”

Fred and George still looked mutinous. Ginny,however, took a few steps over to the nearest chairand sank into it. Harry looked at Ron, who made afunny movement somewhere between a nod andshrug, and they sat down too. The twins glared atSirius for another minute, then took seats on eitherside of Ginny.

“That’s right,” said Sirius encouragingly, “come on,let’s all ... let’s all have a drink while we’re waiting.Accio Butterbeeri”

He raised his wand as he spoke and half a dozenbottles came flying toward them out of the pantry,skidded along the table, scattering the debris of

Page | 609Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Sirius’s meal, and stopped neatly in front of the six ofthem. They all drank, and for a while the only soundswere those of the crackling of the kitchen fire and thesoft thud of their bottles on the table.

Harry was only drinking to have something to do withhis hands. His stomach was full of horrible hot,bubbling guilt. They would not be here if it were notfor him; they would all still be asleep in bed. And itwas no good telling himself that by raising the alarmhe had ensured that Mr. Weasley was found, becausethere was also the inescapable business of it being hewho had attacked Mr. Weasley in the first place...

Don’t be stupid, you haven’t got fangs, he told himself,trying to keep calm, though the hand on hisbutterbeer bottle was shaking. You were lying in bed,you weren’t attacking anyone...

But then, what just happened in Dumbledore’s office?he asked himself. I felt like I wanted to attackDumbledore too...

He put the bottle down on the table a little harderthan he meant to, so that it slopped over onto thetable. No one took any notice. Then a burst of fire inmidair illuminated the dirty plates in front of themand as they gave cries of shock, a scroll of parchmentfell with a thud onto the table, accompanied by asingle golden phoenix tail feather.

“Fawkes!” said Sirius at once, snatching up theparchment. “That’s not Dumbledore’s writing — itmust be a message from your mother — here —”

He thrust the letter into George’s hand, who ripped itopen and read aloud, “Dad is still alive. I am settingout for St. Mungo’s now. Stay where you are. I willsend news as soon as I can. Mum.”

Page | 610Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

George looked around the table.

“Still alive ...” he said slowly. “But that makes itsound ...”

He did not need to finish the sentence. It sounded toHarry too as though Mr. Weasley was hoveringsomewhere between life and death. Still exceptionallypale, Ron stared at the back of his mother’s letter asthough it might speak words of comfort to him. Fredpulled the parchment out of George’s hands and readit for himself, then looked up at Harry, who felt hishand shaking on his butterbeer bottle again andclenched it more tightly to stop the trembling.

If Harry had ever sat through a longer night than thisone he could not remember it. Sirius suggested oncethat they all go to bed, but without any realconviction, and the Weasleys’ looks of disgust wereanswer enough. They mostly sat in silence around thetable, watching the candle wick sinking lower andlower into liquid wax, now and then raising bottles totheir lips, speaking only to check the time, to wonderaloud what was happening, and to reassure oneanother that if there was bad news, they would knowstraightaway, for Mrs. Weasley must long since havearrived at St. Mungo’s.

Fred fell into a doze, his head sagging sideways ontohis shoulder. Ginny was curled like a cat on herchair, but her eyes were open; Harry could see themreflecting the firelight. Ron was sitting with his headin his hands, whether awake or asleep it wasimpossible to tell. And he and Sirius looked at eachother every so often, intruders upon the family grief,waiting ... waiting ...

And then, at ten past five in the morning by Ron’swatch, the kitchen door swung open and Mrs.

Page | 611Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Weasley entered the kitchen. She was extremely pale,but when they all turned to look at her, Fred, Ron,and Harry half-rising from their chairs, she gave awan smile.

“He’s going to be all right,” she said, her voice weakwith tiredness. “He’s sleeping. We can all go and seehim later. Bill’s sitting with him now, he’s going totake the morning off work.”

Fred fell back into his chair with his hands over hisface. George and Ginny got up, walked swiftly over totheir mother, and hugged her. Ron gave a very shakylaugh and downed the rest of his butterbeer in one.

“Breakfast!” said Sirius loudly and joyfully, jumpingto his feet. “Where’s that accursed house-elf?

Kreacher! KREACHER!”

But Kreacher did not answer the summons.

“Oh, forget it, then,” muttered Sirius, counting thepeople in front of him. “So it’s breakfast for — let’s see— seven ... Bacon and eggs, I think, and some tea,and toast —”

Harry hurried over to the stove to help. He did notwant to intrude upon the Weasleys’ happiness, andhe dreaded the moment when Mrs. Weasley wouldask him to recount his vision. However, he had barelytaken plates from the dresser when Mrs. Weasleylifted them out of his hands and pulled him into ahug.

“I don’t know what would have happened if it hadn’tbeen for you, Harry,” she said in a muffled voice.

“They might not have found Arthur for hours, andthen it would have been too late, but thanks to youhe’s alive and Dumbledore’s been able to think up aPage | 612Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

good cover story for Arthur being where he was,you’ve no idea what trouble he would have been inotherwise, look at poor Sturgis...”

Harry could hardly stand her gratitude, butfortunately she soon released him to turn to Siriusand thank him for looking after her children throughthe night. Sirius said that he was very pleased to havebeen able to help, and hoped they would all stay withhim as long as Mr. Weasley was in hospital.

“Oh, Sirius, I’m so grateful... They think hell be therea little while and it would be wonderful to be nearer...Of course, that might mean we’re here forChristmas...”

“The more the merrier!” said Sirius with such obvioussincerity that Mrs. Weasley beamed at him, threw onan apron, and began to help with breakfast.

“Sirius,” Harry muttered, unable to stand it a momentlonger. “Can I have a quick word? Er — now?”

He walked into the dark pantry and Sirius followed.Without preamble Harry told his godfather everydetail of the vision he had had, including the fact thathe himself had been the snake who had attacked Mr.Weasley.

When he paused for breath, Sirius said, “Did you tellDumbledore this?”

“Yes,” said Harry impatiently, “but he didn’t tell mewhat it meant. Well, he doesn’t tell me anythinganymore...”

“I’m sure he would have told you if it was anything toworry about,” said Sirius steadily.

Page | 613Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But that’s not all,” said Harry in a voice only a littleabove a whisper. “Sirius, I ... I think I’m going mad...Back in Dumbledore’s office, just before we took thePortkey ... for a couple of seconds there I thought Iwas a snake, I felt like one — my scar really hurtwhen I was looking at Dumbledore — Sirius, I wantedto attack him —”

He could only see a sliver of Sirius’s face; the rest wasin darkness.

“It must have been the aftermath of the vision, that’sall,” said Sirius. “You were still thinking of the dreamor whatever it was and —”

“It wasn’t that,” said Harry, shaking his head. “It waslike something rose up inside me, like there’s a snakeinside me —”

“You need to sleep,” said Sirius firmly. “You’re goingto have breakfast and then go upstairs to bed, andthen you can go and see Arthur after lunch with theothers. You’re in shock, Harry; you’re blamingyourself for something you only witnessed, and it’slucky you did witness it or Arthur might have died.Just stop worrying...”

He clapped Harry on the shoulder and left the pantry,leaving Harry standing alone in the dark.

Everyone but Harry spent the rest of the morningsleeping. He went up to the bedroom he had sharedwith Ron over the summer, but while Ron crawledinto bed and was asleep within minutes, Harry satfully clothed, hunched against the cold metal bars ofthe bedstead, keeping himself deliberatelyuncomfortable, determined not to fall into a doze,terrified that he might become the serpent again inhis sleep and awake to find that he had attacked Ron,Page | 614Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

or else slithered through the house after one of theothers...

When Ron woke up, Harry pretended to have enjoyeda refreshing nap too. Their trunks arrived fromHogwarts while they were eating lunch, so that theycould dress as Muggles for the trip to St. Mungo’s.Everybody except Harry was riotously happy andtalkative as they changed out of their robes into jeansand sweatshirts, and they greeted Tonks and Mad-Eye, who had turned up to escort them acrossLondon, gleefully laughing at the bowler hat Mad-Eyewas wearing at an angle to conceal his magical eyeand assuring him, truthfully, that Tonks, whose hairwas short and bright pink again, would attract farless attention on the underground.

Tonks was very interested in Harry’s vision of theattack on Mr. Weasley, something he was notremotely interested in discussing.

“There isn’t any Seer blood in your family, is there?”she inquired curiously, as they sat side by side on atrain rattling toward the heart of the city.

“No,” said Harry, thinking of Professor Trelawney andfeeling insulted.

“No,” said Tonks musingly, “no, I suppose it’s notreally prophecy you’re doing, is it? I mean, you’re notseeing the future, you’re seeing the present... It’s odd,isn’t it? Useful, though ...”

Harry did not answer; fortunately they got out at thenext stop, a station in the very heart of London, andin the bustle of leaving the train he was able to allowFred and George to get between himself and Tonks,who was leading the way. They all followed her up theescalator, Moody clunking along at the back of thePage | 615Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

group, his bowler tilted low and one gnarled handstuck in between the buttons of his coat, clutchinghis wand. Harry thought he sensed the concealed eyestaring hard at him; trying to deflect more questionsabout his dream he asked Mad-Eye where St.

Mungo’s was hidden.

“Not far from here,” grunted Moody as they steppedout into the wintry air on a broad store-lined streetpacked with Christmas shoppers. He pushed Harry alittle ahead of him and stumped along just behind;Harry knew the eye was rolling in all directions underthe tilted hat. “Wasn’t easy to find a good location fora hospital. Nowhere in Diagon Alley was big enoughand we couldn’t have it underground like the Ministry— unhealthy. In the end they managed to get hold ofa building up here. Theory was sick wizards couldcome and go and just blend in with the crowd...”

He seized Harry’s shoulder to prevent them beingseparated by a gaggle of shoppers plainly intent onnothing but making it into a nearby shop full ofelectrical gadgets.

“Here we go,” said Moody a moment later.

They had arrived outside a large, old-fashioned, redbrick department store called Purge and Dowse Ltd.The place had a shabby, miserable air; the windowdisplays consisted of a few chipped dummies withtheir wigs askew, standing at random and modelingfashions at least ten years out of date. Large signs onall the dusty doors read CLOSED FORREFURBISHMENT. Harry distinctly heard a largewoman laden with plastic shopping bags say to herfriend as they passed, “It’s never open, that place...”

“Right,” said Tonks, beckoning them forward to awindow displaying nothing but a particularly ugly

Page | 616Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

female dummy whose false eyelashes were hanging offand who was modeling a green nylon pinafore dress.“Everybody ready?”

They nodded, clustering around her; Moody gaveHarry another shove between the shoulder blades tourge him forward and Tonks leaned close to the glass,looking up at the very ugly dummy and said, herbreath steaming up the glass, “Wotcher ... We’re hereto see Arthur Weasley.”

For a split second, Harry thought how absurd it wasfor Tonks to expect the dummy to hear her talkingthat quietly through a sheet of glass, when there werebuses rumbling along behind her and all the racket ofa street full of shoppers. Then he reminded himselfthat dummies could not hear anyway. Next secondhis mouth opened in shock as the dummy gave a tinynod, beckoned its jointed finger, and Tonks hadseized Ginny and Mrs. Weasley by the elbows,stepped right through the glass and vanished.

Fred, George, and Ron stepped after them; Harryglanced around at the jostling crowd; not one of themseemed to have a glance to spare for window displaysas ugly as Purge and Dowse Ltd.’s, nor did any ofthem seem to have noticed that six people had justmelted into thin air in front of them.

“C’mon,” growled Moody, giving Harry yet anotherpoke in the back and together they stepped forwardthrough what felt like a sheet of cool water, emergingquite warm and dry on the other side.

There was no sign of the ugly dummy or the spacewhere she had stood. They had arrived in whatseemed to be a crowded reception area where rows ofwitches and wizards sat upon rickety wooden chairs,some looking perfectly normal and perusing out-of-P a g e | 617Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

date copies of Witch Weekly, others sporting gruesomedisfigurements such as elephant trunks or extrahands sticking out of their chests. The room wasscarcely less quiet than the street outside, for many ofthe patients were making very peculiar noises. Asweaty-faced witch in the center of the front row, whowas fanning herself vigorously with a copy of theDaily Prophet, kept letting off a high-pitched whistleas steam came pouring out of her mouth, and agrubby-looking warlock in the corner clanged like abell every time he moved, and with each clang hishead vibrated horribly, so that he had to seize himselfby the ears and hold it steady.

Witches and wizards in lime-green robes were walkingup and down the rows, asking questions and makingnotes on clipboards like Umbridge’s. Harry noticedthe emblem embroidered on their chests: a wand andbone, crossed.

“Are they doctors?” he asked Ron quietly.

“Doctors?” said Ron, looking startled. “Those Mugglenutters that cut people up? Nah, they’re Healers.”

“Over here!” called Mrs. Weasley over the renewedclanging of the warlock in the corner, and theyfollowed her to the queue in front of a plump blondewitch seated at a desk marked inquiries. The wallbehind her was covered in notices and posters sayingthings like A CLEAN CAULDRON KEEPS POTIONSFROM BECOMING POISONS and ANTIDOTES AREANTI-DONTS UNLESS APPROVED BY A QUALIFIEDHEALER.

There was also a large portrait of a witch with longsilver ringlets that was labelled

DILYS DERWENT

Page | 618Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

ST. MUNGO’S HEALER 1722-1741

HEADMISTRESS OF HOGWARTS SCHOOL OF

WITCHCRAFT AND WIZARDRY, I74I-I768

Dilys was eyeing the Weasley party as thoughcounting them; when Harry caught her eye she gave atiny wink, walked sideways out of her portrait, andvanished.

Meanwhile, at the front of the queue, a young wizardwas performing an odd on-the-spot jig and trying, inbetween yelps of pain, to explain his predicament tothe witch behind the desk.

“It’s these — ouch — shoes my brother gave me — ow— they’re eating my — OUCH — feet — look at them,there must be some kind of— AARGH —jinx on themand I can’t — AAAAARGH — get them off —”

He hopped from one foot to the other as thoughdancing on hot coals.

“The shoes don’t prevent you reading, do they?” saidthe blonde witch irritably, pointing at a large sign tothe left of her desk. “You want Spell Damage, fourthfloor. Just like it says on the floor guide. Next!”

The wizard hobbled and pranced sideways out of theway, the Weasley party moved forward a few stepsand Harry read the floor guide:

ARTIFACT ACCIDENTS Ground Floor

(Cauldron explosion, wand backfiring, broom crashes,etc.)

Page | 619Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

CREATURE-INDUCED INJURIES

First Floor

(Bites, stings, burns, embedded spines, etc.)

MAGICAL BUGS Second Floor

(Contagious maladies, e.g., dragon pox, vanishingsickness, scrofungulus)

POTION AND PLANT POISONING .... Third Floor

(Rashes, regurgitation, uncontrollable giggling, etc.)

SPELL DAMAGE Fourth Floor

(Unliftable jinxes, hexes, and incorrectly appliedcharms, etc.)

VISITORS’TEAROOM AND HOSPITAL SHOP... .FifthFloor

If you are unsure where to go, incapable, of normalspeech, or unable to remember why you are here, ourWelcome Witch will be pleased to help.

A very old, stooped wizard with a hearing trumpethad shuffled to the front of the queue now.

“I’m here to see Broderick Bode!” he wheezed.

“Ward forty-nine, but I’m afraid you’re wasting yourtime,” said the witch dismissively “He’s completelyaddled, you know, still thinks he’s a teapot... Next!”

A harassed-looking wizard was holding his smalldaughter tightly by the ankle while she flappedaround his head using the immensely large, featherywings that had sprouted right out the back of herromper suit.

Page | 620Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Fourth floor,” said the witch in a bored voice, withoutasking, and the man disappeared through the doubledoors beside the desk, holding his daughter like anoddly shaped balloon. “Next!”

Mrs. Weasley moved forward to the desk.

“Hello,” she said. “My husband, Arthur Weasley, wassupposed to be moved to a different ward thismorning, could you tell us — ?”

“Arthur Weasley?” said the witch, running her fingerdown a long list in front of her. “Yes, first floor,second door on the right, Dai Llewellyn ward.”

“Thank you,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Come on, you lot.”

They followed through the double doors and along thenarrow corridor beyond, which was lined with moreportraits of famous Healers and lit by crystal bubblesfull of candles that floated up on the ceiling, lookinglike giant soapsuds. More witches and wizards inlime-green robes walked in and out of the doors theypassed; a foul-smelling yellow gas wafted into thepassageway as they passed one door, and every nowand then they heard distant wailing. They climbed aflight of stairs and entered the “Creature-InducedInjuries” corridor, where the second door on the rightbore the words “DANGEROUS” DAI LLEWELLYNWARD: SERIOUS BITES. Underneath this was a cardin a brass holder on which had been handwrittenHealer-in-Charge: Hippocrates Smethwyck, TraineeHealer: Augustus Pye.

“Well wait outside, Molly,” Tonks said. “Arthur won’twant too many visitors at once... It ought to be justthe family first.”

Page | 621Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Mad-Eye growled his approval of this idea and sethimself with his back against the corridor wall, hismagical eye spinning in all directions. Harry drewback too, but Mrs. Weasley reached out a hand andpushed him through the door, saying, “Don’t be silly,Harry, Arthur wants to thank you...”

The ward was small and rather dingy as the onlywindow was narrow and set high in the wall facingthe door. Most of the light came from more shiningcrystal bubbles clustered in the middle of the ceiling.The walls were of panelled oak and there was aportrait of a rather vicious-looking wizard on the wall,captioned URQUHART RACKHARROW, 1612-1697,INVENTOR OF THE ENTRAIL-EXPELLING CURSE.

There were only three patients. Mr. Weasley wasoccupying the bed at the far end of the ward besidethe tiny window. Harry was pleased and relieved tosee that he was propped up on several pillows andreading the Daily Prophet by the solitary ray ofsunlight falling onto his bed. He looked around asthey walked toward him and, seeing whom it was,beamed.

“Hello!” he called, throwing the Prophet aside. “Billjust left, Molly, had to get back to work, but he sayshe’ll drop in on you later...”

“How are you, Arthur?” asked Mrs. Weasley, bendingdown to kiss his cheek and looking anxiously into hisface. “You’re still looking a bit peaky...”

“I feel absolutely fine,” said Mr. Weasley brightly,holding out his good arm to give Ginny a hug. “If theycould only take the bandages off, I’d be fit to gohome.”

“Why can’t they take them off, Dad?” asked Fred.

Page | 622Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, I start bleeding like mad every time they try,”said Mr. Weasley cheerfully, reaching across for hiswand, which lay on his bedside cabinet, and waving itso that six extra chairs appeared at his bedside toseat them all. “It seems there was some ratherunusual kind of poison in that snake’s fangs thatkeeps wounds open... They’re sure they’ll find anantidote, though, they say they’ve had much worsecases than mine, and in the meantime I just have tokeep taking a Blood-Replenishing Potion every hour.But that fellow over there,” he said, dropping his voiceand nodding toward the bed opposite in which a manlay looking green and sickly and staring at the ceiling.“Bitten by a werewolf, poor chap. No cure at all.”

“A werewolf?” whispered Mrs. Weasley, lookingalarmed. “Is he safe in a public ward? Shouldn’t he bein a private room?”

“It’s two weeks till full moon,” Mr. Weasley remindedher quietly. “They’ve been talking to him thismorning, the Healers, you know, trying to persuadehim he’ll be able to lead an almost normal life. I saidto him — didn’t mention names, of course — but Isaid I knew a werewolf personally, very nice man, whofinds the condition quite easy to manage...”

“What did he say?” asked George.

“Said he’d give me another bite if I didn’t shut up,”said Mr. Weasley sadly. “And that woman over there,”he indicated the only other occupied bed, which wasright beside the door, “won’t tell the Healers what bither, which makes us all think it must have beensomething she was handling illegally. Whatever it wastook a real chunk out of her leg, very nasty smellwhen they take off the dressings.”

Page | 623Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“So, you going to tell us what happened, Dad?” askedFred, pulling his chair closer to the bed.

“Well, you already know, don’t you?” said Mr.

Weasley, with a significant smile at Harry. “It’s verysimple — I’d had a very long day, dozed off, gotsneaked up on, and bitten.”

“Is it in the Prophet, you being attacked?” asked Fred,indicating the newspaper Mr. Weasley had cast aside.

“No, of course not,” said Mr. Weasley, with a slightlybitter smile, “the Ministry wouldn’t want everyone toknow a dirty great serpent got —”

“Arthur!” said Mrs. Weasley warningly.

“— got — er — me,” Mr. Weasley said hastily, thoughHarry was quite sure that was not what he had meantto say.

“So where were you when it happened, Dad?” askedGeorge.

“That’s my business,” said Mr. Weasley, though witha small smile. He snatched up the Daily Prophet,shook it open again and said, “I was just readingabout Willy Widdershins’s arrest when you arrived.You know Willy turned out to be behind thoseregurgitating toilets last summer? One of his jinxesbackfired, the toilet exploded, and they found himlying unconscious in the wreckage covered from headto foot in —”

“When you say you were ‘on duty,’ ” Fred interruptedin a low voice, “what were you doing?”

Page | 624Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You heard your father,” whispered Mrs. Weasley, “weare not discussing this here! Go on about WillyWiddershins, Arthur —”

“Well, don’t ask me how, but he actually got off on thetoilet charge,” said Mr. Weasley grimly. “I can onlysuppose gold changed hands —”

“You were guarding it, weren’t you?” said Georgequietly. “The weapon? The thing You-Know-Who’safter?”

“George, be quiet!” snapped Mrs. Weasley.

“Anyway,” said Mr. Weasley in a raised voice, “thistime Willy’s been caught selling biting doorknobs toMuggles, and I don’t think he’ll be able to worm hisway out of it because according to this article, twoMuggles have lost fingers and are now in St. Mungo’sfor emergency bone regrowth and memorymodification. Just think of it, Muggles in St. Mungo’s!I wonder which ward they’re in?”

And he looked eagerly around as though hoping tosee a signpost.

“Didn’t you say You-Know-Who’s got a snake, Harry?”asked Fred, looking at his father for a reaction. “Amassive one? You saw it the night he returned, didn’tyou?”

“That’s enough,” said Mrs. Weasley crossly. “Mad-Eyeand Tonks are outside, Arthur, they want to comeand see you. And you lot can wait outside,” she addedto her children and Harry. “You can come and saygood-bye afterward. Go on...”

Page | 625Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

They trooped back into the corridor. Mad-Eye andTonks went in and closed the door of the ward behindthem. Fred raised his eyebrows.

“Fine,” he said coolly, rummaging in his pockets, “belike that. Don’t tell us anything.”

“Looking for these?” said George, holding out whatlooked like a tangle of flesh-colored string.

“You read my mind,” said Fred, grinning. “Let’s see ifSt. Mungo’s puts Imperturbable Charms on its warddoors, shall we?”

He and George disentangled the string and separatedfive Extendable Ears from each other. Fred andGeorge handed them around. Harry hesitated to takeone.

“Go on, Harry, take it! You saved Dad’s life, ifanyone’s got the right to eavesdrop on him it’s you...”

Grinning in spite of himself, Harry took the end of thestring and inserted it into his ear as the twins haddone.

“Okay, go!” Fred whispered.

The flesh-colored strings wriggled like long skinnyworms, then snaked under the door. For a fewseconds Harry could hear nothing, then he heardTonks whispering as clearly as though she werestanding right beside him.

"... they searched the whole area but they couldn’tfind the snake anywhere, it just seems to havevanished after it attacked you, Arthur... But You-Know-Who can’t have expected a snake to get in, canhe?”

Page | 626Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I reckon he sent it as a lookout,” growled Moody, “’cause he’s not had any luck so far, has he? No, Ireckon he’s trying to get a clearer picture of what he’sfacing and if Arthur hadn’t been there the beastwould’ve had much more time to look around. SoPotter says he saw it all happen?”

“Yes,” said Mrs. Weasley. She sounded rather uneasy.“You know, Dumbledore seems almost to have beenwaiting for Harry to see something like this...”

“Yeah, well,” said Moody, “there’s something funnyabout the Potter kid, we all know that.”

“Dumbledore seemed worried about Harry when Ispoke to him this morning,” whispered Mrs. Weasley.

“ ’Course he’s worried,” growled Moody. “The boy’sseeing things from inside You-Know-Who’s snake...Obviously, Potter doesn’t realize what that means, butif You-Know-Who’s possessing him —”

Harry pulled the Extendable Ear out of his own, hisheart hammering very fast and heat rushing up hisface. He looked around at the others. They were allstaring at him, the strings still trailing from theirears, looking suddenly fearful.

Page | 627Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





CHRISTMAS ON THE CLOSED WARD

Was this why Dumbledore would no longer meetHarry’s eyes? Did he expect to see Voldemort staringout of them, afraid, perhaps, that their vivid greenmight turn suddenly to scarlet, with catlike slits forpupils? Harry remembered how the snakelike face ofVoldemort had once forced itself out of the back ofProfessor Quirrell’s head, and he ran his hand overthe back of his own, wondering what it would feel likeif Voldemort burst out of his skull...

He felt dirty, contaminated, as though he werecarrying some deadly germ, unworthy to sit on theunderground train back from the hospital withinnocent, clean people whose minds and bodies werefree of the taint of Voldemort... He had not merelyseen the snake, he had been the snake, he knew itnow...

And then a truly terrible thought occurred to him, amemory bobbing to the surface of his mind, one thatmade his insides writhe and squirm like serpents...

Page | 628Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What’s he after apart from followers?”

“Stuff he can only get by stealth ... like a weapon.Something he didn’t have last time.”

I’m the weapon, Harry thought, and it was as thoughpoison were pumping through his veins, chilling him,bringing him out in a sweat as he swayed with thetrain through the dark tunnel. I’m the one Voldemort’strying to use, that’s why they’ve got guards around meeverywhere I go, it’s not for my protection, it’s for otherpeople’s, only it’s not working, they can’t havesomeone on me all the time at Hogwarts... I did attackMr. Weasley last night, it was me, Voldemort made medo it and he could be inside me, listening to mythoughts right now...

“Are you all right, Harry, dear?” whispered Mrs.Weasley, leaning across Ginny to speak to him as thetrain rattled along through its dark tunnel. “You don’tlook very well. Are you feeling sick?”

They were all watching him. He shook his headviolently and stared up at an advertisement for homeinsurance.

“Harry, dear, are you sure you’re all right?” said Mrs.Weasley in a worried voice, as they walked around theunkempt patch of grass in the middle of GrimmauldPlace. “You look ever so pale... Are you sure you sleptthis morning? You go upstairs to bed right now, andyou can have a couple of hours’ sleep before dinner,all right?”

He nodded; here was a ready-made excuse not to talkto any of the others, which was precisely what hewanted, so when she opened the front door heproceeded straight past the troll’s leg umbrella stand

Page | 629Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and up the stairs and hurried into his and Ron’sbedroom.

Here he began to pace up and down, past the twobeds and Phineas Nigellus’s empty portrait, his brainteeming and seething with questions and ever moredreadful ideas...

How had he become a snake? Perhaps he was anAnimagus... No, he couldn’t be, he would know...perhaps Voldemort was an Animagus... Yes, thoughtHarry, that would fit, he would turn into a snake ofcourse ... and when he’s possessing me, then we bothtransform... That still doesn’t explain how come I got toLondon and back to my bed in the space of about fiveminutes, though... But then Voldemort’s about the mostpowerful wizard in the world, apart from Dumbledore,it’s probably no problem at all to him to transportpeople like that...

And then, with a terrible stab of panic he thought, butthis is insane — if Voldemort’s possessing me, I’mgiving him a clear view into the headquarters of theOrder of the Phoenix right now! He’ll know who’s in theOrder and where Sirius is ... and I’ve heard loads ofstuff I shouldn’t have, everything Sirius told me thefirst night I was here...

There was only one thing for it: He would have toleave Grimmauld Place straightaway. He would spendChristmas at Hogwarts without the others, whichwould keep them safe over the holidays at least... Butno, that wouldn’t do, there were still plenty of peopleat Hogwarts to maim and injure, what if it wasSeamus, Dean, or Neville next time? He stopped hispacing and stood staring at Phineas Nigellus’s emptyframe. A leaden sensation was settling in the pit of hisstomach. He had no alternative: He was going to have

Page | 630Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

to return to Privet Drive, cut himself off from otherwizards entirely...

Well, if he had to do it, he thought, there was no pointhanging around. Trying with all his might not to thinkhow the Dursleys were going to react when they foundhim on their doorstep six months earlier than theyhad expected, he strode over to his trunk, slammedthe lid shut and locked it, then glanced aroundautomatically for Hedwig before remembering that shewas still at Hogwarts — well, her cage would be oneless thing to carry — he seized one end of his trunkand had dragged it halfway toward the door when asneaky voice said, “Running away, are we?”

He looked around. Phineas Nigellus had appearedupon the canvas of his portrait and was leaningagainst the frame, watching Harry with an amusedexpression on his face.

“Not running away, no,” said Harry shortly, dragginghis trunk a few more feet across the room.

“I thought,” said Phineas Nigellus, stroking hispointed beard, “that to belong in Gryffindor Houseyou were supposed to be brave? It looks to me asthough you would have been better off in my ownhouse. We Slytherins are brave, yes, but not stupid.For instance, given the choice, we will always chooseto save our own necks.”

“It’s not my own neck I’m saving,” said Harry tersely,tugging the trunk over a patch of particularly uneven,moth-eaten carpet right in front of the door.

“Oh I see,” said Phineas Nigellus, still stroking hisbeard. “This is no cowardly flight — you are beingnoble.”

Page | 631Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry ignored him. His hand was on the doorknobwhen Phineas Nigellus said lazily, “I have a messagefor you from Albus Dumbledore.”

Harry spun around.

“What is it?”

“Stay where you are.”

“I haven’t moved!” said Harry, his hand still upon thedoorknob. “So what’s the message?”

“I have just given it to you, dolt,” said PhineasNigellus smoothly. “Dumbledore says, ‘Stay whereyou are. ’ ”

“Why?” said Harry eagerly, dropping the end of histrunk. “Why does he want me to stay? What else didhe say?”

“Nothing whatsoever,” said Phineas Nigellus, raising athin black eyebrow as though he found Harryimpertinent.

Harry’s temper rose to the surface like a snakerearing from long grass. He was exhausted, he wasconfused beyond measure, he had experienced terror,relief, and then terror again in the last twelve hours,and still Dumbledore did not want to talk to him!

“So that’s it, is it?” he said loudly. “Stay there? That’sall anyone could tell me after I got attacked by thosedementors too! Just stay put while the grown-upssort it out, Harry! We won’t bother telling youanything, though, because your tiny little brain mightnot be able to cope with it!”

Page | 632Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You know,” said Phineas Nigellus, even more loudlythan Harry, “this is precisely why I loathed being ateacher! Young people are so infernally convinced thatthey are absolutely right about everything. Has it notoccurred to you, my poor puffed-up popinjay, thatthere might be an excellent reason why theheadmaster of Hogwarts is not confiding every tinydetail of his plans to you? Have you never paused,while feeling hard-done-by, to note that followingDumbledore’s orders has never yet led you into harm?No. No, like all young people, you are quite sure thatyou alone feel and think, you alone recognize danger,you alone are the only one clever enough to realizewhat the Dark Lord may be planning...”

“He is planning something to do with me, then?” saidHarry swiftly.

“Did I say that?” said Phineas Nigellus, idly examininghis silk gloves. “Now, if you will excuse me, I havebetter things to do than to listen to adolescentagonizing... Good day to you...”

And he strolled into his frame and out of sight.

“Fine, go then!” Harry bellowed at the empty frame.“And tell Dumbledore thanks for nothing!”

The empty canvas remained silent. Fuming, Harrydragged his trunk back to the foot of his bed, thenthrew himself facedown upon the moth-eaten covers,his eyes shut, his body heavy and aching...

He felt he had journeyed miles and miles... It seemedimpossible that less than twenty-four hours ago ChoChang had been approaching him under themistletoe... He was so tired... He was scared to sleep... yet he did not know how long he could fight it...Dumbledore had told him to stay... That must meanPage | 633Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

he was allowed to sleep... But he was scared... What ifit happened again ... ?

He was sinking into shadows...

It was as though a film in his head had been waitingto start. He was walking down a deserted corridortoward a plain black door, past rough stone walls,torches, and an open doorway onto a flight of stonesteps leading downstairs on the left...

He reached the black door but could not open it... Hestood gazing at it, desperate for entry... Something hewanted with all his heart lay beyond... A prize beyondhis dreams... If only his scar would stop prickling ...then he would be able to think more clearly...

“Harry,” said Ron’s voice, from far, far away, “Mumsays dinner’s ready, but she’ll save you something ifyou want to stay in bed...”

Harry opened his eyes, but Ron had already left theroom.

He doesn’t want to be on his own with me, Harrythought. Not after what he heard Moody say ...

He supposed none of them would want him thereanymore now that they knew what was inside him...

He would not go down to dinner; he would not inflicthis company upon them. He turned over onto hisother side and after a while dropped back off to sleep,waking much later in the early hours of the morning,with his insides aching with hunger, and Ron snoringin the next bed. Squinting around the room he sawthe dark outline of Phineas Nigellus standing again inhis portrait and it occurred to Harry that Dumbledore

Page | 634Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

had probably set Phineas Nigellus to watch over him,in case he attacked somebody else.

The feeling of being unclean intensified. He halfwished he had not obeyed Dumbledore and stayed...

If this was how life was going to be in GrimmauldPlace from now on, maybe he would be better off inPrivet Drive after all.

Everybody else spent the following morning puttingup Christmas decorations. Harry could not rememberSirius ever being in such a good mood; he wasactually singing carols, apparently delighted that hewas to have company over Christmas. Harry couldhear his voice echoing up through the floor in the coldand empty drawing room where he was sitting alone,watching the sky outside the windows growing whiter,threatening snow, all the time feeling a savagepleasure that he was giving the others theopportunity to keep talking about him, as they werebound to be doing. When he heard Mrs. Weasleycalling his name softly up the stairs aroundlunchtime he retreated farther upstairs and ignoredher.

It was around six o’clock in the evening that thedoorbell rang and Mrs. Black started screamingagain. Assuming that Mundungus or some otherOrder member had come to call, Harry merely settledhimself more comfortably against the wall ofBuckbeak the hippogriff’s room where he was hiding,trying to ignore how hungry he felt as he fedBuckbeak dead rats. It came as a slight shock whensomebody hammered hard on the door a few minuteslater.

“I know you’re in there,” said Hermione’s voice. “Willyou please come out? I want to talk to you.”

Page | 635Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What are you doing here?” Harry asked her, pullingopen the door, as Buckbeak resumed his scratchingat the straw-strewn floor for any fragments of rat hemight have dropped. “I thought you were skiing withyour mum and dad.”

“Well, to tell the truth, skiing’s not really my thing,”said Hermione. “So I’ve come for Christmas.” Therewas snow in her hair and her face was pink with cold.“But don’t tell Ron that, I told him it’s really goodbecause he kept laughing so much. Anyway, Mumand Dad are a bit disappointed, but I’ve told themthat everyone who’s serious about the exams isstaying at Hogwarts to study. They want me to dowell, they’ll understand. Anyway,” she said briskly,“let’s go to your bedroom, Ron’s mum’s lit a fire inthere and she’s sent up sandwiches.”

Harry followed her back to the second floor. When heentered the bedroom he was rather surprised to seeboth Ron and Ginny waiting for them, sitting on Ron’sbed.

“I came on the Knight Bus,” said Hermione airily,pulling off her jacket before Harry had time to speak.“Dumbledore told me what had happened first thingthis morning, but I had to wait for term to endofficially before setting off. Umbridge is already lividthat you lot disappeared right under her nose, eventhough Dumbledore told her Mr. Weasley was in St.Mungo’s, and he’d given you all permission to visit. So

She sat down next to Ginny, and the two girls andRon looked up at Harry.

“How’re you feeling?” asked Hermione.

“Fine,” said Harry stiffly.

Page | 636Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, don’t lie, Harry,” she said impatiently. “Ron andGinny say you’ve been hiding from everyone since yougot back from St. Mungo’s.”

“They do, do they?” said Harry, glaring at Ron andGinny. Ron looked down at his feet but Ginny seemedquite unabashed.

“Well, you have!” she said. “And you won’t look at anyof us!”

“It’s you lot who won’t look at me!” said Harry angrily.

“Maybe you’re taking it in turns to look and keepmissing each other,” suggested Hermione, the cornersof her mouth twitching.

“Very funny,” snapped Harry, turning away.

“Oh, stop feeling all misunderstood,” said Hermionesharply. “Look, the others have told me what youoverheard last night on the Extendable Ears —”

“Yeah?” growled Harry, his hands deep in his pocketsas he watched the snow now falling thickly outside.“All been talking about me, have you? Well, I’mgetting used to it...”

“We wanted to talk to you, Harry,” said Ginny, “but asyou’ve been hiding ever since we got back —”

“I didn’t want anyone to talk to me,” said Harry, whowas feeling more and more nettled.

“Well, that was a bit stupid of you,” said Ginnyangrily, “seeing as you don’t know anyone but mewho’s been possessed by You-Know-Who, and I cantell you how it feels.”

Page | 637Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry remained quite still as the impact of thesewords hit him. Then he turned on the spot to faceher.

“I forgot,” he said.

“Lucky you,” said Ginny coolly.

“I’m sorry,” Harry said, and he meant it. “So ... so doyou think I’m being possessed, then?”

“Well, can you remember everything you’ve beendoing?” Ginny asked. “Are there big blank periodswhere you don’t know what you’ve been up to?”

Harry racked his brains.

“No,” he said.

“Then You-Know-Who hasn’t ever possessed you,”said Ginny simply. “When he did it to me, I couldn’tremember what I’d been doing for hours at a time. I’dfind myself somewhere and not know how I got there.”

Harry hardly dared believe her, yet his heart waslightening almost in spite of himself.

“That dream I had about your dad and the snake,though —”

“Harry, you’ve had these dreams before,” Hermionesaid. “You had flashes of what Voldemort was up tolast year.”

“This was different,” said Harry, shaking his head. “Iwas inside that snake. It was like I was the snake...What if Voldemort somehow transported me toLondon — ?”

Page | 638Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“One day,” said Hermione, sounding thoroughlyexasperated, “you’ll read Hogwarts, A History, andperhaps that will remind you that you can’t Apparateor Disapparate inside Hogwarts. Even Voldemortcouldn’t just make you fly out of your dormitory,Harry.”

“You didn’t leave your bed, mate,” said Ron. “I sawyou thrashing around in your sleep about a minutebefore we could wake you up...”

Harry started pacing up and down the room again,thinking. What they were all saying was not onlycomforting, it made sense... Without really thinkinghe took a sandwich from the plate on the bed andcrammed it hungrily into his mouth...

I’m not the weapon after all, thought Harry. His heartswelled with happiness and relief, and he felt likejoining in as they heard Sirius tramping past theirdoor toward Buckbeak’s room, singing “God Rest YeMerry, Hippogriffs” at the top of his voice.

How could he have dreamed of returning to PrivetDrive for Christmas? Sirius’s delight at having thehouse full again, and especially at having Harry back,was infectious. He was no longer their sullen host ofthe summer; now he seemed determined thateveryone should enjoy themselves as much, if notmore, than they would have done at Hogwarts, and heworked tirelessly in the run-up to Christmas Day,cleaning and decorating with their help, so that bythe time they all went to bed on Christmas Eve thehouse was barely recognizable. The tarnishedchandeliers were no longer hung with cobwebs butwith garlands of holly and gold and silver streamers;magical snow glittered in heaps over the threadbarecarpets; a great Christmas tree, obtained byMundungus and decorated with live fairies, blockedPage | 639Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Sirius’s family tree from view; and even the stuffed elfheads on the hall wall wore Father Christmas hatsand beards.

Harry awoke on Christmas morning to find a stack ofpresents at the foot of his bed and Ron alreadyhalfway through opening his own, rather larger, pile.

“Good haul this year,” he informed Harry through acloud of paper. “Thanks for the Broom Compass, it’sexcellent, beats Hermione’s — she’s got me ahomework planner—”

Harry sorted through his presents and found one withHermione’s handwriting on it. She had given him tooa book that resembled a diary, except that it saidthings like “Do it today or later you’ll pay\” every timehe opened a page.

Sirius and Lupin had given Harry a set of excellentbooks entitled Practical Defensive Magic and Its UseAgainst the Dark Arts, which had superb, movingcolor illustrations of all the counterjinxes and hexes itdescribed. Harry flicked through the first volumeeagerly; he could see it was going to be highly usefulin his plans for the D.A. Hagrid had sent a furrybrown wallet that had fangs, which were presumablysupposed to be an antitheft device, but unfortunatelyprevented Harry putting any money in without gettinghis fingers ripped off. Tonks’s present was a small,working model of a Firebolt, which Harry watched flyaround the room, wishing he still had his full-sizeversion; Ron had given him an enormous box ofEvery-Flavor Beans; Mr. and Mrs. Weasley the usualhand-knitted jumper and some mince pies; andDobby, a truly dreadful painting that Harry suspectedhad been done by the elf himself. He had just turnedit upside down to see whether it looked better that

Page | 640Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

way when, with a loud crack, Fred and GeorgeApparated at the foot of his bed.

“Merry Christmas,” said George. “Don’t go downstairsfor a bit.”

“Why not?” said Ron.

“Mum’s crying again,” said Fred heavily. “Percy sentback his Christmas jumper.”

“Without a note,” added George. “Hasn’t asked howDad is or visited him or anything...”

“We tried to comfort her,” said Fred, moving aroundthe bed to look at Harry’s portrait. “Told her Percy’snothing more than a humongous pile of rat droppings

“— didn’t work,” said George, helping himself to aChocolate Frog. “So Lupin took over. Best let himcheer her up before we go down for breakfast, Ireckon.”

“What’s that supposed to be anyway?” asked Fred,squinting at Dobby’s painting. “Looks like a gibbonwith two black eyes.”

“It’s Harry!” said George, pointing at the back of thepicture. “Says so on the back!”

“Good likeness,” said Fred, grinning. Harry threw hisnew homework diary at him; it hit the wall oppositeand fell to the floor where it said happily, “If you’vedotted the i’s and crossed the t’s then you may dowhatever you pleasel”

They got up and dressed; they could hear variousinhabitants of the house calling “Merry Christmas” to

Page | 641Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

each other. On their way downstairs they metHermione. “Thanks for the book, Harry!” she saidhappily. “I’ve been wanting that New Theory ofNumerology for ages! And that perfume is reallyunusual, Ron.”

“No problem,” said Ron. “Who’s that for anyway?” headded, nodding at the neatly wrapped present shewas carrying.

“Kreacher,” said Hermione brightly.

“It had better not be clothes!” said Ron warningly.“You know what Sirius said, Kreacher knows toomuch, we can’t set him free!”

“It isn’t clothes,” said Hermione, “although if I had myway I’d certainly give him something to wear otherthan that filthy old rag. No, it’s a patchwork quilt, Ithought it would brighten up his bedroom.”

“What bedroom?” said Harry, dropping his voice to awhisper as they were passing the portrait of Sirius’smother.

“Well, Sirius says it’s not so much a bedroom, more akind of— den,” said Hermione. “Apparently he sleepsunder the boiler in that cupboard off the kitchen.”

Mrs. Weasley was the only person in the basementwhen they arrived there. She was standing at thestove and sounded as though she had a bad headcold when she wished them Merry Christmas, andthey all averted their eyes.

“So, this is Kreacher’s bedroom?” said Ron, strollingover to a dingy door in the corner opposite the pantrywhich Harry had never seen open.

Page | 642Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Hermione, now sounding a little nervous.“Er ... I think we’d better knock ...”

Ron rapped the door with his knuckles but there wasno reply.

“He must be sneaking around upstairs,” he said, andwithout further ado pulled open the door. “Urgh.”

Harry peered inside. Most of the cupboard was takenup with a very large and old-fashioned boiler, but inthe foot’s space underneath the pipes Kreacher hadmade himself something that looked like a nest. Ajumble of assorted rags and smelly old blankets werepiled on the floor and the small dent in the middle ofit showed where Kreacher curled up to sleep everynight. Here and there among the material were stalebread crusts and moldy old bits of cheese. In a farcorner glinted small objects and coins that Harryguessed Kreacher had saved, magpielike, fromSirius’s purge of the house, and he had also managedto retrieve the silver-framed family photographs thatSirius had thrown away over the summer. Their glassmight be shattered, but still the little black-and-whitepeople inside them peered haughtily up at him,including — he felt a little jolt in his stomach — thedark, heavy-lidded woman whose trial he hadwitnessed in Dumbledore’s Pensieve: BellatrixLestrange. By the looks of it, hers was Kreacher’sfavorite photograph; he had placed it to the fore of allthe others and had mended the glass clumsily withSpellotape.

“I think I’ll just leave his present here,” saidHermione, laying the package neatly in the middle ofthe depression in the rags and blankets and closingthe door quietly. “He’ll find it later, that’ll be fine...”

Page | 643Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Come to think of it,” said Sirius, emerging from thepantry carrying a large turkey as they closed thecupboard door, “has anyone actually seen Kreacherlately?”

“I haven’t seen him since the night we came backhere,” said Harry. “You were ordering him out of thekitchen.”

“Yeah ...” said Sirius, frowning. “You know, I thinkthat’s the last time I saw him, too... He must behiding upstairs somewhere...”

“He couldn’t have left, could he?” said Harry. “I mean,when you said ‘out,’ maybe he thought you meant, getout of the house?”

“No, no, house-elves can’t leave unless they’re givenclothes, they’re tied to their family’s house,” saidSirius.

“They can leave the house if they really want to,”

Harry contradicted him. “Dobby did, he left theMalfoys’ to give me warnings two years ago. He had topunish himself afterward, but he still managed it.”

Sirius looked slightly disconcerted for a moment, thensaid, “I’ll look for him later, I expect I’ll find himupstairs crying his eyes out over my mother’s oldbloomers or something... Of course, he might havecrawled into the airing cupboard and died... But Imustn’t get my hopes up...”

Fred, George, and Ron laughed; Hermione, however,looked reproachful.

Once they had had their Christmas lunch, theWeasleys and Harry and Hermione were planning topay Mr. Weasley another visit, escorted by Mad-Eye

Page | 644Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and Lupin. Mundungus turned up in time forChristmas pudding and trifle, having managed to“borrow” a car for the occasion, as the Undergrounddid not run on Christmas Day. The car, which Harrydoubted very much had been taken with theknowledge or consent of its owner, had had a similarEnlarging Spell put upon it as the Weasleys’ old FordAnglia; although normally proportioned outside, tenpeople with Mundungus driving were able to fit into itquite comfortably. Mrs. Weasley hesitated at the pointof getting inside; Harry knew that her disapproval ofMundungus was battling with her dislike of travelingwithout magic; finally the cold outside and herchildren’s pleading triumphed, and she settled herselfinto the backseat between Fred and Bill with goodgrace.

The journey to St. Mungo’s was quite quick, as therewas very little traffic on the roads. A small trickle ofwitches and wizards were creeping furtively up theotherwise deserted street to visit the hospital. Harryand the others got out of the car, and Mundungusdrove off around the corner to wait for them; theystrolled casually toward the window where thedummy in green nylon stood, then, one by one,stepped through the glass.

The reception area looked pleasantly festive: Thecrystal orbs that illuminated St. Mungo’s had beenturned to red and gold so that they became gigantic,glowing Christmas baubles; holly hung around everydoorway, and shining white Christmas trees coveredin magical snow and icicles glittered in every corner,each topped with a gleaming gold star. It was lesscrowded than the last time they had been there,although halfway across the room Harry foundhimself shunted aside by a witch with a walnutjammed up her left nostril.

Page | 645Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Family argument, eh?” smirked the blonde witchbehind the desk. “You’re the third I’ve seen today ...Spell Damage, fourth floor ...”

They found Mr. Weasley propped up in bed with theremains of his turkey dinner on a tray in his lap anda rather sheepish expression on his face.

“Everything all right, Arthur?” asked Mrs. Weasley,after they had all greeted Mr. Weasley and handedover their presents.

“Fine, fine,” said Mr. Weasley, a little too heartily.

“You — er — haven’t seen Healer Smethwyck, haveyou?”

“No,” said Mrs. Weasley suspiciously, “why?”

“Nothing, nothing,” said Mr. Weasley airily, starting tounwrap his pile of gifts. “Well, everyone had a goodday? What did you all get for Christmas? Oh, Harry —this is absolutely wonderful —”

For he had just opened Harry’s gift of fuse-wire andscrewdrivers. Mrs. Weasley did not seem entirelysatisfied with Mr. Weasley’s answer. As her husbandleaned over to shake Harry’s hand, she peered at thebandaging under his nightshirt.

“Arthur,” she said, with a snap in her voice like amousetrap, “you’ve had your bandages changed. Whyhave you had your bandages changed a day early,Arthur? They told me they wouldn’t need doing untiltomorrow.”

“What?” said Mr. Weasley, looking rather frightenedand pulling the bed covers higher up his chest. “No,no — it’s nothing — it’s — I —”

Page | 646Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He seemed to deflate under Mrs. Weasley’s piercinggaze.

“Well — now don’t get upset, Molly, but Augustus Pyehad an idea... He’s the Trainee Healer, you know,lovely young chap and very interested in ... um ...complementary medicine... I mean, some of these oldMuggle remedies ... well, they’re called stitches, Molly,and they work very well on — on Muggle wounds —”

Mrs. Weasley let out an ominous noise somewherebetween a shriek and a snarl. Lupin strolled awayfrom the bed and over to the werewolf, who had novisitors and was looking rather wistfully at the crowdaround Mr. Weasley; Bill muttered something aboutgetting himself a cup of tea and Fred and George leaptup to accompany him, grinning.

“Do you mean to tell me,” said Mrs. Weasley, hervoice growing louder with every word and apparentlyunaware that her fellow visitors were scurrying forcover, “that you have been messing about withMuggle remedies?”

“Not messing about, Molly, dear,” said Mr. Weasleyimploringly. “It was just — just something Pye and Ithought we’d try — only, most unfortunately — well,with these particular kinds of wounds — it doesn’tseem to work as well as we’d hoped —”

“Meaning?”

“Well ... well, I don’t know whether you know what —what stitches are?”

“It sounds as though you’ve been trying to sew yourskin back together,” said Mrs. Weasley with a snort ofmirthless laughter, “but even you, Arthur, wouldn’tbe that stupid —”

Page | 647Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I fancy a cup of tea too,” said Harry, jumping to hisfeet.

Hermione, Ron, and Ginny almost sprinted to thedoor with him. As it swung closed behind them, theyheard Mrs. Weasley shriek, “WHAT DO YOU MEAN,THAT’S THE GENERAL IDEA?”

“Typical Dad,” said Ginny, shaking her head as theyset off up the corridor. “Stitches ... I ask you ...”

“Well, you know, they do work well on non-magicalwounds,” said Hermione fairly. “I suppose somethingin that snake’s venom dissolves them or something...I wonder where the tearoom is?”

“Fifth floor,” said Harry, remembering the sign overthe Welcome Witch’s desk.

They walked along the corridor through a set ofdouble doors and found a rickety staircase lined withmore portraits of brutal-looking Healers. As theyclimbed it, the various Healers called out to them,diagnosing odd complaints and suggesting horribleremedies. Ron was seriously affronted when amedieval wizard called out that he clearly had a badcase of spattergroit.

“And what’s that supposed to be?” he asked angrily,as the Healer pursued him through six moreportraits, shoving the occupants out of the way.

“ Tis a most grievous affliction of the skin, youngmaster, that will leave you pockmarked and moregruesome even than you are now —”

“Watch who you’re calling gruesome!” said Ron, hisears turning red.

Page | 648Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“The only remedy is to take the liver of a toad, bind ittight about your throat, stand naked by the full moonin a barrel of eels’ eyes —”

“I have not got spattergroit!”

“But the unsightly blemishes upon your visage, youngmaster —”

“They’re freckles!” said Ron furiously. “Now get backin your own picture and leave me alone!”

He rounded on the others, who were all keepingdeterminedly straight faces.

“What floor’s this?”

“I think it’s the fifth,” said Hermione.

“Nah, it’s the fourth,” said Harry, “one more —”

But as he stepped onto the landing he came to anabrupt halt, staring at the small window set into thedouble doors that marked the start of a corridorsignposted SPELL DAMAGE. A man was peering outat them all with his nose pressed against the glass.

He had wavy blond hair, bright blue eyes, and abroad vacant smile that revealed dazzlingly whiteteeth.

“Blimey!” said Ron, also staring at the man.

“Oh my goodness,” said Hermione suddenly, soundingbreathless. “Professor Lockhart!”

Their ex-Defense Against the Dark Arts teacherpushed open the doors and moved toward them,wearing a long lilac dressing gown.

Page | 649Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, hello there!” he said. “I expect you’d like myautograph, would you?”

“Hasn’t changed much, has he?” Harry muttered toGinny, who grinned.

“Er — how are you, Professor?” said Ron, soundingslightly guilty. It had been Ron’s malfunctioning wandthat had damaged Professor Lockhart’s memory sobadly that he had landed here in the first place,though, as Lockhart had been attempting topermanently wipe Harry and Ron’s memories at thetime, Harry’s sympathy was limited.

“I’m very well indeed, thank you!” said Lockhartexuberantly, pulling a rather battered peacock-featherquill from his pocket. “Now, how many autographswould you like? I can do joined-up writing now, youknow!”

“Er — we don’t want any at the moment, thanks,”said Ron, raising his eyebrows at Harry, who asked,“Professor, should you be wandering around thecorridors? Shouldn’t you be in a ward?”

The smile faded slowly from Lockhart’s face. For a fewmoments he gazed intently at Harry, then he said,“Haven’t we met?”

“Er ... yeah, we have,” said Harry. “You used to teachus at Hogwarts, remember?”

“Teach?” repeated Lockhart, looking faintly unsettled.“Me? Did I?”

And then the smile reappeared upon his face sosuddenly it was rather alarming. “Taught youeverything you know, I expect, did I? Well, how aboutthose autographs, then? Shall we say a round dozen,

Page | 650Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

you can give them to all your little friends then andnobody will be left out!”

But just then a head poked out of a door at the farend of the corridor and a voice said, “Gilderoy, younaughty boy, where have you wandered off to?”

A motherly looking Healer wearing a tinsel wreath inher hair came bustling up the corridor, smilingwarmly at Harry and the others.

“Oh Gilderoy, you’ve got visitors! How lovely, and onChristmas Day too! Do you know, he never getsvisitors, poor lamb, and I can’t think why, he’s such asweetie, aren’t you?”

“We’re doing autographs!” Gilderoy told the Healerwith another glittering smile. “They want loads ofthem, won’t take no for an answer! I just hope we’vegot enough photographs!”

“Listen to him,” said the Healer, taking Lockhart’sarm and beaming fondly at him as though he were aprecocious two-year-old. “He was rather well known afew years ago; we very much hope that this liking forgiving autographs is a sign that his memory might becoming back a little bit. Will you step this way? He’sin a closed ward, you know, he must have slipped outwhile I was bringing in the Christmas presents, thedoor’s usually kept locked ... not that he’s dangerous!But,” she lowered her voice to a whisper, “bit of adanger to himself, bless him... Doesn’t know who heis, you see, wanders off and can’t remember how toget back... It is nice of you to have come to see him —

“Er,” said Ron, gesturing uselessly at the floor above,“actually, we were just — er —”

Page | 651Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But the Healer was smiling expectantly at them, andRon’s feeble mutter of “going to have a cup of tea”trailed away into nothingness. They looked at oneanother rather hopelessly and then followed Lockhartand his Healer along the corridor.

“Let’s not stay long,” Ron said quietly.

The Healer pointed her wand at the door of the JanusThickey ward and muttered “Alohomora.” The doorswung open and she led the way inside, keeping afirm grasp on Gilderoy’s arm until she had settledhim into an armchair beside his bed.

“This is our long-term resident ward,” she informedHarry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny in a low voice. “Forpermanent spell damage, you know. Of course, withintensive remedial potions and charms and a bit ofluck, we can produce some improvement... Gilderoydoes seem to be getting back some sense of himself,and we’ve seen a real improvement in Mr. Bode, heseems to be regaining the power of speech very well,though he isn’t speaking any language we recognizeyet... Well, I must finish giving out the Christmaspresents, I’ll leave you all to chat...”

Harry looked around; this ward bore unmistakablesigns of being a permanent home to its residents.

They had many more personal effects around theirbeds than in Mr. Weasley’s ward; the wall aroundGilderoy’s headboard, for instance, was papered withpictures of himself, all beaming toothily and waving atthe new arrivals. He had autographed many of themto himself in disjointed, childish writing. The momenthe had been deposited in his chair by the Healer,Gilderoy pulled a fresh stack of photographs towardhim, seized a quill, and started signing them allfeverishly.

Page | 652Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You can put them in envelopes,” he said to Ginny,throwing the signed pictures into her lap one by oneas he finished them. “I am not forgotten, you know,no, I still receive a very great deal of fan mail... GladysGudgeon writes weekly... I just wish I knew why...”

He paused, looking faintly puzzled, then beamedagain and returned to his signing with renewed vigor.“I suspect it is simply my good looks...”

A sallow-skinned, mournful-looking wizard lay in thebed opposite, staring at the ceiling; he was mumblingto himself and seemed quite unaware of anythingaround him. Two beds along was a woman whoseentire head was covered in fur; Harry rememberedsomething similar happening to Hermione duringtheir second year, although fortunately the damage,in her case, had not been permanent. At the far endof the ward flowery curtains had been drawn aroundtwo beds to give the occupants and their visitors someprivacy.

“Here you are, Agnes,” said the Healer brightly to thefurry-faced woman, handing her a small pile ofChristmas presents. “See, not forgotten, are you? Andyour son’s sent an owl to say he’s visiting tonight, sothat’s nice, isn’t it?”

Agnes gave several loud barks.

“And look, Broderick, you’ve been sent a potted plantand a lovely calendar with a different fancy hippogrifffor each month, they’ll brighten things up, won’tthey?” said the Healer, bustling along to themumbling man, setting a rather ugly plant with long,swaying tentacles on the bedside cabinet and fixingthe calendar to the wall with her wand. “And — oh,Mrs. Longbottom, are you leaving already?”

Page | 653Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s head spun round. The curtains had beendrawn back from the two beds at the end of the wardand two visitors were walking back down the aislebetween the beds: a formidable-looking old witchwearing a long green dress, a moth-eaten fox fur, anda pointed hat decorated with what was unmistakablya stuffed vulture and, trailing behind her lookingthoroughly depressed — Neville.

With a sudden rush of understanding, Harry realizedwho the people in the end beds must be. He castaround wildly for some means of distracting theothers so that Neville could leave the ward unnoticedand unquestioned, but Ron had looked up at thesound of the name “Longbottom” too, and beforeHarry could stop him had called, “Neville\”

Neville jumped and cowered as though a bullet hadnarrowly missed him.

“It’s us, Neville!” said Ron brightly, getting to his feet.“Have you seen? Lockhart’s here! Who’ve you beenvisiting?”

“Friends of yours, Neville, dear?” said Neville’sgrandmother graciously, bearing down upon them all.

Neville looked as though he would rather be anywherein the world but here. A dull purple flush wascreeping up his plump face and he was not makingeye contact with any of them.

“Ah, yes,” said his grandmother, looking closely atHarry and sticking out a shriveled, clawlike hand forhim to shake. “Yes, yes, I know who you are, ofcourse. Neville speaks most highly of you.”

Page | 654Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Er — thanks,” said Harry, shaking hands. Neville didnot look at him, but stared at his own feet, the colordeepening in his face all the while.

“And you two are clearly Weasleys,” Mrs. Longbottomcontinued, proffering her hand regally to Ron andGinny in turn. “Yes, I know your parents — not well,of course — but fine people, fine people ... and youmust be Hermione Granger?”

Hermione looked rather startled that Mrs.

Longbottom knew her name, but shook hands all thesame.

“Yes, Neville’s told me all about you. Helped him outof a few sticky spots, haven’t you? He’s a good boy,”she said, casting a sternly appraising look down herrather bony nose at Neville, “but he hasn’t got hisfather’s talent, I’m afraid to say...” And she jerked herhead in the direction of the two beds at the end of theward, so that the stuffed vulture on her hat trembledalarmingly.

“What?” said Ron, looking amazed (Harry wanted tostamp on Ron’s foot, but that sort of thing was muchharder to bring off unnoticed when you were wearingjeans rather than robes). “Is that your dad down theend, Neville?”

“What’s this?” said Mrs. Longbottom sharply. “Haven’tyou told your friends about your parents, Neville?”

Neville took a deep breath, looked up at the ceiling,and shook his head. Harry could not remember everfeeling sorrier for anyone, but he could not think ofany way of helping Neville out of the situation.

“Well, it’s nothing to be ashamed of!” said Mrs.Longbottom angrily. “You should be proud, Neville,

Page | 655Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

proud). They didn’t give their health and their sanityso their only son would be ashamed of them, youknow!”

“I’m not ashamed,” said Neville very faintly, stilllooking anywhere but at Harry and the others. Ronwas now standing on tiptoe to look over at theinhabitants of the two beds.

“Well, you’ve got a funny way of showing it!” said Mrs.Longbottom. “My son and his wife,” she said, turninghaughtily to Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny, “weretortured into insanity by You-Know-Who’s followers.”

Hermione and Ginny both clapped their hands overtheir mouths. Ron stopped craning his neck to catcha glimpse of Neville’s parents and looked mortified.

“They were Aurors, you know, and very well respectedwithin the Wizarding community,” Mrs. Longbottomwent on. “Highly gifted, the pair of them. I — yes,

Alice dear, what is it?”

Neville’s mother had come edging down the ward inher nightdress. She no longer had the plump, happy-looking face Harry had seen in Moody’s oldphotograph of the original Order of the Phoenix. Herface was thin and worn now, her eyes seemedoverlarge, and her hair, which had turned white, waswispy and dead-looking. She did not seem to want tospeak, or perhaps she was not able to, but she madetimid motions toward Neville, holding something inher outstretched hand.

“Again?” said Mrs. Longbottom, sounding slightlyweary. “Very well, Alice dear, very well — Neville, takeit, whatever it is...”

Page | 656Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But Neville had already stretched out his hand, intowhich his mother dropped an empty DrooblesBlowing Gum wrapper.

“Very nice, dear,” said Neville’s grandmother in afalsely cheery voice, patting his mother on theshoulder. But Neville said quietly, “Thanks Mum.”

His mother tottered away, back up the ward,humming to herself. Neville looked around at theothers, his expression defiant, as though daring themto laugh, but Harry did not think he’d ever foundanything less funny in his life.

“Well, we’d better get back,” sighed Mrs. Longbottom,drawing on long green gloves. “Very nice to have metyou all. Neville, put that wrapper in the bin, she musthave given you enough of them to paper yourbedroom by now...”

But as they left, Harry was sure he saw Neville slipthe wrapper into his pocket.

The door closed behind them.

“I never knew,” said Hermione, who looked tearful.“Nor did I,” said Ron rather hoarsely.

“Nor me,” whispered Ginny.

They all looked at Harry.

“I did,” he said glumly. “Dumbledore told me but Ipromised I wouldn’t mention it ... that’s whatBellatrix Lestrange got sent to Azkaban for, using theCruciatus Curse on Neville’s parents until they losttheir minds.”

Page | 657Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Bellatrix Lestrange did that?” whispered Hermione,horrified. “That woman Kreacher’s got a photo of inhis den?”

There was a long silence, broken by Lockhart’s angryvoice. “Look, I didn’t learn joined-up writing fornothing, you know!”

Page | 658Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



OCCLUMENCY

Kreacher, it transpired, had been lurking in the attic.Sirius said he had found him up there, covered indust, no doubt looking for more relics of the Blackfamily to hide in his cupboard. Though Sirius seemedsatisfied with this story, it made Harry uneasy.Kreacher seemed to be in a better mood on hisreappearance, his bitter muttering had subsidedsomewhat, and he submitted to orders more docilelythan usual, though once or twice Harry caught thehouse-elf staring avidly at him, always looking quicklyaway when he saw that Harry had noticed.

Harry did not mention his vague suspicions to Sirius,whose cheerfulness was evaporating fast now thatChristmas was over. As the date of their departureback to Hogwarts drew nearer, he became more andmore prone to what Mrs. Weasley called “fits of thesullens,” in which he would become taciturn andgrumpy, often withdrawing to Buckbeak’s room forhours at a time. His gloom seeped through the house,oozing under doorways like some noxious gas, so thatall of them became infected by it.

Page | 659Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry did not want to leave Sirius all alone again withonly Kreacher for company. In fact, for the first timein his life, he was not looking forward to returning toHogwarts. Going back to school would mean placinghimself once again under the tyranny of DoloresUmbridge, who had no doubt managed to forcethrough another dozen decrees in their absence. Thenthere was no Quidditch to look forward to now that hehad been banned; there was every likelihood thattheir burden of homework would increase as theexams drew even nearer; Dumbledore remained asremote as ever; in fact, if it had not been for the D.A.,Harry felt he might have gone to Sirius and beggedhim to let him leave Hogwarts and remain inGrimmauld Place.

Then, on the very last day of the holidays, somethinghappened that made Harry positively dread his returnto school.

“Harry dear,” said Mrs. Weasley, poking her head intohis and Ron’s bedroom, where the pair of them wereplaying wizard chess watched by Hermione, Ginny,and Crookshanks, “could you come down to thekitchen? Professor Snape would like a word withyou.”

Harry did not immediately register what she had said;one of his castles was engaged in a violent tussle witha pawn of Ron’s, and he was egging it onenthusiastically.

“Squash him — squash him, he’s only a pawn, youidiot — sorry, Mrs. Weasley, what did you say?”

“Professor Snape, dear. In the kitchen. He’d like aword.”

Page | 660Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s mouth fell open in horror. He looked aroundat Ron, Hermione, and Ginny, all of whom weregaping back at him. Crookshanks, whom Hermionehad been restraining with difficulty for the pastquarter of an hour, leapt gleefully upon the board andset the pieces running for cover, squealing at the topof their voices.

“Snape?” said Harry blankly.

“Professor Snape, dear,” said Mrs. Weasleyreprovingly. “Now come on, quickly, he says he can’tstay long.”

“What’s he want with you?” said Ron, lookingunnerved as Mrs. Weasley withdrew from the room.

“You haven’t done anything, have you?”

“No!” said Harry indignantly, racking his brains tothink what he could have done that would makeSnape pursue him to Grimmauld Place. Had his lastpiece of homework perhaps earned a T?

He pushed open the kitchen door a minute or twolater to find Sirius and Snape both seated at the longkitchen table, glaring in opposite directions. Thesilence between them was heavy with mutual dislike.

A letter lay open on the table in front of Sirius.

“Er,” said Harry to announce his presence.

Snape looked around at him, his face framed betweencurtains of greasy black hair.

“Sit down, Potter.”

“You know,” said Sirius loudly, leaning back on hisrear chair legs and speaking to the ceiling, “I think I’d

Page | 661Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

prefer it if you didn’t give orders here, Snape. It’s myhouse, you see.”

An ugly flush suffused Snape’s pallid face. Harry satdown in a chair beside Sirius, facing Snape across thetable.

“I was supposed to see you alone, Potter,” said Snape,the familiar sneer curling his mouth, “but Black —”

“I’m his godfather,” said Sirius, louder than ever.

“I am here on Dumbledore’s orders,” said Snape,whose voice, by contrast, was becoming more andmore quietly waspish, “but by all means stay, Black, Iknow you like to feel ... involved.”

“What’s that supposed to mean?” said Sirius, lettinghis chair fall back onto all four legs with a loud bang.

“Merely that I am sure you must feel — ah —frustrated by the fact that you can do nothing useful,”Snape laid a delicate stress on the word, “for theOrder.”

It was Sirius’s turn to flush. Snape’s lip curled intriumph as he turned to Harry.

“The headmaster has sent me to tell you, Potter, thatit is his wish for you to study Occlumency this term.”

“Study what?” said Harry blankly.

Snape’s sneer became more pronounced.

“Occlumency, Potter. The magical defense of the mindagainst external penetration. An obscure branch ofmagic, but a highly useful one.”

Page | 662Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s heart began to pump very fast indeed.

Defense against external penetration? But he was notbeing possessed, they had all agreed on that...

“Why do I have to study Occlu — thing?” he blurtedout.

“Because the headmaster thinks it a good idea,” saidSnape smoothly. “You will receive private lessonsonce a week, but you will not tell anybody what youare doing, least of all Dolores Umbridge. Youunderstand?”

“Yes,” said Harry. “Who’s going to be teaching me?”Snape raised an eyebrow.

“I am,” he said.

Harry had the horrible sensation that his insides weremelting. Extra lessons with Snape — what on earthhad he done to deserve this? He looked quicklyaround at Sirius for support.

“Why can’t Dumbledore teach Harry?” asked Siriusaggressively. “Why you?”

“I suppose because it is a headmaster’s privilege todelegate less enjoyable tasks,” said Snape silkily. “Iassure you I did not beg for the job.” He got to hisfeet. “I will expect you at six o’clock on Mondayevening, Potter. My office. If anybody asks, you aretaking Remedial Potions. Nobody who has seen you inmy classes could deny you need them.”

He turned to leave, his black traveling cloak billowingbehind him.

Page | 663Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Wait a moment,” said Sirius, sitting up straighter inhis chair.

Snape turned back to face them, sneering.

“I am in rather a hurry, Black ... unlike you, I do nothave unlimited leisure time...”

“I’ll get to the point, then,” said Sirius, standing up.

He was rather taller than Snape who, Harry noticed,had balled his fist in the pocket of his cloak over whatHarry was sure was the handle of his wand. “If I hearyou’re using these Occlumency lessons to give Harrya hard time, you’ll have me to answer to.”

“How touching,” Snape sneered. “But surely you havenoticed that Potter is very like his father?”

“Yes, I have,” said Sirius proudly.

“Well then, you’ll know he’s so arrogant that criticismsimply bounces off him,” Snape said sleekly.

Sirius pushed his chair roughly aside and strodearound the table toward Snape, pulling out his wandas he went; Snape whipped out his own. They weresquaring up to each other, Sirius looking livid, Snapecalculating, his eyes darting from Sirius’s wand tip tohis face.

“Sirius!” said Harry loudly, but Sirius appeared not tohear him.

“I’ve warned you, Snivellus,” said Sirius, his facebarely a foot from Snape’s, “I don’t care if Dumbledorethinks you’ve reformed, I know better —”

“Oh, but why don’t you tell him so?” whisperedSnape. “Or are you afraid he might not take the

Page | 664Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

advice of a man who has been hiding inside hismother’s house for six months very seriously?”

“Tell me, how is Lucius Malfoy these days? I expecthe’s delighted his lapdog’s working at Hogwarts, isn’the?”

“Speaking of dogs,” said Snape softly, “did you knowthat Lucius Malfoy recognized you last time yourisked a little jaunt outside? Clever idea, Black,getting yourself seen on a safe station platform ...gave you a cast-iron excuse not to leave your hidey-hole in future, didn’t it?”

Sirius raised his wand.

“NO!” Harry yelled, vaulting over the table and tryingto get in between them, “Sirius, don’t —”

“Are you calling me a coward?” roared Sirius, trying topush Harry out of the way, but Harry would notbudge.

“Why, yes, I suppose I am,” said Snape.

“Harry — get — out — of— it!” snarled Sirius,pushing him out of the way with his free hand.

The kitchen door opened and the entire Weasleyfamily, plus Hermione, came inside, all looking veryhappy, with Mr. Weasley walking proudly in theirmidst dressed in a pair of striped pajamas covered bya mackintosh.

“Cured!” he announced brightly to the kitchen atlarge. “Completely cured!”

He and all the other Weasleys froze on the threshold,gazing at the scene in front of them, which was also

Page | 665Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

suspended in mid-action, both Sirius and Snapelooking toward the door with their wands pointinginto each other’s faces and Harry immobile betweenthem, a hand stretched out to each of them, trying toforce them apart.

“Merlin’s beard,” said Mr. Weasley, the smile slidingoff his face, “what’s going on here?”

Both Sirius and Snape lowered their wands. Harrylooked from one to the other. Each wore anexpression of utmost contempt, yet the unexpectedentrance of so many witnesses seemed to havebrought them to their senses. Snape pocketed hiswand and swept back across the kitchen, passing theWeasleys without comment. At the door he lookedback.

“Six o’clock Monday evening, Potter.”

He was gone. Sirius glared after him, his wand at hisside.

“But what’s been going on?” asked Mr. Weasley again.

“Nothing, Arthur,” said Sirius, who was breathingheavily as though he had just run a long distance.“Just a friendly little chat between two old schoolfriends...” With what looked like an enormous effort,he smiled. “So ... you’re cured? That’s great news,really great...”

“Yes, isn’t it?” said Mrs. Weasley, leading herhusband forward into a chair. “Healer Smethwyckworked his magic in the end, found an antidote towhatever that snake’s got in its fangs, and Arthur’slearned his lesson about dabbling in Mugglemedicine, haven’t you, dear?” she added, rathermenacingly.

Page | 666Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, Molly dear,” said Mr. Weasley meekly.

That night’s meal should have been a cheerful onewith Mr. Weasley back amongst them; Harry couldtell Sirius was trying to make it so, yet when hisgodfather was not forcing himself to laugh loudly atFred and George’s jokes or offering everyone morefood, his face fell back into a moody, broodingexpression. Harry was separated from him byMundungus and Mad-Eye, who had dropped in tooffer Mr. Weasley their congratulations; he wanted totalk to Sirius, to tell him that he should not listen to aword Snape said, that Snape was goading himdeliberately and that the rest of them did not thinkSirius was a coward for doing as Dumbledore toldhim and remaining in Grimmauld Place, but he hadno opportunity to do so, and wondered occasionally,eyeing the ugly look on Sirius’s face, whether hewould have dared to even if he had the chance.

Instead he told Ron and Hermione under his voiceabout having to take Occlumency lessons with Snape.

“Dumbledore wants to stop you having those dreamsabout Voldemort,” said Hermione at once. “Well, youwon’t be sorry not to have them anymore, will you?”

“Extra lessons with Snape?” said Ron, soundingaghast. “I’d rather have the nightmares!”

They were to return to Hogwarts on the Knight Busthe following day, escorted once again by Tonks andLupin, both of whom were eating breakfast in thekitchen when Harry, Ron, and Hermione arrived therenext morning. The adults seemed to have beenmidway through a whispered conversation when thedoor opened; all of them looked around hastily andfell silent.

Page | 667Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

After a hurried breakfast they pulled on jackets andscarves against the chilly gray January morning.

Harry had an unpleasant constricted sensation in hischest; he did not want to say good-bye to Sirius. Hehad a bad feeling about this parting; he did not knowwhen they would next see each other and felt that itwas incumbent upon him to say something to Siriusto stop him doing anything stupid — Harry wasworried that Snape’s accusation of cowardice hadstung Sirius so badly he might even now be planningsome foolhardy trip beyond Grimmauld Place. Beforehe could think of what to say, however, Sirius hadbeckoned him to his side.

“I want you to take this,” he said quietly, thrusting abadly wrapped package roughly the size of apaperback book into Harry’s hands.

“What is it?” Harry asked.

“A way of letting me know if Snape’s giving you a hardtime. No, don’t open it in here!” said Sirius, with awary look at Mrs. Weasley, who was trying topersuade the twins to wear hand-knitted mittens. “Idoubt Molly would approve — but I want you to use itif you need me, all right?”

“Okay,” said Harry, stowing the package away in theinside pocket of his jacket, but he knew he wouldnever use whatever it was. It would not be he, Harry,who lured Sirius from his place of safety, no matterhow foully Snape treated him in their forthcomingOcclumency classes.

“Let’s go, then,” said Sirius, clapping Harry on theshoulder and smiling grimly, and before Harry couldsay anything else, they were heading upstairs,stopping before the heavily chained and bolted frontdoor, surrounded by Weasleys.

Page | 668Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Good-bye, Harry, take care,” said Mrs. Weasley,hugging him.

“See you Harry, and keep an eye out for snakes forme!” said Mr. Weasley genially, shaking his hand.

“Right — yeah,” said Harry distractedly. It was hislast chance to tell Sirius to be careful; he turned,looked into his godfather’s face and opened his mouthto speak, but before he could do so Sirius was givinghim a brief, one-armed hug. He said gruffly, “Lookafter yourself, Harry,” and next moment Harry foundhimself being shunted out into the icy winter air, withTonks (today heavily disguised as a tall, tweedywoman with iron-gray hair) chivvying him down thesteps.

The door of number twelve slammed shut behindthem. They followed Lupin down the front steps. Ashe reached the pavement, Harry looked around.Number twelve was shrinking rapidly as those oneither side of it stretched sideways, squeezing it out ofsight; one blink later, it had gone.

“Come on, the quicker we get on the bus the better,”said Tonks, and Harry thought there wasnervousness in the glance she threw around thesquare. Lupin flung out his right arm.

BANG.

A violently purple, triple-decker bus had appeared outof thin air in front of them, narrowly avoiding thenearest lamppost, which jumped backward out of itsway.

A thin, pimply, jug-eared youth in a purple uniformleapt down onto the pavement and said, “Welcome tothe —”

Page | 669Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, yes, we know, thank you,” said Tonks swiftly.“On, on, get on —

And she shoved Harry forward toward the steps, pastthe conductor, who goggled at Harry as he passed.

“ ’Ere — it’s ’Arry — !”

“If you shout his name I will curse you into oblivion,”muttered Tonks menacingly, now shunting Ginny andHermione forward.

“I’ve always wanted to go on this thing,” said Ronhappily, joining Harry on board and looking around.

It had been evening the last time Harry had traveledby Knight Bus and its three decks had been full ofbrass bedsteads. Now, in the early morning, it wascrammed with an assortment of mismatched chairsgrouped haphazardly around windows. Some of theseappeared to have fallen over when the bus stoppedabruptly in Grimmauld Place; a few witches andwizards were still getting to their feet, grumbling, andsomebody’s shopping bag had slid the length of thebus; an unpleasant mixture of frog spawn,cockroaches, and custard creams was scattered allover the floor.

“Looks like we’ll have to split up,” said Tonics briskly,looking around for empty chairs. “Fred, George, andGinny, if you just take those seats at the back ...Remus can stay with you...”

She, Harry, Ron, and Hermione proceeded up to thevery top deck, where there were two chairs at the veryfront of the bus and two at the back. Stan Shunpike,the conductor, followed Harry and Ron eagerly to theback. Heads turned as Harry passed and when he sat

Page | 670Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

down, he saw all the faces flick back to the frontagain.

As Harry and Ron handed Stan eleven Sickles each,the bus set off again, swaying ominously. It rumbledaround Grimmauld Square, weaving on and off thepavement, then, with another tremendous BANG,they were all flung backward; Ron’s chair toppledright over and Pigwidgeon, who had been on his lap,burst out of his cage and flew twittering wildly up tothe front of the bus where he fluttered down uponHermione’s shoulder instead. Harry, who hadnarrowly avoided falling by seizing a candle bracket,looked out of the window: they were now speedingdown what appeared to be a motorway.

“Just outside Birmingham,” said Stan happily,answering Harry’s unasked question as Ron struggledup from the floor. “You keepin’ well, then, ’Arry? Iseen your name in the paper loads over the summer,but it weren’t never nuffink very nice... I said to Ern, Isaid, ‘’e didn’t seem like a nutter when we met ’im,just goes to show, dunnit?’ ”

He handed over their tickets and continued to gaze,enthralled, at Harry; apparently Stan did not carehow nutty somebody was if they were famous enoughto be in the paper. The Knight Bus swayedalarmingly, overtaking a line of cars on the inside.Looking toward the front of the bus Harry sawHermione cover her eyes with her hands, Pigwidgeonstill swaying happily on her shoulder.

BANG.

Chairs slid backward again as the Knight Bus jumpedfrom the Birmingham motorway to a quiet countrylane full of hairpin bends. Hedgerows on either side ofthe road were leaping out of their way as they

Page | 671Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

mounted the verges. From here they moved to a mainstreet in the middle of a busy town, then to a viaductsurrounded by tall hills, then to a windswept roadbetween high-rise flats, each time with a loud BANG.

“I’ve changed my mind,” muttered Ron, pickinghimself up from the floor for the sixth time, “I neverwant to ride on here again.”

“Listen, it’s ’Ogwarts stop after this,” said Stanbrightly, swaying toward them. “That bossy womanup front ’oo got on with you, she’s given us a little tipto move you up the queue. We’re just gonna letMadam Marsh off first, though —” There was moreretching from downstairs, followed by a horriblespattering sound. “She’s not feeling ’er best.”

A few minutes later the Knight Bus screeched to ahalt outside a small pub, which squeezed itself out ofthe way to avoid a collision. They could hear Stanushering the unfortunate Madam Marsh out of thebus and the relieved murmurings of her fellowpassengers on the second deck. The bus moved onagain, gathering speed, until —

BANG.

They were rolling through a snowy Hogsmeade. Harrycaught a glimpse of the Hog’s Head down its sidestreet, the severed boar’s head sign creaking in thewintry wind. Flecks of snow hit the large window atthe front of the bus. At last they rolled to a haltoutside the gates to Hogwarts.

Lupin and Tonks helped them off the bus with theirluggage and then got off to say good-bye. Harryglanced up at the three decks of the Knight Bus andsaw all the passengers staring down at them, nosesflat against the windows.

Page | 672Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You’ll be safe once you’re in the grounds,” saidTonks, casting a careful eye around at the desertedroad. “Have a good term, okay?”

“Look after yourselves,” said Lupin, shaking hands allround and reaching Harry last. “And listen ...” Helowered his voice while the rest of them exchangedlast-minute good-byes with Tonks, “Harry, I know youdon’t like Snape, but he is a superb Occlumens andwe all — Sirius included — want you to learn toprotect yourself, so work hard, all right?”

“Yeah, all right,” said Harry heavily, looking up intoLupin’s prematurely lined face. “See you, then ...”

The six of them struggled up the slippery drive towardthe castle dragging their trunks. Hermione wasalready talking about knitting a few elf hats beforebedtime. Harry glanced back when they reached theoak front doors; the Knight Bus had already gone,and he half-wished, given what was coming thefollowing day, that he was still on board.

Harry spent most of the next day dreading theevening. His morning Potions lesson did nothing todispel his trepidation, as Snape was as unpleasant asever, and Harry’s mood was further lowered by thefact that members of the D.A. were continuallyapproaching him in the corridors between classes,asking hopefully whether there would be a meetingthat night.

“I’ll let you know when the next one is,” Harry saidover and over again, “but I can’t do it tonight, I’ve gotto go to — er — Remedial Potions...”

“You take Remedial Potions?” asked Zacharias Smithsuperciliously, having cornered Harry in the entrance

Page | 673Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

hall after lunch. “Good Lord, you must be terrible,Snape doesn’t usually give extra lessons, does he?”

As Smith strode away in an annoyingly buoyantfashion, Ron glared after him.

“Shall I jinx him? I can still get him from here,” hesaid, raising his wand and taking aim betweenSmith’s shoulder blades.

“Forget it,” said Harry dismally. “It’s what everyone’sgoing to think, isn’t it? That I’m really stup —”

“Hi, Harry,” said a voice behind him. He turnedaround and found Cho standing there.

“Oh,” said Harry as his stomach leapt uncomfortably.“Hi.”

“We’ll be in the library, Harry,” said Hermione firmly,and she seized Ron above the elbow and dragged himoff toward the marble staircase.

“Had a good Christmas?” asked Cho.

“Yeah, not bad,” said Harry.

“Mine was pretty quiet,” said Cho. For some reason,she was looking rather embarrassed. “Erm ... there’sanother Hogsmeade trip next month, did you see thenotice?”

“What? Oh no, I haven’t checked the notice boardsince I got back...”

“Yes, it’s on Valentine’s Day...”

“Right,” said Harry, wondering why she was tellinghim this. “Well, I suppose you want to — ?”

Page | 674Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Only if you do,” she said eagerly.

Harry stared. He had been about to say “I supposeyou want to know when the next D.A. meeting is?”but her response did not seem to fit.

“I — er —” he said.

“Oh, it’s okay if you don’t,” she said, lookingmortified. “Don’t worry. I-I’ll see you around.”

She walked away. Harry stood staring after her, hisbrain working frantically. Then something clunkedinto place.

“Cho! Hey — CHO!”

He ran after her, catching her halfway up the marblestaircase.

“Er — d’you want to come into Hogsmeade with me onValentine’s Day?”

“Oooh, yes!” she said, blushing crimson and beamingat him.

“Right ... well ... that’s settled then,” said Harry, andfeeling that the day was not going to be a completeloss after all, he headed off to the library to pick upRon and Hermione before their afternoon lessons,walking in a rather bouncy way himself.

By six o’clock that evening, however, even the glow ofhaving successfully asked out Cho Chang wasinsufficient to lighten the ominous feelings thatintensified with every step Harry took toward Snape’soffice.

Page | 675Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He paused outside the door when he reached it,wishing he were almost anywhere else, then, taking adeep breath, knocked, and entered.

It was a shadowy room lined with shelves bearinghundreds of glass jars in which floated slimy bits ofanimals and plants, suspended in variously coloredpotions. In a corner stood the cupboard full ofingredients that Snape had once accused Harry — notwithout reason — of robbing. Harry’s attention wasdrawn toward the desk, however, where a shallowstone basin engraved with runes and symbols lay in apool of candlelight. Harry recognized it at once —Dumbledore’s Pensieve. Wondering what on earth itwas doing here, he jumped when Snape’s cold voicecame out of the corner.

“Shut the door behind you, Potter.”

Harry did as he was told with the horrible feeling thathe was imprisoning himself as he did so. When heturned back to face the room Snape had moved intothe light and was pointing silently at the chairopposite his desk. Harry sat down and so did Snape,his cold black eyes fixed unblinkingly upon Harry,dislike etched in every line of his face.

“Well, Potter, you know why you are here,” he said.“The headmaster has asked me to teach youOcclumency. I can only hope that you prove moreadept at it than Potions.”

“Right,” said Harry tersely.

“This may not be an ordinary class, Potter,” saidSnape, his eyes narrowed malevolently, “but I am stillyour teacher and you will therefore call me ‘sir’ or‘Professor’ at all times.”

Page | 676Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes ... sir,” said Harry.

“Now, Occlumency. As I told you back in your deargodfather’s kitchen, this branch of magic seals themind against magical intrusion and influence.”

“And why does Professor Dumbledore think I need it,sir?” said Harry, looking directly into Snape’s dark,cold eyes and wondering whether he would answer.

Snape looked back at him for a moment and thensaid contemptuously, “Surely even you could haveworked that out by now, Potter? The Dark Lord ishighly skilled at Legilimency —”

“What’s that? Sir?”

“It is the ability to extract feelings and memories fromanother person’s mind —”

“He can read minds?” said Harry quickly, his worstfears confirmed.

“You have no subtlety, Potter,” said Snape, his darkeyes glittering. “You do not understand finedistinctions. It is one of the shortcomings that makesyou such a lamentable potion-maker.”

Snape paused for a moment, apparently to savor thepleasure of insulting Harry, before continuing, “OnlyMuggles talk of ‘mind reading. ’ The mind is not abook, to be opened at will and examined at leisure.Thoughts are not etched on the inside of skulls, to beperused by any invader. The mind is a complex andmany-layered thing, Potter ... or at least, most mindsare...” He smirked. “It is true, however, that thosewho have mastered Legilimency are able, undercertain conditions, to delve into the minds of theirvictims and to interpret their findings correctly. ThePage | 677Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Dark Lord, for instance, almost always knows whensomebody is lying to him. Only those skilled atOcclumency are able to shut down those feelings andmemories that contradict the lie, and so utterfalsehoods in his presence without detection.”

Whatever Snape said, Legilimency sounded like mindreading to Harry and he did not like the sound of it atall.

“So he could know what we’re thinking right now?Sir?”

“The Dark Lord is at a considerable distance and thewalls and grounds of Hogwarts are guarded by manyancient spells and charms to ensure the bodily andmental safety of those who dwell within them,” saidSnape. “Time and space matter in magic, Potter. Eyecontact is often essential to Legilimency.”

“Well then, why do I have to learn Occlumency?”

Snape eyed Harry, tracing his mouth with one long,thin finger as he did so.

“The usual rules do not seem to apply with you,Potter. The curse that failed to kill you seems to haveforged some kind of connection between you and theDark Lord. The evidence suggests that at times, whenyour mind is most relaxed and vulnerable — whenyou are asleep, for instance — you are sharing theDark Lord’s thoughts and emotions. The headmasterthinks it inadvisable for this to continue. He wishesme to teach you how to close your mind to the DarkLord.”

Harry’s heart was pumping fast again. None of thisadded up.

Page | 678Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But why does Professor Dumbledore want to stop it?”he asked abruptly. “I don’t like it much, but it’s beenuseful, hasn’t it? I mean ... I saw that snake attackMr. Weasley and if I hadn’t, Professor Dumbledorewouldn’t have been able to save him, would he? Sir?”

Snape stared at Harry for a few moments, still tracinghis mouth with his finger. When he spoke again, itwas slowly and deliberately, as though he weighedevery word.

“It appears that the Dark Lord has been unaware ofthe connection between you and himself until veryrecently. Up till now it seems that you have beenexperiencing his emotions and sharing his thoughtswithout his being any the wiser. However, the visionyou had shortly before Christmas —”

“The one with the snake and Mr. Weasley?”

“Do not interrupt me, Potter,” said Snape in adangerous voice. “As I was saying ... the vision youhad shortly before Christmas represented such apowerful incursion upon the Dark Lord’s thoughts —”

“I saw inside the snake’s head, not his!”

“I thought I just told you not to interrupt me, Potter?”

But Harry did not care if Snape was angry; at last heseemed to be getting to the bottom of this business.

He had moved forward in his chair so that, withoutrealizing it, he was perched on the very edge, tense asthough poised for flight.

“How come I saw through the snake’s eyes if it’sVoldemort’s thoughts I’m sharing?”

“Do not say the Dark Lord’s name\” spat Snape.

Page | 679Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

There was a nasty silence. They glared at each otheracross the Pensieve.

“Professor Dumbledore says his name,” said Harryquietly.

“Dumbledore is an extremely powerful wizard,” Snapemuttered. “While he may feel secure enough to usethe name ... the rest of us ...” He rubbed his leftforearm, apparently unconsciously, on the spot whereHarry knew the Dark Mark was burned into his skin.

“I just wanted to know,” Harry began again, forcinghis voice back to politeness, “why —”

“You seem to have visited the snake’s mind becausethat was where the Dark Lord was at that particularmoment,” snarled Snape. “He was possessing thesnake at the time and so you dreamed you wereinside it too...”

“And Vol — he — realized I was there?”

“It seems so,” said Snape coolly.

“How do you know?” said Harry urgently. “Is this justProfessor Dumbledore guessing, or — ?”

“I told you,” said Snape, rigid in his chair, his eyesslits, “to call me ‘sir.’ ”

“Yes, sir,” said Harry impatiently, “but how do youknow — ?”

“It is enough that we know,” said Snape repressively.“The important point is that the Dark Lord is nowaware that you are gaining access to his thoughts andfeelings. He has also deduced that the process islikely to work in reverse; that is to say, he hasPage | 680Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

realized that he might be able to access your thoughtsand feelings in return —”

“And he might try and make me do things?” askedHarry. “Sir?” he added hurriedly.

“He might,” said Snape, sounding cold andunconcerned. “Which brings us back to Occlumency.”

Snape pulled out his wand from an inside pocket ofhis robes and Harry tensed in his chair, but Snapemerely raised the wand to his temple and placed itstip into the greasy roots of his hair. When hewithdrew it, some silvery substance came away,stretching from temple to wand like a thick gossamerstrand, which broke as he pulled the wand away fromit and fell gracefully into the Pensieve, where itswirled silvery white, neither gas nor liquid. Twicemore Snape raised the wand to his temple anddeposited the silvery substance into the stone basin,then, without offering any explanation of his behavior,he picked up the Pensieve carefully, removed it to ashelf out of their way and returned to face Harry withhis wand held at the ready.

“Stand up and take out your wand, Potter.”

Harry got to his feet feeling nervous. They faced eachother with the desk between them.

“You may use your wand to attempt to disarm me, ordefend yourself in any other way you can think of,”said Snape.

“And what are you going to do?” Harry asked, eyeingSnape’s wand apprehensively.

“I am about to attempt to break into your mind,” saidSnape softly. “We are going to see how well you resist.

Page | 681Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

I have been told that you have already shownaptitude at resisting the Imperius Curse... You willfind that similar powers are needed for this... Braceyourself, now... LegilimensV’

Snape had struck before Harry was ready, beforeHarry had even begun to summon any force ofresistance: the office swam in front of his eyes andvanished, image after image was racing through hismind like a flickering film so vivid it blinded him tohis surroundings...

He was five, watching Dudley riding a new red bicycle,and his heart was bursting with jealousy... He wasnine, and Ripper the bulldog was chasing him up atree and the Dursleys were laughing below on thelawn... He was sitting under the Sorting Hat, and itwas telling him he would do well in Slytherin...Hermione was lying in the hospital wing, her facecovered with thick black hair... A hundred dementorswere closing in on him beside the dark lake... ChoChang was drawing nearer to him under themistletoe...

No, said a voice in Harry’s head, as the memory ofCho drew nearer, you’re not watching that, you’re notwatching it, it’s private —

He felt a sharp pain in his knee. Snape’s office hadcome back into view and he realized that he hadfallen to the floor; one of his knees had collidedpainfully with the leg of Snape’s desk. He looked up atSnape, who had lowered his wand and was rubbinghis wrist. There was an angry weal there, like ascorch mark.

“Did you mean to produce a Stinging Hex?” askedSnape coolly.

Page | 682Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry bitterly, getting up from the floor.

“I thought not,” said Snape contemptuously. “You letme get in too far. You lost control.”

“Did you see everything I saw?” Harry asked, unsurewhether he wanted to hear the answer.

“Flashes of it,” said Snape, his lip curling. “To whomdid the dog belong?”

“My Aunt Marge,” Harry muttered, hating Snape.

“Well, for a first attempt that was not as poor as itmight have been,” said Snape, raising his wand oncemore. “You managed to stop me eventually, thoughyou wasted time and energy shouting. You mustremain focused. Repel me with your brain and youwill not need to resort to your wand.”

“I’m trying,” said Harry angrily, “but you’re not tellingme how!”

“Manners, Potter,” said Snape dangerously. “Now, Iwant you to close your eyes.”

Harry threw him a filthy look before doing as he wastold. He did not like the idea of standing there withhis eyes shut while Snape faced him, carrying awand.

“Clear your mind, Potter,” said Snape’s cold voice.“Let go of all emotion...”

But Harry’s anger at Snape continued to poundthrough his veins like venom. Let go of his anger? Hecould as easily detach his legs...

Page | 683Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You’re not doing it, Potter... You will need morediscipline than this... Focus, now...”

Harry tried to empty his mind, tried not to think, orremember, or feel...

“Let’s go again ... on the count of three ... one — two— three — Legilimensl”

A great black dragon was rearing in front of him... Hisfather and mother were waving at him out of anenchanted mirror... Cedric Diggory was lying on theground with blank eyes staring at him...

“NOOOOOOO!”

He was on his knees again, his face buried in hishands, his brain aching as though someone had beentrying to pull it from his skull.

“Get up!” said Snape sharply. “Get up! You are nottrying, you are making no effort, you are allowing meaccess to memories you fear, handing me weapons!”

Harry stood up again, his heart thumping wildly asthough he had really just seen Cedric dead in thegraveyard. Snape looked paler than usual, andangrier, though not nearly as angry as Harry was.

“I — am — making — an — effort,” he said throughclenched teeth.

“I told you to empty yourself of emotion!”

“Yeah? Well, I’m finding that hard at the moment,”Harry snarled.

“Then you will find yourself easy prey for the DarkLord!” said Snape savagely. “Fools who wear their

Page | 684Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

hearts proudly on their sleeves, who cannot controltheir emotions, who wallow in sad memories andallow themselves to be provoked this easily — weakpeople, in other words — they stand no chanceagainst his powers! He will penetrate your mind withabsurd ease, Potter!”

“I am not weak,” said Harry in a low voice, fury nowpumping through him so that he thought he mightattack Snape in a moment.

“Then prove it! Master yourself!” spat Snape. “Controlyour anger, discipline your mind! We shall try again!Get ready, now! Legilimens\”

He was watching Uncle Vernon hammering the letterbox shut... A hundred dementors were drifting acrossthe lake in the grounds toward him... He was runningalong a windowless passage with Mr. Weasley... Theywere drawing nearer to the plain black door at theend of the corridor... Harry expected to go through it... but Mr. Weasley led him off to the left, down aflight of stone steps...

“I KNOW! I KNOW!”

He was on all fours again on Snape’s office floor, hisscar was prickling unpleasantly, but the voice thathad just issued from his mouth was triumphant. Hepushed himself up again to find Snape staring at him,his wand raised. It looked as though, this time, Snapehad lifted the spell before Harry had even tried tofight back.

“What happened then, Potter?” he asked, eyeingHarry intently.

“I saw — I remembered,” Harry panted. “I’ve justrealized ...”

Page | 685Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Realized what?” asked Snape sharply.

Harry did not answer at once; he was still savoringthe moment of blinding realization as he rubbed hisforehead...

He had been dreaming about a windowless corridorending in a locked door for months, without oncerealizing that it was a real place. Now, seeing thememory again, he knew that all along he had beendreaming about the corridor down which he had runwith Mr. Weasley on the twelfth of August as theyhurried to the courtrooms in the Ministry. It was thecorridor leading to the Department of Mysteries, andMr. Weasley had been there the night that he hadbeen attacked by Voldemort’s snake...

He looked up at Snape.

“What’s in the Department of Mysteries?”

“What did you say?” Snape asked quietly and Harrysaw, with deep satisfaction, that Snape wasunnerved.

“I said, what’s in the Department of Mysteries, sir?”Harry said.

“And why,” said Snape slowly, “would you ask such athing?”

“Because,” said Harry, watching Snape closely for areaction, “that corridor I’ve just seen — I’ve beendreaming about it for months — I’ve just recognized it— it leads to the Department of Mysteries ... and Ithink Voldemort wants something from —”

“I have told you not to say the Dark Lord’s name\”

Page | 686Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

They glared at each other. Harry’s scar seared again,but he did not care. Snape looked agitated. When hespoke again he sounded as though he was trying toappear cool and unconcerned.

“There are many things in the Department ofMysteries, Potter, few of which you would understandand none of which concern you, do I make myselfplain?”

“Yes,” Harry said, still rubbing his prickling scar,which was becoming more painful.

“I want you back here same time on Wednesday, andwe will continue work then.”

“Fine,” said Harry. He was desperate to get out ofSnape’s office and find Ron and Hermione.

“You are to rid your mind of all emotion every nightbefore sleep — empty it, make it blank and calm, youunderstand?”

“Yes,” said Harry, who was barely listening.

“And be warned, Potter ... I shall know if you have notpracticed ...”

“Right,” Harry mumbled. He picked up his schoolbag,swung it over his shoulder, and hurried toward theoffice door. As he opened it he glanced back at Snape,who had his back to Harry and was scooping his ownthoughts out of the Pensieve with the tip of his wandand replacing them carefully inside his own head.Harry left without another word, closing the doorcarefully behind him, his scar still throbbingpainfully.

Page | 687Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry found Ron and Hermione in the library, wherethey were working on Umbridge’s most recent ream ofhomework. Other students, nearly all of them fifthyears, sat at lamp-lit tables nearby, noses close tobooks, quills scratching feverishly, while the skyoutside the mullioned windows grew steadily blacker.The only other sound was the slight squeaking of oneof Madam Pince’s shoes as the librarian prowled theaisles menacingly, breathing down the necks of thosetouching her precious books.

Harry felt shivery; his scar was still aching, he feltalmost feverish. When he sat down opposite Ron andHermione he caught sight of himself in the windowopposite. He was very white, and his scar seemed tobe showing up more clearly than usual.

“How did it go?” Hermione whispered, and then,looking concerned, “Are you all right, Harry?”

“Yeah ... fine ... I dunno,” said Harry impatiently,wincing as pain shot through his scar again. “Listen... I’ve just realized something...”

And he told them what he had just seen and deduced.

“So ... so, are you saying ...” whispered Ron, asMadam Pince swept past, squeaking slightly, “that theweapon — the thing You-Know-Who’s after — is inthe Ministry of Magic?”

“In the Department of Mysteries, it’s got to be,” Harrywhispered. “I saw that door when your dad took medown to the courtrooms for my hearing and it’sdefinitely the same one he was guarding when thesnake bit him.”

Hermione let out a long, slow sigh. “Of course,” shebreathed.

Page | 688Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Of course what?” said Ron rather impatiently.

“Ron, think about it... Sturgis Podmore was trying toget through a door at the Ministry of Magic... It musthave been that one, it’s too much of a coincidence!”

“How come Sturgis was trying to break in when he’son our side?” said Ron.

“Well, I don’t know,” Hermione admitted. “That is a bitodd...”

“So what’s in the Department of Mysteries?” Harryasked Ron. “Has your dad ever mentioned anythingabout it?”

“I know they call the people who work in there‘Unspeakables,’ ” said Ron, frowning. “Because no onereally seems to know what they do in there... Weirdplace to have a weapon ...”

“It’s not weird at all, it makes perfect sense,” saidHermione. “It will be something top secret that theMinistry has been developing, I expect... Harry, areyou sure you’re all right?”

For Harry had just run both his hands hard over hisforehead as though trying to iron it.

“Yeah ... fine ...” he said, lowering his hands, whichwere trembling. “I just feel a bit ... I don’t likeOcclumency much...”

“I expect anyone would feel shaky if they’d had theirmind attacked over and over again,” said Hermionesympathetically. “Look, let’s get back to the commonroom, well be a bit more comfortable there...”

Page | 689Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But the common room was packed and full of shrieksof laughter and excitement; Fred and George weredemonstrating their latest bit of joke shopmerchandise.

“Headless Hats!” shouted George, as Fred waved apointed hat decorated with a fluffy pink feather at thewatching students. “Two Galleons each — watchFred, now!”

Fred swept the hat onto his head, beaming. For asecond he merely looked rather stupid, then both hatand head vanished.

Several girls screamed, but everyone else was roaringwith laughter.

“And off again!” shouted George, and Fred’s handgroped for a moment in what seemed to be thin airover his shoulder; then his head reappeared as heswept the pink-feathered hat from it again.

“How do those hats work, then?” said Hermione,distracted from her homework and watching Fred andGeorge. “I mean, obviously it’s some kind ofInvisibility Spell, but it’s rather clever to haveextended the field of invisibility beyond theboundaries of the charmed object... I’d imagine thecharm wouldn’t have a very long life though...”

Harry did not answer; he was still feeling ill.

“I’m going to have to do this tomorrow,” he muttered,pushing the books he had just taken out of his bagback inside it.

“Well, write it in your homework planner then!” saidHermione encouragingly. “So you don’t forget!”

Page | 690Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry and Ron exchanged looks as he reached intohis bag, withdrew the planner and opened ittentatively.

“Don’t leave it till later, you big second-rateri” chidedthe book as Harry scribbled down Umbridge’shomework. Hermione beamed at it.

“I think 111 go to bed,” said Harry, stuffing thehomework planner back into his bag and making amental note to drop it in the fire the first opportunityhe got.

He walked across the common room, dodging George,who tried to put a Headless Hat on him, and reachedthe peace and cool of the stone staircase to the boys’dormitories. He was feeling sick again, just as he hadthe night he had had the vision of the snake, butthought that if he could just lie down for a while hewould be all right.

He opened the door of his dormitory and was one stepinside it when he experienced pain so severe hethought that someone must have sliced into the top ofhis head. He did not know where he was, whether hewas standing or lying down, he did not even know hisown name...

Maniacal laughter was ringing in his ears... He washappier than he had been in a very long time...Jubilant, ecstatic, triumphant ... A wonderful,wonderful thing had happened...

“Harry? HARRY!”

Someone had hit him around the face. The insanelaughter was punctuated with a cry of pain. Thehappiness was draining out of him, but the laughtercontinued...

Page | 691Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He opened his eyes and as he did so, he becameaware that the wild laughter was coming out of hisown mouth. The moment he realized this, it diedaway; Harry lay panting on the floor, staring up at theceiling, the scar on his forehead throbbing horribly.Ron was bending over him, looking very worried.

“What happened?” he said.

“I ... dunno ...” Harry gasped, sitting up again. “He’sreally happy ... really happy ...”

“You-Know-Who is?”

“Something good’s happened,” mumbled Harry. Hewas shaking as badly as he had done after seeing thesnake attack Mr. Weasley and felt very sick.“Something he’s been hoping for.”

The words came, just as they had back in theGryffindor changing room, as though a stranger wasspeaking them through Harry’s mouth, yet he knewthey were true. He took deep breaths, willing himselfnot to vomit all over Ron. He was very glad that Deanand Seamus were not here to watch this time.

“Hermione told me to come and check on you,” saidRon in a low voice, helping Harry to his feet. “Shesays your defenses will be low at the moment, afterSnape’s been fiddling around with your mind... Still, Isuppose it’ll help in the long run, won’t it?”

He looked doubtfully at Harry as he helped himtoward bed. Harry nodded without any conviction andslumped back on his pillows, aching all over fromhaving fallen to the floor so often that evening, hisscar still prickling painfully. He could not help feelingthat his first foray into Occlumency had weakened hismind’s resistance rather than strengthening it, andPage | 692Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

he wondered, with a feeling of great trepidation, whathad happened to make Lord Voldemort the happiesthe had been in fourteen years.

Page | 693Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE BEETLE AT BAY

Harry’s question was answered the very nextmorning. When Hermione’s Daily Prophet arrived shesmoothed it out, gazed for a moment at the frontpage, and then gave a yelp that caused everyone inthe vicinity to stare at her.

“What?” said Harry and Ron together.

For an answer she spread the newspaper on the tablein front of them and pointed at ten black-and-whitephotographs that filled the whole of the front page,nine showing wizards’ faces and the tenth, a witch’s.Some of the people in the photographs were silentlyjeering; others were tapping their fingers on the frameof their pictures, looking insolent. Each picture wascaptioned with a name and the crime for which theperson had been sent to Azkaban.

Antonin Dolohov, read the legend beneath a wizardwith a long, pale, twisted face who was sneering up atHarry, convicted of the brutal murders of Gideon andFabian Prewett.

Page | 694Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Augustus Rookwood, said the caption beneath apockmarked man with greasy hair who was leaningagainst the edge of his picture, looking bored,convicted of leaking Ministry of Magic Secrets to He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named.

But Harry’s eyes were drawn to the picture of thewitch. Her face had leapt out at him the moment hehad seen the page. She had long, dark hair thatlooked unkempt and straggly in the picture, thoughhe had seen it sleek, thick, and shining. She glaredup at him through heavily lidded eyes, an arrogant,disdainful smile playing around her thin mouth. LikeSirius, she retained vestiges of great good looks, butsomething — perhaps Azkaban — had taken most ofher beauty.

Bellatrix Lestrange, convicted of the torture andpermanent incapacitation of Frank and AliceLongbottom.

Hermione nudged Harry and pointed at the headlineover the pictures, which Harry, concentrating onBellatrix, had not yet read.

MASS BREAKOUT FROM AZKABAN

MINISTRY FEARS BLACK IS “RALLYING POINT”

FOR OLD DEATH EATERS

“Black?” said Harry loudly. “Not — ?”

“Shhh\” whispered Hermione desperately. “Not so loud— just read it!”

The Ministry of Magic announced late last night thatthere has been a mass breakout from Azkaban.

Page | 695Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Speaking to reporters in his private office, CorneliusFudge, Minister of Magic, confirmed that ten high-security prisoners escaped in the early hours ofyesterday evening, and that he has already informedthe Muggle Prime Minister of the dangerous nature ofthese individuals.

“We find ourselves, most unfortunately, in the sameposition we were two and a half years ago when themurderer Sirius Black escaped, ” said Fudge last night.“Nor do we think the two breakouts are unrelated. Anescape of this magnitude suggests outside help, andwe must remember that Black, as the first person everto break out of Azkaban, would be ideally placed tohelp others follow in his footsteps. We think it likelythat these individuals, who include Black’s cousin,Bellatrix Lestrange, have rallied around Black as theirleader. We are, however, doing all we can to round upthe criminals and beg the magical community to remainalert and cautious. On no account should any of theseindividuals be approached. ”

“There you are, Harry,” said Ron, looking awestruck.“That’s why he was happy last night...”

“I don’t believe this,” snarled Harry, “Fudge is blamingthe breakout on Sirius?”

“What other options does he have?” said Hermionebitterly. “He can hardly say, ‘Sorry everyone,Dumbledore warned me this might happen, theAzkaban guards have joined Lord Voldemort’ — stopwhimpering, Ron — ‘and now Voldemort’s worstsupporters have broken out too.’ I mean, he’s spent agood six months telling everyone you and Dumbledoreare liars, hasn’t he?”

Hermione ripped open the newspaper and began toread the report inside while Harry looked around the

Page | 696Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Great Hall. He could not understand why his fellowstudents were not looking scared or at leastdiscussing the terrible piece of news on the frontpage, but very few of them took the newspaper everyday like Hermione. There they all were, talking abouthomework and Quidditch and who knew what otherrubbish, and outside these walls ten more DeathEaters had swollen Voldemort’s ranks...

He glanced up at the staff table. It was a differentstory here: Dumbledore and Professor McGonagallwere deep in conversation, both looking extremelygrave. Professor Sprout had the Prophet proppedagainst a bottle of ketchup and was reading the frontpage with such concentration that she was notnoticing the gentle drip of egg yolk falling into her lapfrom her stationary spoon. Meanwhile, at the far endof the table, Professor Umbridge was tucking into abowl of porridge. For once her pouchy toad’s eyeswere not sweeping the Great Hall looking formisbehaving students. She scowled as she gulpeddown her food and every now and then she shot amalevolent glance up the table to where Dumbledoreand McGonagall were talking so intently.

“Oh my —” said Hermione wonderingly, still staring atthe newspaper.

“What now?” said Harry quickly; he was feelingjumpy.

“It’s ... horrible,” said Hermione, looking shaken. Shefolded back page ten of the newspaper and handed itback to Harry and Ron.

TRAGIC DEMISE OF

MINISTRY OF MAGIC WORKER

Page | 697Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

St. Mungo’s Hospital promised a full inquiry lastnight after Ministry of Magic worker Broderick Bode,49, was discovered dead in his bed, strangled by apotted-plant. Healers called to the scene were unableto revive Mr. Bode, who had been injured in aworkplace accident some weeks prior to his death.

Healer Miriam Strout, who was in charge of Mr.

Bode’s ward at the time of the incident, has beensuspended on full pay and was unavailable forcomment yesterday, but a spokeswizard for thehospital said in a statement, “St. Mungo’s deeplyregrets the death of Mr. Bode, whose health wasimproving steadily prior to this tragic accident.

“We have strict guidelines on the decorationspermitted on our wards but it appears that HealerStrout, busy over the Christmas period, overlookedthe dangers of the plant on Mr. Bode’s bedside table.As his speech and mobility improved, Healer Stroutencouraged Mr. Bode to look after the plant himself,unaware that it was not an innocent Flitterbloom, buta cutting of Devil’s Snare, which, when touched bythe convalescent Mr. Bode, throttled him instantly.

“St. Mungo’s is as yet unable to account for thepresence of the plant on the ward and asks any witchor wizard with information to come forward.”

“Bode ...” said Ron. “Bode. It rings a bell...”

“We saw him,” Hermione whispered. “In St. Mungo’s,remember? He was in the bed opposite Lockhart’s,just lying there, staring at the ceiling. And we saw theDevil’s Snare arrive. She — the Healer — said it was aChristmas present...”

Harry looked back at the story. A feeling of horror wasrising like bile in his throat.

Page | 698Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“How come we didn’t recognize Devil’s Snare ... ?We’ve seen it before ... we could’ve stopped this fromhappening ...”

“Who expects Devil’s Snare to turn up in a hospitaldisguised as a potted plant?” said Ron sharply. “It’snot our fault, whoever sent it to the bloke is to blame!They must be a real prat, why didn’t they check whatthey were buying?”

“Oh come on, Ron!” said Hermione shakily, “I don’tthink anyone could put Devil’s Snare in a pot and notrealize it tries to kill whoever touches it? This — thiswas murder... A clever murder, as well... If the plantwas sent anonymously, how’s anyone ever going tofind out who did it?”

Harry was not thinking about Devil’s Snare. He wasremembering taking the lift down to the ninth level ofthe Ministry on the day of his hearing, and thesallow-faced man who had got in on the Atrium level.

“I met Bode,” he said slowly. “I saw him at theMinistry with your dad ...”

Ron’s mouth fell open.

“I’ve heard Dad talk about him at home! He was anUnspeakable — he worked in the Department ofMysteries!”

They looked at one another for a moment, thenHermione pulled the newspaper back toward her,closed it, glared for a moment at the pictures of theten escaped Death Eaters on the front, then leapt toher feet.

“Where are you going?” said Ron, startled.

Page | 699Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“To send a letter,” said Hermione, swinging her bagonto her shoulder. “It ... well, I don’t know whether ...but it’s worth trying ... and I’m the only one who can

“I hate it when she does that,” grumbled Ron as heand Harry got up from the table and made their own,slower way out of the Great Hall. “Would it kill her totell us what she’s up to for once? It’d take her aboutten more seconds — hey, Hagrid!”

Hagrid was standing beside the doors into theentrance hall, waiting for a crowd of Ravenclaws topass. He was still as heavily bruised as he had beenon the day he had come back from his mission to thegiants and there was a new cut right across thebridge of his nose.

“All righ’, you two?” he said, trying to muster a smilebut managing only a kind of pained grimace.

“Are you okay, Hagrid?” asked Harry, following him ashe lumbered after the Ravenclaws.

“Fine, fine,” said Hagrid with a feeble assumption ofairiness; he waved a hand and narrowly missedconcussing a frightened-looking Professor Vector, whowas passing. “Jus’ busy, yeh know, usual stuff —lessons ter prepare — couple o’ salamanders got scalerot — an’ I’m on probation,” he mumbled.

“ You’re on probation?” said Ron very loudly, so thatmany students passing looked around curiously.“Sorry — I mean — you’re on probation?” hewhispered.

“Yeah,” said Hagrid. “ ’S’no more’n I expected, ter tellyeh the truth. Yeh migh’ not’ve picked up on it, bu’that inspection didn’ go too well, yeh know ...

Page | 700Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

anyway,” he sighed deeply. “Bes’ go an mb a bit morechili powder on them salamanders or their tails’ll behangin’ off ’em next. See yeh, Harry ... Ron ...”

He trudged away, out the front doors and down thestone steps into the damp grounds. Harry watchedhim go, wondering how much more bad news hecould stand.

The fact that Hagrid was now on probation becamecommon knowledge within the school over the nextfew days, but to Harry’s indignation, hardly anybodyappeared to be upset about it; indeed, some people,Draco Malfoy prominent among them, seemedpositively gleeful. As for the freakish death of anobscure Department of Mysteries employee in St.Mungo’s, Harry, Ron, and Hermione seemed to be theonly people who knew or cared. There was only onetopic of conversation in the corridors now: the tenescaped Death Eaters, whose story had finally filteredthrough the school from those few people who readthe newspapers. Rumors were flying that some of theconvicts had been spotted in Hogsmeade, that theywere supposed to be hiding out in the ShriekingShack and that they were going to break intoHogwarts, just as Sirius Black had done.

Those who came from Wizarding families had grownup hearing the names of these Death Eaters spokenwith almost as much fear as Voldemort’s; the crimesthey had committed during the days of Voldemort’sreign of terror were legendary. There were relatives oftheir victims among the Hogwarts students, who nowfound themselves the unwilling objects of a gruesomesort of reflected fame as they walked the corridors:Susan Bones, who had an uncle, aunt, and cousinswho had all died at the hands of one of the ten, saidmiserably during Herbology that she now had a goodidea what it felt like to be Harry.

Page | 701Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“And I don’t know how you stand it, it’s horrible,” shesaid bluntly, dumping far too much dragon manureon her tray of Screechsnap seedlings, causing them towriggle and squeak in discomfort.

It was true that Harry was the subject of muchrenewed muttering and pointing in the corridors thesedays, yet he thought he detected a slight difference inthe tone of the whisperers’ voices. They soundedcurious rather than hostile now, and once or twice hewas sure he overheard snatches of conversation thatsuggested that the speakers were not satisfied withthe Prophet’s version of how and why ten DeathEaters had managed to break out of Azkaban fortress.In their confusion and fear, these doubters nowseemed to be turning to the only other explanationavailable to them, the one that Harry andDumbledore had been expounding since the previousyear.

It was not only the students’ mood that had changed.It was now quite common to come across two or threeteachers conversing in low, urgent whispers in thecorridors, breaking off their conversations themoment they saw students approaching.

“They obviously can’t talk freely in the staffroomanymore,” said Hermione in a low voice, as she,

Harry, and Ron passed Professors McGonagall,Flitwick, and Sprout huddled together outside theCharms classroom one day. “Not with Umbridgethere.”

“Reckon they know anything new?” said Ron, gazingback over his shoulder at the three teachers.

“If they do, we’re not going to hear about it, are we?”said Harry angrily. “Not after Decree ... What numberare we on now?”

Page | 702Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

For new signs had appeared on the house noticeboards the morning after news of the Azkabanbreakout:

— BY ORDER OF —

THE HIGH INQUISITOR OF HOGWARTS

Teachers are hereby banned from giving students anyinformation that is not strictly related to the subjectsthey are paid to teach.

The above is in accordance with

Educational Decree Number Twenty-six.

Signed:

Dolores Jane UmbridgeHIGH INQUISITOR

This latest decree had been the subject of a greatnumber of jokes among the students. Lee Jordan hadpointed out to Umbridge that by the terms of the newrule she was not allowed to tell Fred and George offfor playing Exploding Snap in the back of the class.

“Exploding Snap’s got nothing to do with DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts, Professor! That’s notinformation relating to your subject!”

When Harry next saw Lee, the back of his hand wasbleeding rather badly. Harry recommended essence ofmurtlap.

Harry had thought that the breakout from Azkabanmight have humbled Umbridge a little, that she might

Page | 703Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

have been abashed at the catastrophe that hadoccurred right under her beloved Fudge’s nose. Itseemed, however, to have only intensified her furiousdesire to bring every aspect of life at Hogwarts underher personal control. She seemed determined at thevery least to achieve a sacking before long, and theonly question was whether it would be ProfessorTrelawney or Hagrid who went first.

Every single Divination and Care of Magical Creatureslesson was now conducted in the presence ofUmbridge and her clipboard. She lurked by the fire inthe heavily perfumed tower room, interruptingProfessor Trelawney’s increasingly hysterical talkswith difficult questions about Ornithomancy andHeptomology, insisting that she predict students’answers before they gave them and demanding thatshe demonstrate her skill at the crystal ball, the tealeaves, and the rune stones in turn. Harry thoughtthat Professor Trelawney might soon crack under thestrain; several times he passed her in the corridors (initself a very unusual occurrence as she generallyremained in her tower room), muttering wildly toherself, wringing her hands, and shooting terrifiedglances over her shoulder, all the time giving off apowerful smell of cooking sherry. If he had not beenso worried about Hagrid, he would have felt sorry forher — but if one of them was to be ousted out of ajob, there could be only one choice for Harry as towho should remain.

Unfortunately, Harry could not see that Hagrid wasputting up a better show than Trelawney. Though heseemed to be following Hermione’s advice and hadshown them nothing more frightening than a crup, acreature indistinguishable from a Jack Russell terrierexcept for its forked tail, since before Christmas, healso seemed to have lost his nerve. He was oddlydistracted and jumpy in lessons, losing the thread ofPage | 704Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

what he was saying while talking to the class,answering questions wrongly and glancing anxiouslyat Umbridge all the time. He was also more distantwith Harry, Ron, and Hermione than he had everbeen before, expressly forbidding them to visit himafter dark.

“If she catches yeh, it’ll be all of our necks on theline,” he told them flatly, and with no desire to doanything that jeopardized his job further, theyabstained from walking down to his hut in theevenings. It seemed to Harry that Umbridge wassteadily depriving him of everything that made his lifeat Hogwarts worth living: visits to Hagrid’s house,letters from Sirius, his Firebolt, and Quidditch. Hetook his revenge the only way he had: redoubling hisefforts for the D.A.

Harry was pleased to see that all of them, evenZacharias Smith, had been spurred to work harderthan ever by the news that ten more Death Eaterswere now on the loose, but in nobody was thisimprovement more pronounced than in Neville. Thenews of his parents’ attacker’s escape had wrought astrange and even slightly alarming change in him. Hehad not once mentioned his meeting with Harry, Ron,and Hermione on the closed ward in St. Mungo’s, andtaking their lead from him, they had kept quiet aboutit too. Nor had he said anything on the subject ofBellatrix and her fellow torturers’ escape; in fact, hebarely spoke during D.A. meetings anymore, butworked relentlessly on every new jinx andcountercurse Harry taught them, his plump facescrewed up in concentration, apparently indifferent toinjuries or accidents, working harder than anyoneelse in the room. He was improving so fast it wasquite unnerving and when Harry taught them theShield Charm, a means of deflecting minor jinxes so

Page | 705Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

that they rebounded upon the attacker, onlyHermione mastered the charm faster than Neville.

In fact Harry would have given a great deal to bemaking as much progress at Occlumency as Nevillewas making during D.A. meetings. Harry’s sessionswith Snape, which had started badly enough, werenot improving; on the contrary, Harry felt he wasgetting worse with every lesson.

Before he had started studying Occlumency, his scarhad prickled occasionally, usually during the night, orelse following one of those strange flashes ofVoldemort’s thoughts or moods that he experiencedevery now and then. Nowadays, however, his scarhardly ever stopped prickling, and he often feltlurches of annoyance or cheerfulness that wereunrelated to what was happening to him at the time,which were always accompanied by a particularlypainful twinge from his scar. He had the horribleimpression that he was slowly turning into a kind ofaerial that was tuned in to tiny fluctuations inVoldemort’s mood, and he was sure he could date thisincreased sensitivity firmly from his first Occlumencylesson with Snape. What was more, he was nowdreaming about walking down the corridor toward theentrance to the Department of Mysteries almost everynight, dreams that always culminated in himstanding longingly in front of the plain black door.

“Maybe it’s a bit like an illness,” said Hermione,looking concerned when Harry confided in her andRon. “A fever or something. It has to get worse beforeit gets better.”

“It’s lessons with Snape that are making it worse,”said Harry flatly. “I’m getting sick of my scar hurting,and I’m getting bored walking down that corridorevery night.” He rubbed his forehead angrily. “I just

Page | 706Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

wish the door would open, I’m sick of standing staringat it —”

“That’s not funny,” said Hermione sharply.“Dumbledore doesn’t want you to have dreams aboutthat corridor at all, or he wouldn’t have asked Snapeto teach you Occlumency. You’re just going to have towork a bit harder in your lessons.”

“I am working!” said Harry, nettled. “You try itsometime, Snape trying to get inside your head, it’snot a bundle of laughs, you know!”

“Maybe ...” said Ron slowly.

“Maybe what?” said Hermione rather snappishly.

“Maybe it’s not Harry’s fault he can’t close his mind,”said Ron darkly.

“What do you mean?” said Hermione.

“Well, maybe Snape isn’t really trying to help Harry...”

Harry and Hermione stared at him. Ron looked darklyand meaningfully from one to the other.

“Maybe,” he said again in a lower voice, “he’s actuallytrying to open Harry’s mind a bit wider ... make iteasier for You-Know —”

“Shut up, Ron,” said Hermione angrily. “How manytimes have you suspected Snape, and when have youever been right? Dumbledore trusts him, he works forthe Order, that ought to be enough.”

“He used to be a Death Eater,” said Ron stubbornly.“And we’ve never seen proof that he really swappedsides...”

Page | 707Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Dumbledore trusts him,” Hermione repeated. “And ifwe can’t trust Dumbledore, we can’t trust anyone.”

With so much to worry about and so much to do —startling amounts of homework that frequently keptthe fifth years working until past midnight, secretD.A. meetings, and regular classes with Snape —January seemed to be passing alarmingly fast. BeforeHarry knew it, February had arrived, bringing with itwetter and warmer weather and the prospect of thesecond Hogsmeade visit of the year. Harry had hadvery little time to spare on conversations with Chosince they had agreed to visit the village together, butsuddenly found himself facing a Valentine’s Dayspent entirely in her company.

On the morning of the fourteenth he dressedparticularly carefully. He and Ron arrived at breakfastjust in time for the arrival of the post owls. Hedwigwas not there — not that he had expected her — butHermione was tugging a letter from the beak of anunfamiliar brown owl as they sat down.

“And about time! If it hadn’t come today ...” she saideagerly, tearing open the envelope and pulling out asmall piece of parchment. Her eyes sped from left toright as she read through the message and a grimlypleased expression spread across her face.

“Listen, Harry,” she said, looking up at him. “This isreally important... Do you think you could meet me inthe Three Broomsticks around midday?”

“Well ... I dunno,” said Harry dubiously. “Cho mightbe expecting me to spend the whole day with her. Wenever said what we were going to do.”

“Well, bring her along if you must,” said Hermioneurgently. “But will you come?”

Page | 708Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well ... all right, but why?”

“I haven’t got time to tell you now, I’ve got to answerthis quickly —”

And she hurried out of the Great Hall, the letterclutched in one hand and a piece of uneaten toast inthe other.

“Are you coming?” Harry asked Ron, but he shook hishead, looking glum.

“I can’t come into Hogsmeade at all, Angelina wants afull day’s training. Like it’s going to help — we’re theworst team I’ve ever seen. You should see Sloper andKirke, they’re pathetic, even worse than I am.” Heheaved a great sigh. “I dunno why Angelina won’t justlet me resign...”

“It’s because you’re good when you’re on form, that’swhy,” said Harry irritably.

He found it very hard to be sympathetic to Ron’splight when he himself would have given almostanything to be playing in the forthcoming matchagainst Hufflepuff. Ron seemed to notice Harry’s tone,because he did not mention Quidditch again duringbreakfast, and there was a slight frostiness in the waythey said good-bye to each other shortly afterward.Ron departed for the Quidditch pitch and Harry, afterattempting to flatten his hair while staring at hisreflection in the back of a teaspoon, proceeded aloneto the entrance hall to meet Cho, feeling veryapprehensive and wondering what on earth they weregoing to talk about.

She was waiting for him a little to the side of the oakfront doors, looking very pretty with her hair tiedback in a long ponytail. Harry’s feet seemed to be too

Page | 709Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

big for his body as he walked toward her, and he wassuddenly horribly aware of his arms and how stupidthey looked swinging at his sides.

“Hi,” said Cho slightly breathlessly.

“Hi,” said Harry.

They stared at each other for a moment, then Harrysaid, “Well — er — shall we go, then?”

“Oh —yes ...”

They joined the queue of people being signed out byFilch, occasionally catching each other’s eye andgrinning shiftily, but not talking to each other. Harrywas relieved when they reached the fresh air, findingit easier to walk along in silence than just stand therelooking awkward. It was a fresh, breezy sort of dayand as they passed the Quidditch stadium, Harryglimpsed Ron and Ginny skimming over the standsand felt a horrible pang that he was not up there withthem...

“You really miss it, don’t you?” said Cho.

He looked around and saw her watching him.

“Yeah,” sighed Harry. “I do.”

“Remember the first time we played against eachother, in the third year?” she asked him.

“Yeah,” said Harry, grinning. “You kept blocking me.”

“And Wood told you not to be a gentleman and knockme off my broom if you had to,” said Cho, smilingreminiscently. “I heard he got taken on by Pride ofPortree, is that right?”

Page | 710Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Nah, it was Puddlemere United, I saw him at theWorld Cup last year.”

“Oh, I saw you there too, remember? We were on thesame campsite. It was really good, wasn’t it?”

The subject of the Quidditch World Cup carried themall the way down the drive and out through the gates.Harry could hardly believe how easy it was to talk toher, no more difficult, in fact, than talking to Ron andHermione, and he was just starting to feel confidentand cheerful when a large gang of Slytherin girlspassed them, including Pansy Parkinson.

“Potter and Chang!” screeched Pansy to a chorus ofsnide giggles. “Urgh, Chang, I don’t think much ofyour taste... At least Diggory was good-looking!”

They sped up, talking and shrieking in a pointedfashion with many exaggerated glances back at Harryand Cho, leaving an embarrassed silence in theirwake. Harry could think of nothing else to say aboutQuidditch, and Cho, slightly flushed, was watchingher feet.

“So ... where d’you want to go?” Harry asked as theyentered Hogsmeade. The High Street was full ofstudents ambling up and down, peering into the shopwindows and messing about together on thepavements.

“Oh ... I don’t mind,” said Cho, shrugging. “Um ...shall we just have a look in the shops or something?”

They wandered toward Dervish and Banges. A largeposter had been stuck up in the window and a fewHogsmeaders were looking at it. They moved asidewhen Harry and Cho approached and Harry foundhimself staring once more at the ten pictures of thePage | 711Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

escaped Death Eaters. The poster (“By Order of theMinistry of Magic”) offered a thousand-Galleon rewardto any witch or wizard with information relating to therecapture of any of the convicts pictured.

“It’s funny, isn’t it,” said Cho in a low voice, alsogazing up at the pictures of the Death Eaters.“Remember when that Sirius Black escaped, andthere were dementors all over Hogsmeade looking forhim? And now ten Death Eaters are on the loose andthere aren’t dementors anywhere...”

“Yeah,” said Harry, tearing his eyes away fromBellatrix Lestrange’s face to glance up and down theHigh Street. “Yeah, it is weird...”

He was not sorry that there were no dementorsnearby, but now he came to think of it, their absencewas highly significant. They had not only let theDeath Eaters escape, they were not bothering to lookfor them... It looked as though they really wereoutside Ministry control now.

The ten escaped Death Eaters were staring out ofevery shop window he and Cho passed. It started torain as they passed Scrivenshaft’s; cold, heavy dropsof water kept hitting Harry’s face and the back of hisneck.

“Um ... d’you want to get a coffee?” said Chotentatively, as the rain began to fall more heavily.

“Yeah, all right,” said Harry, looking around. “Where— ?”

“Oh, there’s a really nice place just up here, haven’tyou ever been to Madam Puddifoot’s?” she saidbrightly, and she led him up a side road and into asmall tea shop that Harry had never noticed before. It

Page | 712Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

was a cramped, steamy little place where everythingseemed to have been decorated with frills or bows.Harry was reminded unpleasantly of Umbridge’soffice.

“Cute, isn’t it?” said Cho happily.

“Er ... yeah,” said Harry untruthfully.

“Look, she’s decorated it for Valentine’s Day!” saidCho, indicating a number of golden cherubs that werehovering over each of the small, circular tables,occasionally throwing pink confetti over theoccupants.

“Aaah ...”

They sat down at the last remaining table, which wassituated in the steamy window. Roger Davies, theRavenclaw Quidditch Captain, was sitting about afoot and a half away with a pretty blonde girl. Theywere holding hands. The sight made Harry feeluncomfortable, particularly when, looking around thetea shop, he saw that it was full of nothing butcouples, all of them holding hands. Perhaps Chowould expect him to hold her hand.

“What can I get you, m’dears?” said MadamPuddifoot, a very stout woman with a shiny blackbun, squeezing between their table and RogerDavies’s with great difficulty.

“Two coffees, please,” said Cho.

In the time it took for their coffees to arrive, RogerDavies and his girlfriend started kissing over theirsugar bowl. Harry wished they wouldn’t; he felt thatDavies was setting a standard with which Cho wouldsoon expect him to compete. He felt his face growingPage | 713Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

hot and tried staring out of the window, but it was sosteamed up he could not see the street outside. Topostpone the moment when he had to look at Cho hestared up at the ceiling as though examining thepaintwork and received a handful of confetti in theface from their hovering cherub.

After a few more painful minutes Cho mentionedUmbridge; Harry seized on the subject with relief andthey passed a few happy moments abusing her, butthe subject had already been so thoroughly canvassedduring D.A. meetings it did not last very long. Silencefell again. Harry was very conscious of the slurpingnoises coming from the table next door and castwildly around for something else to say.

“Er ... listen, d’you want to come with me to the ThreeBroomsticks at lunchtime? I’m meeting HermioneGranger there.”

Cho raised her eyebrows.

“You’re meeting Hermione Granger? Today?”

“Yeah. Well, she asked me to, so I thought I would.D’you want to come with me? She said it wouldn’tmatter if you did.”

“Oh ... well ... that was nice of her.”

But Cho did not sound as though she thought it wasnice at all; on the contrary, her tone was cold and allof a sudden she looked rather forbidding.

A few more minutes passed in total silence, Harrydrinking his coffee so fast that he would soon need afresh cup. Next door, Roger Davies and his girlfriendseemed glued together by the lips.

Page | 714Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Cho’s hand was lying on the table beside her coffee,and Harry was feeling a mounting pressure to takehold of it. Just do it, he told himself, as a fount ofmingled panic and excitement surged up inside hischest. Just reach out and grab it... Amazing how muchmore difficult it was to extend his arm twelve inchesand touch her hand than to snatch a speeding Snitchfrom midair ...

But just as he moved his hand forward, Cho tookhers off the table. She was now watching RogerDavies kissing his girlfriend with a mildly interestedexpression.

“He asked me out, you know,” she said in a quietvoice. “A couple of weeks ago. Roger. I turned himdown, though.”

Harry, who had grabbed the sugar bowl to excuse hissudden lunging movement across the table, could notthink why she was telling him this. If she wished shewere sitting at the table next door being heartilykissed by Roger Davies, why had she agreed to comeout with him?

He said nothing. Their cherub threw another handfulof confetti over them; some of it landed in the lastcold dregs of coffee Harry had been about to drink.

“I came in here with Cedric last year,” said Cho.

In the second or so it took for him to take in what shehad said, Harry’s insides had become glacial. Hecould not believe she wanted to talk about Cedricnow, while kissing couples surrounded them and acherub floated over their heads.

Cho’s voice was rather higher when she spoke again.

Page | 715Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I’ve been meaning to ask you for ages... Did Cedric —did he m-m-mention me at all before he died?”

This was the very last subject on earth Harry wantedto discuss, and least of all with Cho.

“Well — no —” he said quietly. “There — there wasn’ttime for him to say anything. Erm ... so ... d’you ...d’you get to see a lot of Quidditch in the holidays?

You support the Tornados, right?”

His voice sounded falsely bright and cheery. To hishorror, he saw that her eyes were swimming withtears again, just as they had been after the last D.A.meeting before Christmas.

“Look,” he said desperately, leaning in so that nobodyelse could overhear, “let’s not talk about Cedric rightnow... Let’s talk about something else...”

But this, apparently, was quite the wrong thing tosay.

“I thought,” she said, tears spattering down onto thetable. “I thought you’d u-u-understand! I need to talkabout it! Surely you n-need to talk about it t-too! Imean, you saw it happen, d-didn’t you?”

Everything was going nightmarishly wrong; RogerDavies’ girlfriend had even unglued herself to lookaround at Cho crying.

“Well — I have talked about it,” Harry said in awhisper, “to Ron and Hermione, but —”

“Oh, you’ll talk to Hermione Granger!” she saidshrilly, her face now shining with tears, and severalmore kissing couples broke apart to stare. “But youwon’t talk to me! P-perhaps it would be best if we just

Page | 716Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

... just p-paid and you went and met up withHermione G-Granger, like you obviously want to!”

Harry stared at her, utterly bewildered, as she seizeda frilly napkin and dabbed at her shining face with it.

“Cho?” he said weakly, wishing Roger would seize hisgirlfriend and start kissing her again to stop hergoggling at him and Cho.

“Go on, leave!” she said, now crying into the napkin.

“I don’t know why you asked me out in the first placeif you’re going to make arrangements to meet othergirls right after me... How many are you meeting afterHermione?”

“It’s not like that!” said Harry, and he was so relievedat finally understanding what she was annoyed aboutthat he laughed, which he realized a split second toolate was a mistake.

Cho sprang to her feet. The whole tearoom was quiet,and everybody was watching them now.

“I’ll see you around, Harry,” she said dramatically,and hiccuping slightly she dashed to the door,wrenched it open, and hurried off into the pouringrain.

“Cho!” Harry called after her, but the door hadalready swung shut behind her with a tuneful tinkle.

There was total silence within the tea shop. Every eyewas upon Harry. He threw a Galleon down onto thetable, shook pink confetti out of his eyes, andfollowed Cho out of the door.

It was raining hard now, and she was nowhere to beseen. He simply did not understand what had

Page | 717Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

happened; half an hour ago they had been gettingalong fine.

“Women!” he muttered angrily, sloshing down therain-washed street with his hands in his pockets.“What did she want to talk about Cedric for anyway?Why does she always want to drag up a subject thatmakes her act like a human hosepipe?”

He turned right and broke into a splashy run, andwithin minutes he was turning into the doorway ofthe Three Broomsticks. He knew he was too early tomeet Hermione, but he thought it likely there wouldbe someone in here with whom he could spend theintervening time. He shook his wet hair out of hiseyes and looked around. Hagrid was sitting alone in acorner, looking morose.

“Hi, Hagrid!” he said, when he had squeezed throughthe crammed tables and pulled up a chair beside him.

Hagrid jumped and looked down at Harry as thoughhe barely recognized him. Harry saw that he had twofresh cuts on his face and several new bruises.

“Oh, it’s you, Harry,” said Hagrid. “You all righ’?”

“Yeah, I’m fine,” lied Harry; in fact, next to thisbattered and mournful-looking Hagrid, he felt he didnot have much to complain about. “Er — are youokay?”

“Me?” said Hagrid. “Oh yeah, I’m grand, Harry,grand...”

He gazed into the depths of his pewter tankard, whichwas the size of a large bucket, and sighed. Harry didnot know what to say to him. They sat side by side in

Page | 718Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

silence for a moment. Then Hagrid said abruptly, “Inthe same boat, you an’ me, aren’ we, Harry?”

“Er —” said Harry.

“Yeah ... I’ve said it before... Both outsiders, like,”said Hagrid, nodding wisely. “An’ both orphans. Yeah... both orphans.”

He took a great swig from his tankard.

“Makes a diff’rence, havin’ a decent family,” he said.“Me dad was decent. An’ your mum an’ dad weredecent. If they’d lived, life woulda bin diff’rent, eh?”

“Yeah ... I s’pose,” said Harry cautiously. Hagridseemed to be in a very strange mood.

“Family,” said Hagrid gloomily. “Whatever yeh say,blood’s important...”

And he wiped a trickle of it out of his eye.

“Hagrid,” said Harry, unable to stop himself, “whereare you getting all these injuries?”

“Eh?” said Hagrid, looking startled. “Wha’ injuries?”

“All those!” said Harry, pointing at Hagrid’s face.

“Oh ... tha’s jus’ normal bumps an’ bruises, Harry,”said Hagrid dismissively. “I got a rough job.”

He drained his tankard, set it back upon the table,and got to his feet.

“I’ll be seein’yeh, Harry... Take care now...”

Page | 719Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

And he lumbered out of the pub looking wretched andthen disappeared into the torrential rain. Harrywatched him go, feeling miserable. Hagrid wasunhappy and he was hiding something, but heseemed determined not to accept help. What wasgoing on? But before Harry could think about thematter any further, he heard a voice calling his name.

“Harry! Harry, over here!”

Hermione was waving at him from the other side ofthe room. He got up and made his way toward herthrough the crowded pub. He was still a few tablesaway when he realized that Hermione was not alone;she was sitting at a table with the unlikeliest pair ofdrinking mates he could ever have imagined: LunaLovegood and none other than Rita Skeeter, ex-journalist on the Daily Prophet and one of Hermione’sleast favorite people in the world.

“You’re early!” said Hermione, moving along to givehim room to sit down. “I thought you were with Cho, Iwasn’t expecting you for another hour at least!”

“Cho?” said Rita at once, twisting around in her seatto stare avidly at Harry. “A girl?”

She snatched up her crocodile-skin handbag andgroped within it.

“It’s none of your business if Harry’s been with ahundred girls,” Hermione told Rita coolly. “So you canput that away right now.”

Rita had been on the point of withdrawing an acid-green quill from her bag. Looking as though she hadbeen forced to swallow Stinksap, she snapped her bagshut again.

Page | 720Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What are you up to?” Harry asked, sitting down andstaring from Rita to Luna to Hermione.

“Little Miss Perfect was just about to tell me when youarrived,” said Rita, taking a large slurp of her drink. “Isuppose I’m allowed to talk to him, am I?” she shot atHermione.

“Yes, I suppose you are,” said Hermione coldly.

Unemployment did not suit Rita. The hair that hadonce been set in elaborate curls now hung lank andunkempt around her face. The scarlet paint on hertwo-inch talons was chipped and there were a coupleof false jewels missing from her winged glasses. Shetook another great gulp of her drink and said out ofthe corner of her mouth, “Pretty girl, is she, Harry?”

“One more word about Harry’s love life and the deal’soff and that’s a promise,” said Hermione irritably.

“What deal?” said Rita, wiping her mouth on the backof her hand. “You haven’t mentioned a deal yet, MissPrissy, you just told me to turn up. Oh, one of thesedays ...” She took a deep shuddering breath.

“Yes, yes, one of these days you’ll write more horriblestories about Harry and me,” said Hermioneindifferently. “Find someone who cares, why don’tyou?”

“They’ve run plenty of horrible stories about Harrythis year without my help,” said Rita, shooting asideways look at him over the top of her glass andadding in a rough whisper, “How has that made youfeel, Harry? Betrayed? Distraught? Misunderstood?”

“He feels angry, of course,” said Hermione in a hard,clear voice. “Because he’s told the Minister of Magic

Page | 721Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

the truth and the Minister’s too much of an idiot tobelieve him.”

“So you actually stick to it, do you, that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named is back?” said Rita, lowering herglass and subjecting Harry to a piercing stare whileher finger strayed longingly to the clasp of thecrocodile bag. “You stand by all this garbageDumbledore’s been telling everybody about You-Know-Who returning and you being the sole witness— ?”

“I wasn’t the sole witness,” snarled Harry. “There werea dozen-odd Death Eaters there as well. Want theirnames?”

“I’d love them,” breathed Rita, now fumbling in herbag once more and gazing at him as though he wasthe most beautiful thing she had ever seen. “A greatbold headline: ‘PotterAccuses ...’A subheading:

‘Harry Potter Names Death Eaters Still Among Us.’ Andthen, beneath a nice big photograph of you:

‘Disturbed teenage survivor of You-Know-Who’s attack,Harry Potter, 15, caused outrage yesterday byaccusing respectable and prominent members of theWizarding community of being Death Eaters...’ ”

The Quick-Quotes Quill was actually in her hand andhalfway to her mouth when the rapturous expressiondied out of her face.

“But of course,” she said, lowering the quill andlooking daggers at Hermione, “Little Miss Perfectwouldn’t want that story out there, would she?”

“As a matter of fact,” said Hermione sweetly, “that’sexactly what Little Miss Perfect does want.”

Page | 722Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Rita stared at her. So did Harry. Luna, on the otherhand, sang, “Weasley Is Our King” dreamily under herbreath and stirred her drink with a cocktail onion ona stick.

“You want me to report what he says about He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named?” Rita asked Hermione in ahushed voice.

“Yes, I do,” said Hermione. “The true story. All thefacts. Exactly as Harry reports them. Hell give you allthe details, hell tell you the names of theundiscovered Death Eaters he saw there, hell tell youwhat Voldemort looks like now — oh, get a grip onyourself,” she added contemptuously, throwing anapkin across the table, for at the sound ofVoldemort’s name, Rita had jumped so badly that shehad slopped half her glass of firewhisky down herself.

Rita blotted the front of her grubby raincoat, stillstaring at Hermione. Then she said baldly, “TheProphet wouldn’t print it. In case you haven’t noticed,nobody believes his cock-and-bull story. Everyonethinks he’s delusional. Now, if you let me write thestory from that angle —”

“We don’t need another story about how Harry’s losthis marbles!” said Hermione angrily. “We’ve hadplenty of those already, thank you! I want him giventhe opportunity to tell the truth!”

“There’s no market for a story like that,” said Ritacoldly.

“You mean the Prophet won’t print it because Fudgewon’t let them,” said Hermione irritably.

Rita gave Hermione a long, hard look. Then, leaningforward across the table toward her, she said in a

Page | 723Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

businesslike tone, “All right, Fudge is leaning on theProphet, but it comes to the same thing. They won’tprint a story that shows Harry in a good light. Nobodywants to read it. It’s against the public mood. Thislast Azkaban breakout has got people quite worriedenough. People just don’t want to believe You-Know-Who’s back.”

“So the Daily Prophet exists to tell people what theywant to hear, does it?” said Hermione scathingly.

Rita sat up straight again, her eyebrows raised, anddrained her glass of firewhisky.

“The Prophet exists to sell itself, you silly girl,” shesaid coldly.

“My dad thinks it’s an awful paper,” said Luna,chipping into the conversation unexpectedly. Suckingon her cocktail onion, she gazed at Rita with herenormous, protuberant, slightly mad eyes. “Hepublishes important stories that he thinks the publicneeds to know. He doesn’t care about making money.”

Rita looked disparagingly at Luna.

“I’m guessing your father runs some stupid littlevillage newsletter?” she said. “ Twenty-five Ways toMingle with Muggles’ and the dates of the next Bring-and-Fly Sale?”

“No,” said Luna, dipping her onion back into hergillywater, “he’s the editor of The Quibbler.”

Rita snorted so loudly that people at a nearby tablelooked around in alarm.

Page | 724Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“ ‘Important stories he thinks the public needs toknow’?” she said witheringly. “I could manure mygarden with the contents of that rag.”

“Well, this is your chance to raise the tone of it a bit,isn’t it?” said Hermione pleasantly. “Luna says herfather’s quite happy to take Harry’s interview. That’swho’ll be publishing it.”

Rita stared at them both for a moment and then letout a great whoop of laughter.

“The Quibbleii” she said, cackling. “You think peoplewill take him seriously if he’s published in TheQuibbler?”

“Some people won’t,” said Hermione in a level voice.“But the Daily Prophet’s version of the Azkabanbreakout had some gaping holes in it. I think a lot ofpeople will be wondering whether there isn’t a betterexplanation of what happened, and if there’s analternative story available, even if it is published in a”— she glanced sideways at Luna, “in a — well, anunusual magazine — I think they might be ratherkeen to read it.”

Rita did not say anything for a while, but eyedHermione shrewdly, her head a little to one side.

“All right, let’s say for a moment I’ll do it,” she saidabruptly. “What kind of fee am I going to get?”

“I don’t think Daddy exactly pays people to write forthe magazine,” said Luna dreamily. “They do itbecause it’s an honor, and, of course, to see theirnames in print.”

Page | 725Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Rita Skeeter looked as though the taste of Stinksapwas strong in her mouth again as she rounded onHermione. “I’m supposed to do this for free?”

“Well, yes,” said Hermione calmly, taking a sip of herdrink. “Otherwise, as you very well know, I will informthe authorities that you are an unregisteredAnimagus. Of course, the Prophet might give yourather a lot for an insider’s account of life inAzkaban...”

Rita looked as though she would have liked nothingbetter than to seize the paper umbrella sticking out ofHermione’s drink and thrust it up her nose.

“I don’t suppose I’ve got any choice, have I?” said Rita,her voice shaking slightly. She opened her crocodilebag once more, withdrew a piece of parchment, andraised her Quick-Quotes Quill.

“Daddy will be pleased,” said Luna brightly. A muscletwitched in Rita’s jaw.

“Okay, Harry?” said Hermione, turning to him. “Readyto tell the public the truth?”

“I suppose,” said Harry, watching Rita balancing theQuick-Quotes Quill at the ready on the parchmentbetween them.

“Fire away, then, Rita,” said Hermione serenely,fishing a cherry out of the bottom of her glass.

Page | 726Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





SEEN AND UNFORESEEN

Luna said vaguely that she did not know how soonRita’s interview with Harry would appear in TheQuibbler, that her father was expecting a lovely longarticle on recent sightings of Crumple-HornedSnorkacks. “And, of course, that’ll be a veryimportant story, so Harry’s might have to wait for thefollowing issue,” said Luna.

Harry had not found it an easy experience to talkabout the night when Voldemort had returned. Ritahad pressed him for every little detail, and he hadgiven her everything he could remember, knowingthat this was his one big opportunity to tell the worldthe truth. He wondered how people would react to thestory. He guessed that it would confirm a lot of peoplein the view that he was completely insane, not leastbecause his story would be appearing alongside utterrubbish about Crumple-Horned Snorkacks. But thebreakout of Bellatrix Lestrange and her fellow DeathEaters had given Harry a burning desire to dosomething, whether it worked or not...

Page | 727Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Can’t wait to see what Umbridge thinks of you goingpublic,” said Dean, sounding awestruck at dinner onMonday night. Seamus was shoveling down largeamounts of chicken-and-ham pie on Dean’s otherside, but Harry knew he was listening.

“It’s the right thing to do, Harry,” said Neville, whowas sitting opposite him. He was rather pale, butwent on in a low voice, “It must have been ... tough ...talking about it... Was it?”

“Yeah,” mumbled Harry, “but people have got to knowwhat Voldemort’s capable of, haven’t they?”

“That’s right,” said Neville, nodding, “and his DeathEaters too ... People should know...”

Neville left his sentence hanging and returned to hisbaked potato. Seamus looked up, but when he caughtHarry’s eye he looked quickly back at his plate again.After a while Dean, Seamus, and Neville departed forthe common room, leaving Harry and Hermione at thetable waiting for Ron, who had not yet had dinnerbecause of Quidditch practice.

Cho Chang walked into the hall with her friendMarietta. Harry’s stomach gave an unpleasant lurch,but she did not look over at the Gryffindor table andsat down with her back to him.

“Oh, I forgot to ask you,” said Hermione brightly,glancing over at the Ravenclaw table, “what happenedon your date with Cho? How come you were back soearly?”

“Er ... well, it was ...” said Harry, pulling a dish ofrhubarb crumble toward him and helping himself toseconds, “a complete fiasco, now that you mention it.”

Page | 728Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

And he told her what had happened in MadamPuddifoot’s Tea Shop.

"... so then,” he finished several minutes later, as thefinal bit of crumble disappeared, “she jumps up,right, and says ‘111 see you around, Harry,’ and runsout of the place!” He put down his spoon and lookedat Hermione. “I mean, what was all that about? Whatwas going on?”

Hermione glanced over at the back of Cho’s head andsighed. “Oh, Harry,” she said sadly. “Well, I’m sorry,but you were a bit tactless.”

“Me, tactless?” said Harry, outraged. “One minute wewere getting on fine, next minute she was telling methat Roger Davies asked her out, and how she used togo and snog Cedric in that stupid tea shop — howwas I supposed to feel about that?”

“Well, you see,” said Hermione, with the patient air ofone explaining that one plus one equals two to anoveremotional toddler, “you shouldn’t have told herthat you wanted to meet me halfway through yourdate.”

“But, but,” spluttered Harry, “but — you told me tomeet you at twelve and to bring her along, how was Isupposed to do that without telling her — ?”

“You should have told her differently” said Hermione,still with that maddeningly patient air. “You shouldhave said it was really annoying, but I’d made youpromise to come along to the Three Broomsticks, andyou really didn’t want to go, you’d much rather spendthe whole day with her, but unfortunately youthought you really ought to meet me and would sheplease, please come along with you, and hopefullyyou’d be able to get away more quickly? And it mightPage | 729Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

have been a good idea to mention how ugly you thinkI am too,” Hermione added as an afterthought.

“But I don’t think you’re ugly,” said Harry, bemused.

Hermione laughed.

“Harry, you’re worse than Ron... Well, no, you’re not,”she sighed, as Ron himself came stumping into theHall splattered with mud and looking grumpy. “Look— you upset Cho when you said you were going tomeet me, so she tried to make you jealous. It was herway of trying to find out how much you liked her.”

“Is that what she was doing?” said Harry as Rondropped onto the bench opposite them and pulledevery dish within reach toward himself. “Well,wouldn’t it have been easier if she’d just asked mewhether I liked her better than you?”

“Girls don’t often ask questions like that,” saidHermione.

“Well, they should!” said Harry forcefully. “Then Icould’ve just told her I fancy her, and she wouldn’thave had to get herself all worked up again aboutCedric dying!”

“I’m not saying what she did was sensible,” saidHermione, as Ginny joined them, just as muddy asRon and looking equally disgruntled. “I’m just tryingto make you see how she was feeling at the time.”

“You should write a book,” Ron told Hermione as hecut up his potatoes, “translating mad things girls doso boys can understand them.”

“Yeah,” said Harry fervently, looking over at theRavenclaw table. Cho had just got up; still not looking

Page | 730Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

at him, she left the Great Hall. Feeling ratherdepressed, he looked back at Ron and Ginny. “So,how was Quidditch practice?”

“It was a nightmare,” said Ron in a surly voice.

“Oh come on,” said Hermione, looking at Ginny, “I’msure it wasn’t that —”

“Yes, it was,” said Ginny. “It was appalling. Angelinawas nearly in tears by the end of it.”

Ron and Ginny went off for baths after dinner; Harryand Hermione returned to the busy Gryffindorcommon room and their usual pile of homework.Harry had been struggling with a new star chart forAstronomy for half an hour when Fred and Georgeturned up.

“Ron and Ginny not here?” asked Fred, lookingaround as he pulled up a chair and, when Harryshook his head, he said, “Good. We were watchingtheir practice. They’re going to be slaughtered. They’recomplete rubbish without us.”

“Come on, Ginny’s not bad,” said George fairly, sittingdown next to Fred. “Actually, I dunno how she got sogood, seeing how we never let her play with us...”

“She’s been breaking into your broom shed in thegarden since the age of six and taking each of yourbrooms out in turn when you weren’t looking,” saidHermione from behind her tottering pile of AncientRune books.

“Oh,” said George, looking mildly impressed. “Well —that’d explain it.”

Page | 731Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Has Ron saved a goal yet?” asked Hermione, peeringover the top of Magical Hieroglyphs and Logograms.

“Well, he can do it if he doesn’t think anyone’swatching him,” said Fred, rolling his eyes. “So all wehave to do is ask the crowd to turn their backs andtalk among themselves every time the Quaffle goes uphis end on Saturday.”

He got up again and moved restlessly to the window,staring out across the dark grounds.

“You know, Quidditch was about the only thing inthis place worth staying for.”

Hermione cast him a stern look.

“You’ve got exams coming!”

“Told you already, we’re not fussed about N.E.W.T.s,”said Fred. “The Snackboxes are ready to roll, wefound out how to get rid of those boils, just a coupleof drops of murtlap essence sorts them, Lee put usonto it...”

George yawned widely and looked out disconsolatelyat the cloudy night sky.

“I dunno if I even want to watch this match. IfZacharias Smith beats us I might have to kill myself.”

“Kill him, more like,” said Fred firmly.

“That’s the trouble with Quidditch,” said Hermioneabsentmindedly, once again bent over her Runetranslation, “it creates all this bad feeling and tensionbetween the Houses.”

Page | 732Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She looked up to find her copy of Spellman’sSyllabary and caught Fred, George, and Harry lookingat her with expressions of mingled disgust andincredulity on their faces.

“Well, it does!” she said impatiently. “It’s only a game,isn’t it?”

“Hermione,” said Harry, shaking his head, “you’regood on feelings and stuff, but you just don’tunderstand about Quidditch.”

“Maybe not,” she said darkly, returning to hertranslation again, “but at least my happiness doesn’tdepend on Ron’s goalkeeping ability.”

And though Harry would rather have jumped off theAstronomy Tower than admit it to her, by the time hehad watched the game the following Saturday hewould have given any number of Galleons not to careabout Quidditch either.

The very best thing you could say about the matchwas that it was short; the Gryffindor spectators hadto endure only twenty-two minutes of agony. It washard to say what the worst thing was: Harry thoughtit was a close-run contest between Ron’s fourteenthfailed save, Sloper missing the Bludger but hittingAngelina in the mouth with his bat, and Kirkeshrieking and falling backward off his broom asZacharias Smith zoomed at him carrying the Quaffle.The miracle was that Gryffindor only lost by tenpoints: Ginny managed to snatch the Snitch fromright under Hufflepuff Seeker Summerby’s nose, sothat the final score was two hundred and forty versustwo hundred and thirty.

Page | 733Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Good catch,” Harry told Ginny back in the commonroom, where the atmosphere closely resembled that ofa particularly dismal funeral.

“I was lucky,” she shrugged. “It wasn’t a very fastSnitch and Summerby’s got a cold, he sneezed andclosed his eyes at exactly the wrong moment. Anyway,once you’re back on the team —”

“Ginny, I’ve got a lifelong ban.”

“You’re banned as long as Umbridge is in the school,”Ginny corrected him. “There’s a difference. Anyway,once you’re back, I think I’ll try out for Chaser.Angelina and Alicia are both leaving next year and Iprefer goal-scoring to Seeking anyway.”

Harry looked over at Ron, who was hunched in acorner, staring at his knees, a bottle of butterbeerclutched in his hand.

“Angelina still won’t let him resign,” Ginny said, asthough reading Harry’s mind. “She says she knowshe’s got it in him.”

Harry liked Angelina for the faith she was showing inRon, but at the same time thought it would really bekinder to let him leave the team. Ron had left thepitch to another booming chorus of “Weasley Is OurKing” sung with great gusto by the Slytherins, whowere now favorites to win the Quidditch Cup.

Fred and George wandered over.

“I haven’t got the heart to take the mickey out of him,even,” said Fred, looking over at Ron’s crumpledfigure. “Mind you ... when he missed the fourteenth

Page | 734Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He made wild motions with his arms as though doingan upright doggy-paddle.

“Well, I’ll save it for parties, eh?”

Ron dragged himself up to bed shortly after this. Outof respect for his feelings, Harry waited a while beforegoing up to the dormitory himself, so that Ron couldpretend to be asleep if he wanted to. Sure enough,when Harry finally entered the room Ron was snoringa little too loudly to be entirely plausible.

Harry got into bed, thinking about the match. It hadbeen immensely frustrating watching from thesidelines. He was quite impressed by Ginny’sperformance but he felt that if he had been playing hecould have caught the Snitch sooner... There hadbeen a moment when it had been fluttering nearKirke’s ankle; if she hadn’t hesitated, she might havebeen able to scrape a win for Gryffindor...

Umbridge had been sitting a few rows below Harryand Hermione. Once or twice she had turned squatlyin her seat to look at him, her wide toad’s mouthstretched in what he thought had been a gloatingsmile. The memory of it made him feel hot with angeras he lay there in the dark. After a few minutes,however, he remembered that he was supposed to beemptying his mind of all emotion before he slept, asSnape kept instructing him at the end of everyOcclumency lesson.

He tried for a moment or two, but the thought ofSnape on top of memories of Umbridge merelyincreased his sense of grumbling resentment, and hefound himself focusing instead on how much heloathed the pair of them. Slowly, Ron’s snores diedaway, replaced by the sound of deep, slow breathing.

It took Harry much longer to get to sleep; his bodyPage | 735Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

was tired, but it took his brain a long time to closedown.

He dreamed that Neville and Professor Sprout werewaltzing around the Room of Requirement whileProfessor McGonagall played the bagpipes. Hewatched them happily for a while, then decided to goand find the other members of the D.A...

But when he left the room he found himself facing,not the tapestry of Barnabas the Barmy, but a torchburning in its bracket on a stone wall. He turned hishead slowly to the left. There, at the far end of thewindowless passage, was a plain, black door.

He walked toward it with a sense of mountingexcitement. He had the strangest feeling that thistime he was going to get lucky at last, and find theway to open it... He was feet from it and saw with aleap of excitement that there was a glowing strip offaint blue light down the right-hand side... The doorwas ajar... He stretched out his hand to push it wideand —

Ron gave a loud, rasping, genuine snore, and Harryawoke abruptly with his right hand stretched in frontof him in the darkness, to open a door that washundreds of miles away. He let it fall with a feeling ofmingled disappointment and guilt. He knew heshould not have seen the door, but at the same time,felt so consumed with curiosity about what wasbehind it that he could not help feeling annoyed withRon... If he could have saved his snore for justanother minute ...

k k k

Page | 736Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

They entered the Great Hall for breakfast at exactlythe same moment as the post owls on Mondaymorning. Hermione was not the only person eagerlyawaiting her Daily Prophet: Nearly everyone was eagerfor more news about the escaped Death Eaters, who,despite many reported sightings, had still not beencaught. She gave the delivery owl a Knut andunfolded the newspaper eagerly while Harry helpedhimself to orange juice; as he had only received onenote during the entire year he was sure, when thefirst owl landed with a thud in front of him, that ithad made a mistake.

“Who’re you after?” he asked it, languidly removinghis orange juice from underneath its beak andleaning forward to see the recipient’s name andaddress:

Harry Potter

Great Hall

Hogwarts School

Frowning, he made to take the letter from the owl, butbefore he could do so, three, four, five more owls hadfluttered down beside it and were jockeying forposition, treading in the butter, knocking over thesalt, and each attempting to give him their lettersfirst.

“What’s going on?” Ron asked in amazement, as thewhole of Gryffindor table leaned forward to watch asanother seven owls landed amongst the first ones,screeching, hooting, and flapping their wings.

“Harry!” said Hermione breathlessly, plunging herhands into the feathery mass and pulling out a

Page | 737Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

screech owl bearing a long, cylindrical package. “Ithink I know what this means — open this one first!”

Harry ripped off the brown packaging. Out rolled atightly furled copy of March’s edition of The Quibbler.He unrolled it to see his own face grinning sheepishlyat him from the front cover. In large red letters acrosshis picture were the words:

HARRY POTTER SPEAKS OUT AT LAST:

THE TRUTH ABOUT HE-WHO-MUST-NOT-BE-NAMED

AND THE NIGHT I SAW HIM RETURN

“It’s good, isn’t it?” said Luna, who had drifted over tothe Gryffindor table and now squeezed herself ontothe bench between Fred and Ron. “It came outyesterday, I asked Dad to send you a free copy. Iexpect all these,” she waved a hand at the assembledowls still scrabbling around on the table in front ofHarry, “are letters from readers.”

“That’s what I thought,” said Hermione eagerly,“Harry, d’you mind if we — ?”

“Help yourself,” said Harry, feeling slightly bemused.

Ron and Hermione both started ripping openenvelopes.

“This one’s from a bloke who thinks you’re off yourrocker,” said Ron, glancing down his letter. “Ah well

“This woman recommends you try a good course ofShock Spells at St. Mungo’s,” said Hermione, lookingdisappointed and crumpling up a second.

Page | 738Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“This one looks okay, though,” said Harry slowly,scanning a long letter from a witch in Paisley. “Hey,she says she believes me!”

“This one’s in two minds,” said Fred, who had joinedin the letter-opening with enthusiasm. “Says youdon’t come across as a mad person, but he reallydoesn’t want to believe You-Know-Who’s back so hedoesn’t know what to think now... Blimey, what awaste of parchment ...”

“Here’s another one you’ve convinced, Harry!” saidHermione excitedly. “ ‘Having read your side of thestory I am forced to the conclusion that the DailyProphet has treated you very unfairly... Little though Iwant to think that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named hasreturned, I am forced to accept that you are tellingthe truth...’ Oh this is wonderful!”

“Another one who thinks you’re barking,” said Ron,throwing a crumpled letter over his shoulder, “butthis one says you’ve got her converted, and she nowthinks you’re a real hero — she’s put in a photographtoo — wow —”

“What is going on here?” said a falsely sweet, girlishvoice.

Harry looked up with his hands full of envelopes.Professor Umbridge was standing behind Fred andLuna, her bulging toad’s eyes scanning the mess ofowls and letters on the table in front of Harry. Behindher he saw many of the students watching themavidly.

“Why have you got all these letters, Mr. Potter?” sheasked slowly.

Page | 739Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Is that a crime now?” said Fred loudly. “Gettingmail?”

“Be careful, Mr. Weasley, or I shall have to put you indetention,” said Umbridge. “Well, Mr. Potter?”

Harry hesitated, but he did not see how he could keepwhat he had done quiet; it was surely only a matter oftime before a copy of The Quibbler came to Umbridge’sattention.

“People have written to me because I gave aninterview,” said Harry. “About what happened to melast June.”

For some reason he glanced up at the staff table as hesaid this. He had the strangest feeling thatDumbledore had been watching him a second before,but when he looked, Dumbledore seemed to beabsorbed in conversation with Professor Flitwick.

“An interview?” repeated Umbridge, her voice thinnerand higher than ever. “What do you mean?”

“I mean a reporter asked me questions and Ianswered them,” said Harry. “Here —”

And he threw the copy of The Quibbler at her. Shecaught it and stared down at the cover. Her pale,doughy face turned an ugly, patchy violet.

“When did you do this?” she asked, her voicetrembling slightly.

“Last Hogsmeade weekend,” said Harry.

She looked up at him, incandescent with rage, themagazine shaking in her stubby fingers.

Page | 740Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“There will be no more Hogsmeade trips for you, Mr.Potter,” she whispered. “How you dare ... how youcould ...” She took a deep breath. “I have tried againand again to teach you not to tell lies. The message,apparently, has still not sunk in. Fifty points fromGryffindor and another week’s worth of detentions.”

She stalked away, clutching The Quibbler to herchest, the eyes of many students following her.

By mid-morning enormous signs had been put up allover the school, not just on House notice boards, butin the corridors and classrooms too.

— BY ORDER OF —

THE HIGH INQUISITOR OF HOGWARTS

Any student found in possession of the magazine TheQuibbler will be expelled.

The above is in accordance with

Educational Decree Number Twenty-seven.

Signed:

Dolores Jane UmbridgeHIGH INQUISITOR

For some reason, every time Hermione caught sight ofone of these signs she beamed with pleasure.

“What exactly are you so happy about?” Harry askedher.

Page | 741Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh Harry, don’t you see?” Hermione breathed. “If shecould have done one thing to make absolutely surethat every single person in this school will read yourinterview, it was banning it!”

And it seemed that Hermione was quite right. By theend of that day, though Harry had not seen so muchas a corner of The Quibbler anywhere in the school,the whole place seemed to be quoting the interview ateach other; Harry heard them whispering about it asthey queued up outside classes, discussing it overlunch and in the back of lessons, while Hermioneeven reported that every occupant of the cubicles inthe girls’ toilets had been talking about it when shenipped in there before Ancient Runes.

“And then they spotted me, and obviously they know Iknow you, so they were bombarding me withquestions,” Hermione told Harry, her eyes shining,“and Harry, I think they believe you, I really do, Ithink you’ve finally got them convinced!”

Meanwhile Professor Umbridge was stalking theschool, stopping students at random and demandingthat they turn out their books and pockets. Harryknew she was looking for copies of The Quibbler, butthe students were several steps ahead of her. Thepages carrying Harry’s interview had been bewitchedto resemble extracts from textbooks if anyone butthemselves read it, or else wiped magically blank untilthey wanted to peruse it again. Soon it seemed thatevery single person in the school had read it.

The teachers were, of course, forbidden frommentioning the interview by Educational DecreeNumber Twenty-six, but they found ways to expresstheir feelings about it all the same. Professor Sproutawarded Gryffindor twenty points when Harry passedher a watering can; a beaming Professor FlitwickPage | 742Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

pressed a box of squeaking sugar mice on him at theend of Charms, said “Shh\” and hurried away; andProfessor Trelawney broke into hysterical sobs duringDivination and announced to the startled class, and avery disapproving Umbridge, that Harry was not goingto suffer an early death after all, but would live to aripe old age, become Minister of Magic, and havetwelve children.

But what made Harry happiest was Cho catching upwith him as he was hurrying along to Transfigurationthe next day. Before he knew what had happened herhand was in his and she was breathing in his ear,

“I’m really, really sorry. That interview was so brave...it made me cry.”

He was sorry to hear she had shed even more tearsover it, but very glad they were on speaking termsagain, and even more pleased when she gave him aswift kiss on the cheek and hurried off again. Andunbelievably, no sooner had he arrived outsideTransfiguration than something just as goodhappened: Seamus stepped out of the queue to facehim.

“I just wanted to say,” he mumbled, squinting atHarry’s left knee, “I believe you. And I’ve sent a copyof that magazine to me mam.”

If anything more was needed to complete Harry’shappiness, it was Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle’sreactions. He saw them with their heads togetherlater that afternoon in the library, together with aweedy-looking boy Hermione whispered was calledTheodore Nott. They looked around at Harry as hebrowsed the shelves for the book he needed on PartialVanishment, and Goyle cracked his knucklesthreateningly and Malfoy whispered somethingundoubtedly malevolent to Crabbe. Harry knewPage | 743Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

perfectly well why they were acting like this: He hadnamed all of their fathers as Death Eaters.

“And the best bit is,” whispered Hermione gleefully asthey left the library, “they can’t contradict you,because they can’t admit they’ve read the article!”

To cap it all, Luna told him over dinner that no copyof The Quibbler had ever sold out faster.

“Dad’s reprinting!” she told Harry, her eyes poppingexcitedly. “He can’t believe it, he says people seemeven more interested in this than the Crumple-Horned Snorkacks!”

Harry was a hero in the Gryffindor common room thatnight; daringly, Fred and George had put anEnlargement Charm on the front cover of TheQuibbler and hung it on the wall, so that Harry’s gianthead gazed down upon the proceedings, occasionallysaying things like “The Ministry are morons” and “Eatdung, Umbridge” in a booming voice. Hermione didnot find this very amusing; she said it interfered withher concentration, and ended up going to bed earlyout of irritation. Harry had to admit that the posterwas not quite as funny after an hour or two,especially when the talking spell had started to wearoff, so that it merely shouted disconnected words like“Dung” and “Umbridge” at more and more frequentintervals in a progressively higher voice. In fact itstarted to make his head ache and his scar beganprickling uncomfortably again. To disappointedmoans from the many people who were sitting aroundhim, asking him to relive his interview for theumpteenth time, he announced that he too needed anearly night.

The dormitory was empty when he reached it. Herested his forehead for a moment against the cool

Page | 744Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

glass of the window beside his bed; it felt soothingagainst his scar. Then he undressed and got into bed,wishing his headache would go away. He also feltslightly sick. He rolled over onto his side, closed hiseyes, and fell asleep almost at once...

He was standing in a dark, curtained room lit by asingle branch of candles. His hands were clenched onthe back of a chair in front of him. They were long-fingered and white as though they had not seensunlight for years and looked like large, pale spidersagainst the dark velvet of the chair.

Beyond the chair, in a pool of light cast upon the floorby the candles, knelt a man in black robes.

“I have been badly advised, it seems,” said Harry, in ahigh, cold voice that pulsed with anger.

“Master, I crave your pardon...” croaked the mankneeling on the floor. The back of his head glimmeredin the candlelight. He seemed to be trembling.

“I do not blame you, Rookwood,” said Harry in thatcold, cruel voice.

He relinquished his grip upon the chair and walkedaround it, closer to the man cowering upon the floor,until he stood directly over him in the darkness,looking down from a far greater height than usual.

“You are sure of your facts, Rookwood?” asked Harry.

“Yes, My Lord, yes ... I used to work in thedepartment after — after all...”

“Avery told me Bode would be able to remove it.”

Page | 745Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Bode could never have taken it, Master... Bode wouldhave known he could not... Undoubtedly that is whyhe fought so hard against Malfoy’s Imperius Curse...”

“Stand up, Rookwood,” whispered Harry.

The kneeling man almost fell over in his haste toobey. His face was pockmarked; the scars werethrown into relief by the candlelight. He remained alittle stooped when standing, as though halfwaythrough a bow, and he darted terrified looks up atHarry’s face.

“You have done well to tell me this,” said Harry. “Verywell ... I have wasted months on fruitless schemes, itseems... But no matter ... We begin again, from now.You have Lord Voldemort’s gratitude, Rookwood...”

“My Lord ... yes, My Lord,” gasped Rookwood, hisvoice hoarse with relief.

“I shall need your help. I shall need all theinformation you can give me.”

“Of course, My Lord, of course ... anything ...”

“Very well ... you may go. Send Avery to me.”

Rookwood scurried backward, bowing, anddisappeared through a door.

Left alone in the dark room, Harry turned toward thewall. A cracked, age-spotted mirror hung on the wallin the shadows. Harry moved toward it. His reflectiongrew larger and clearer in the darkness... A facewhiter than a skull ... red eyes with slits for pupils ...

“NOOOOOOOOO!”

Page | 746Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What?” yelled a voice nearby.

Harry flailed around madly, became entangled in thehangings, and fell out of his bed. For a few secondshe did not know where he was; he was convinced thathe was about to see the white, skull-like face loomingat him out of the dark again, then Ron’s voice spokevery near to him.

“Will you stop acting like a maniac, and I can get youout of here!”

Ron wrenched the hangings apart, and Harry staredup at him in the moonlight, as he lay flat on his back,his scar searing with pain. Ron looked as though hehad just been getting ready for bed; one arm was outof his robes.

“Has someone been attacked again?” asked Ron,pulling Harry roughly to his feet. “Is it Dad? Is it thatsnake?”

“No — everyone’s fine —” gasped Harry, whoseforehead felt as though it was on fire again. “Well ...Avery isn’t... He’s in trouble... He gave him the wronginformation... He’s really angry...”

Harry groaned and sank, shaking, onto his bed,rubbing his scar.

“But Rookwood’s going to help him now... He’s on theright track again...”

“What are you talking about?” said Ron, soundingscared. “D’you mean ... did you just see You-Know-Who?”

“I was You-Know-Who,” said Harry, and he stretchedout his hands in the darkness and held them up to

Page | 747Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

his face to check that they were no longer deathlywhite and long-fingered. “He was with Rookwood, he’sone of the Death Eaters who escaped from Azkaban,remember? Rookwood’s just told him Bode couldn’thave done it...”

“Done what?”

“Remove something... He said Bode would haveknown he couldn’t have done it... Bode was under theImperius Curse... I think he said Malfoy’s dad put iton him...”

“Bode was bewitched to remove something?” Ronsaid. “But — Harry, that’s got to be —”

“The weapon,” Harry finished the sentence for him. “Iknow.”

The dormitory door opened; Dean and Seamus camein. Harry swung his legs back into bed. He did notwant to look as though anything odd had justhappened, seeing as Seamus had only just stoppedthinking Harry was a nutter.

“Did you say,” murmured Ron, putting his head closeto Harry’s on the pretense of helping himself to waterfrom the jug on his bedside table, “that you were You-Know-Who?”

“Yeah,” said Harry quietly.

Ron took an unnecessarily large gulp of water. Harrysaw it spill over his chin onto his chest.

“Harry,” he said, as Dean and Seamus clatteredaround noisily, pulling off their robes, and talking,“you’ve got to tell —”

Page | 748Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I haven’t got to tell anyone,” said Harry shortly. “Iwouldn’t have seen it at all if I could do Occlumency.I’m supposed to have learned to shut this stuff out.That’s what they want.”

By “they” he meant Dumbledore. He got back into bedand rolled over onto his side with his back to Ron andafter a while he heard Ron’s mattress creak as he layback down too. His scar began to burn; he bit hard onhis pillow to stop himself making a noise. Somewhere,he knew, Avery was being punished...

Harry and Ron waited until break next morning to tellHermione exactly what had happened. They wantedto be absolutely sure they could not be overheard.Standing in their usual corner of the cool and breezycourtyard, Harry told her every detail of the dream hecould remember. When he had finished, she saidnothing at all for a few moments, but stared with akind of painful intensity at Fred and George, whowere both headless and selling their magical hatsfrom under their cloaks on the other side of the yard.

“So that’s why they killed him,” she said quietly,withdrawing her gaze from Fred and George at last.“When Bode tried to steal this weapon, somethingfunny happened to him. I think there must bedefensive spells on it, or around it, to stop peoplefrom touching it. That’s why he was in St. Mungo’s,his brain had gone all funny and he couldn’t talk. Butremember what the Healer told us? He wasrecovering. And they couldn’t risk him getting better,could they? I mean, the shock of whatever happenedwhen he touched that weapon probably made theImperius Curse lift. Once he’d got his voice back, he’dexplain what he’d been doing, wouldn’t he? Theywould have known he’d been sent to steal theweapon. Of course, it would have been easy for

Page | 749Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Lucius Malfoy to put the curse on him. Never out ofthe Ministry, is he?”

“He was even hanging around that day I had myhearing,” said Harry. “In the — hang on ...” he saidslowly. “He was in the Department of Mysteriescorridor that day! Your dad said he was probablytrying to sneak down and find out what happened inmy hearing, but what if —”

“Sturgis,” gasped Hermione, looking thunderstruck.

“Sorry?” said Ron, looking bewildered.

“Sturgis Podmore,” said Hermione, breathlessly.“Arrested for trying to get through a door. LuciusMalfoy got him too. I bet he did it the day you sawhim there, Harry. Sturgis had Moody’s InvisibilityCloak, right? So what if he was standing guard by thedoor, invisible, and Malfoy heard him move, orguessed he was there, or just did the Imperius Curseon the off chance that a guard was there? So whenSturgis next had an opportunity — probably when itwas his turn on guard duty again — he tried to getinto the department to steal the weapon for Voldemort— Ron, be quiet — but he got caught and sent toAzkaban...”

She gazed at Harry.

“And now Rookwood’s told Voldemort how to get theweapon?”

“I didn’t hear all the conversation, but that’s what itsounded like,” said Harry. “Rookwood used to workthere... Maybe Voldemort’ll send Rookwood to do it?”

Page | 750Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hermione nodded, apparently still lost in thought.Then, quite abruptly, she said, “But you shouldn’thave seen this at all, Harry.”

“What?” he said, taken aback.

“You’re supposed to be learning how to close yourmind to this sort of thing,” said Hermione, suddenlystern.

“I know I am,” said Harry. “But —”

“Well, I think we should just try and forget what yousaw,” said Hermione firmly. “And you ought to put ina bit more effort on your Occlumency from now on.”

Harry was so angry with her that he did not talk toher for the rest of the day, which proved to be anotherbad one. When people were not discussing theescaped Death Eaters in the corridors today, theywere laughing at Gryffindor’s abysmal performance intheir match against Hufflepuff; the Slytherins weresinging “Weasley Is Our King” so loudly andfrequently that by sundown Filch had banned it fromthe corridors out of sheer irritation.

The week did not improve as it progressed: Harryreceived two more D’s in Potions, was still ontenterhooks that Hagrid might get the sack, andcould not stop himself from dwelling on the dream inwhich he had seen Voldemort, though he did notbring it up with Ron and Hermione again because hedid not want another telling-off from Hermione. Hewished very much that he could have talked to Siriusabout it, but that was out of the question, so he triedto push the matter to the back of his mind.

Unfortunately, the back of his mind was no longer thesecure place it had once been.

Page | 751Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Get up, Potter.”

A couple of weeks after his dream of Rookwood, Harrywas to be found, yet again, kneeling on the floor ofSnape’s office, trying to clear his head. He had justbeen forced, yet again, to relive a stream of very earlymemories he had not even realized he still had, mostof them concerning humiliations Dudley and his ganghad inflicted upon him in primary school.

“That last memory,” said Snape. “What was it?”

“I don’t know,” said Harry, getting wearily to his feet.He was finding it increasingly difficult to disentangleseparate memories from the rush of images andsound that Snape kept calling forth. “You mean theone where my cousin tried to make me stand in thetoilet?”

“No,” said Snape softly. “I mean the one concerning aman kneeling in the middle of a darkened room...”

“It’s ... nothing,” said Harry.

Snape’s dark eyes bored into Harry’s. Rememberingwhat Snape had said about eye contact being crucialto Legilimency, Harry blinked and looked away.

“How do that man and that room come to be insideyour head, Potter?” said Snape.

“It —” said Harry, looking everywhere but at Snape,

“it was —just a dream I had.”

“A dream,” repeated Snape.

There was a pause during which Harry stared fixedlyat a large dead frog suspended in a purple liquid inits jar.

Page | 752Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You do know why we are here, don’t you, Potter?”said Snape in a low, dangerous voice. “You do knowwhy I am giving up my evenings to this tedious job?”

“Yes,” said Harry stiffly.

“Remind me why we are here, Potter.”

“So I can learn Occlumency,” said Harry, now glaringat a dead eel.

“Correct, Potter. And dim though you may be” —Harry looked back at Snape, hating him — “I wouldhave thought that after two months’ worth of lessonsyou might have made some progress. How many otherdreams about the Dark Lord have you had?”

“Just that one,” lied Harry.

“Perhaps,” said Snape, his dark, cold eyes narrowingslightly, “perhaps you actually enjoy having thesevisions and dreams, Potter. Maybe they make you feelspecial — important?”

“No, they don’t,” said Harry, his jaw set and hisfingers clenched tightly around the handle of hiswand.

“That is just as well, Potter,” said Snape coldly,“because you are neither special nor important, and itis not up to you to find out what the Dark Lord issaying to his Death Eaters.”

“No — that’s your job, isn’t it?” Harry shot at him.

He had not meant to say it; it had burst out of him intemper. For a long moment they stared at each other,Harry convinced he had gone too far. But there was a

Page | 753Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

curious, almost satisfied expression on Snape’s facewhen he answered.

“Yes, Potter,” he said, his eyes glinting. “That is myjob. Now, if you are ready, we will start again...”

He raised his wand. “One — two — three —LegilimensV’

A hundred dementors were swooping toward Harryacross the lake in the grounds... He screwed up hisface in concentration... They were coming closer... Hecould see the dark holes beneath their hoods ... yethe could also see Snape standing in front of him, hiseyes fixed upon Harry’s face, muttering under hisbreath... And somehow, Snape was growing clearer,and the dementors were growing fainter ...

Harry raised his own wand.

“Protegol”

Snape staggered; his wand flew upward, away fromHarry — and suddenly Harry’s mind was teemingwith memories that were not his — a hook-nosed manwas shouting at a cowering woman, while a smalldark-haired boy cried in a corner... A greasy-hairedteenager sat alone in a dark bedroom, pointing hiswand at the ceiling, shooting down flies... A girl waslaughing as a scrawny boy tried to mount a buckingbroomstick —

“ENOUGH!”

Harry felt as though he had been pushed hard in thechest; he took several staggering steps backward, hitsome of the shelves covering Snape’s walls and heardsomething crack. Snape was shaking slightly, verywhite in the face.

Page | 754Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The back of Harry’s robes were damp. One of the jarsbehind him had broken when he fell against it; thepickled slimy thing within was swirling in its drainingpotion.

“Reparo\” hissed Snape, and the jar sealed itself oncemore. “Well, Potter ... that was certainly animprovement...” Panting slightly, Snape straightenedthe Pensieve in which he had again stored some of histhoughts before starting the lesson, almost as thoughchecking that they were still there. “I don’t remembertelling you to use a Shield Charm ... but there is nodoubt that it was effective...”

Harry did not speak; he felt that to say anythingmight be dangerous. He was sure he had just brokeninto Snape’s memories, that he had just seen scenesfrom Snape’s childhood, and it was unnerving tothink that the crying little boy who had watched hisparents shouting was actually standing in front ofhim with such loathing in his eyes...

“Let’s try again, shall we?” said Snape.

Harry felt a thrill of dread: He was about to pay forwhat had just happened, he was sure of it. Theymoved back into position with the desk betweenthem, Harry feeling he was going to find it muchharder to empty his mind this time...

“On the count of three, then,” said Snape, raising hiswand once more. “One — two —”

Harry did not have time to gather himself togetherand attempt to clear his mind, for Snape had alreadycried “Legilimens\”

He was hurtling along the corridor toward theDepartment of Mysteries, past the blank stone walls,

Page | 755Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

past the torches — the plain black door was growingever larger; he was moving so fast he was going tocollide with it, he was feet from it and he could seethat chink of faint blue light again —

The door had flown open! He was through it at last,inside a black-walled, black-floored circular room litwith blue-flamed candles, and there were more doorsall around him — he needed to go on — but whichdoor ought he to take — ?

“POTTER!”

Harry opened his eyes. He was flat on his back againwith no memory of having gotten there; he was alsopanting as though he really had run the length of theDepartment of Mysteries corridor, really had sprintedthrough the black door and found the circular room...

“Explain yourself!” said Snape, who was standing overhim, looking furious.

“I ... dunno what happened,” said Harry truthfully,standing up. There was a lump on the back of hishead from where he had hit the ground and he feltfeverish. “I’ve never seen that before. I mean, I toldyou, I’ve dreamed about the door ... but it’s neveropened before...”

“You are not working hard enough!”

For some reason, Snape seemed even angrier than hehad done two minutes before, when Harry had seeninto his own memories.

“You are lazy and sloppy, Potter, it is small wonderthat the Dark Lord —”

Page | 756Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Can you tell me something, sir?” said Harry, firing upagain. “Why do you call Voldemort the Dark Lord, I’veonly ever heard Death Eaters call him that —”

Snape opened his mouth in a snarl — and a womanscreamed from somewhere outside the room.

Snape’s head jerked upward; he was gazing at theceiling.

“What the — ?” he muttered.

Harry could hear a muffled commotion coming fromwhat he thought might be the entrance hall. Snapelooked around at him, frowning.

“Did you see anything unusual on your way downhere, Potter?”

Harry shook his head. Somewhere above them, thewoman screamed again. Snape strode to his officedoor, his wand still held at the ready, and swept outof sight. Harry hesitated for a moment, then followed.

The screams were indeed coming from the entrancehall; they grew louder as Harry ran toward the stonesteps leading up from the dungeons. When hereached the top he found the entrance hall packed.Students had come flooding out of the Great Hall,where dinner was still in progress, to see what wasgoing on. Others had crammed themselves onto themarble staircase. Harry pushed forward through aknot of tall Slytherins and saw that the onlookers hadformed a great ring, some of them looking shocked,others even frightened. Professor McGonagall wasdirectly opposite Harry on the other side of the hall;she looked as though what she was watching madeher feel faintly sick.

Page | 757Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Professor Trelawney was standing in the middle of theentrance hall with her wand in one hand and anempty sherry bottle in the other, looking utterly mad.Her hair was sticking up on end, her glasses werelopsided so that one eye was magnified more than theother; her innumerable shawls and scarves weretrailing haphazardly from her shoulders, giving theimpression that she was falling apart at the seams.Two large trunks lay on the floor beside her, one ofthem upside down; it looked very much as though ithad been thrown down the stairs after her. ProfessorTrelawney was staring, apparently terrified, atsomething Harry could not see but that seemed to bestanding at the foot of the stairs.

“No!” she shrieked. “NO! This cannot be happening...

It cannot ... I refuse to accept it!”

“You didn’t realize this was coming?” said a highgirlish voice, sounding callously amused, and Harry,moving slightly to his right, saw that Trelawney’sterrifying vision was nothing other than ProfessorUmbridge. “Incapable though you are of predictingeven tomorrow’s weather, you must surely haverealized that your pitiful performance during myinspections, and lack of any improvement, wouldmake it inevitable you would be sacked?”

“You c-can’t!” howled Professor Trelawney, tearsstreaming down her face from behind her enormouslenses, “you c-can’t sack me! I’ve b-been here sixteenyears! H-Hogwarts is m-my h-home!”

“It was your home,” said Professor Umbridge, andHarry was revolted to see the enjoyment stretchingher toadlike face as she watched Professor Trelawneysink, sobbing uncontrollably, onto one of her trunks,“until an hour ago, when the Minister of Magiccountersigned the order for your dismissal. NowPage | 758Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

kindly remove yourself from this hall. You areembarrassing us.”

But she stood and watched, with an expression ofgloating enjoyment, as Professor Trelawneyshuddered and moaned, rocking backward andforward on her trunk in paroxysms of grief. Harryheard a sob to his left and looked around. Lavenderand Parvati were both crying silently, their armsaround each other. Then he heard footsteps.

Professor McGonagall had broken away from thespectators, marched straight up to ProfessorTrelawney and was patting her firmly on the backwhile withdrawing a large handkerchief from withinher robes.

“There, there, Sibyll ... Calm down... Blow your noseon this... It’s not as bad as you think, now... You arenot going to have to leave Hogwarts...”

“Oh really, Professor McGonagall?” said Umbridge ina deadly voice, taking a few steps forward. “And yourauthority for that statement is ... ?”

“That would be mine,” said a deep voice.

The oak front doors had swung open. Students besidethem scuttled out of the way as Dumbledore appearedin the entrance. What he had been doing out in thegrounds Harry could not imagine, but there wassomething impressive about the sight of him framedin the doorway against an oddly misty night. Leavingthe doors wide behind him, he strode forward throughthe circle of onlookers toward the place whereProfessor Trelawney sat, tearstained and trembling,upon her trunk, Professor McGonagall alongside her.

“Yours, Professor Dumbledore?” said Umbridge with asingularly unpleasant little laugh. “I’m afraid you do

Page | 759Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

not understand the position. I have here” — shepulled a parchment scroll from within her robes —

“an Order of Dismissal signed by myself and theMinister of Magic. Under the terms of EducationalDecree Number Twenty-three, the High Inquisitor ofHogwarts has the power to inspect, place uponprobation, and sack any teacher she — that is to say,

I — feel is not performing up to the standard requiredby the Ministry of Magic. I have decided that ProfessorTrelawney is not up to scratch. I have dismissed her.”

To Harry’s very great surprise, Dumbledore continuedto smile. He looked down at Professor Trelawney, whowas still sobbing and choking on her trunk, and said,“You are quite right, of course, Professor Umbridge.

As High Inquisitor you have every right to dismiss myteachers. You do not, however, have the authority tosend them away from the castle. I am afraid,” he wenton, with a courteous little bow, “that the power to dothat still resides with the headmaster, and it is mywish that Professor Trelawney continue to live atHogwarts.”

At this, Professor Trelawney gave a wild little laugh inwhich a hiccup was barely hidden.

“No — no, I’ll g-go, Dumbledore! I sh-shall 1-leaveHogwarts and s-seek my fortune elsewhere —”

“No,” said Dumbledore sharply. “It is my wish thatyou remain, Sibyll.”

He turned to Professor McGonagall.

“Might I ask you to escort Sibyll back upstairs,Professor McGonagall?”

“Of course,” said McGonagall. “Up you get, Sibyll...”

Page | 760Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Professor Sprout came hurrying forward out of thecrowd and grabbed Professor Trelawney’s other arm.Together they guided her past Umbridge and up themarble stairs. Professor Flitwick went scurrying afterthem, his wand held out before him; he squeaked,“Locomotor trunksl” and Professor Trelawney’s luggagerose into the air and proceeded up the staircase afterher, Professor Flitwick bringing up the rear.

Professor Umbridge was standing stock-still, staringat Dumbledore, who continued to smile benignly.

“And what,” she said in a whisper that neverthelesscarried all around the entrance hall, “are you going todo with her once I appoint a new Divination teacherwho needs her lodgings?”

“Oh, that won’t be a problem,” said Dumbledorepleasantly. “You see, I have already found us a newDivination teacher, and he will prefer lodgings on theground floor.”

“You’ve found — ?” said Umbridge shrilly. “You’vefound? Might I remind you, Dumbledore, that underEducational Decree Twenty-two —”

“— the Ministry has the right to appoint a suitablecandidate if — and only if — the headmaster isunable to find one,” said Dumbledore. “And I amhappy to say that on this occasion I have succeeded.May I introduce you?”

He turned to face the open front doors, through whichnight mist was now drifting. Harry heard hooves.There was a shocked murmur around the hall andthose nearest the doors hastily moved even fartherbackward, some of them tripping over in their hasteto clear a path for the newcomer.

Page | 761Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Through the mist came a face Harry had seen oncebefore on a dark, dangerous night in the ForbiddenForest: white-blond hair and astonishingly blue eyes,the head and torso of a man joined to the palominobody of a horse.

“This is Firenze,” said Dumbledore happily to athunderstruck Umbridge. “I think you 11 find himsuitable.”

Page | 762Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



THE CENTAUR AND THE SNEAK

“I’ll bet you wish you hadn’t given up Divination now,don’t you, Hermione?” asked Parvati, smirking.

It was breakfast time a few days after the sacking ofProfessor Trelawney, and Parvati was curling hereyelashes around her wand and examining the effectin the back of her spoon. They were to have their firstlesson with Firenze that morning.

“Not really,” said Hermione indifferently, who wasreading the Daily Prophet “I’ve never really likedhorses.”

She turned a page of the newspaper, scanning itscolumns.

“He’s not a horse, he’s a centaur!” said Lavender,sounding shocked.

“A gorgeous centaur ...” sighed Parvati.

Page | 763Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Either way, he’s still got four legs,” said Hermionecoolly. “Anyway, I thought you two were all upset thatTrelawney had gone?”

“We are!” Lavender assured her. “We went up to heroffice to see her, we took her some daffodils — not thehonking ones that Sprout’s got, nice ones...”

“How is she?” asked Harry.

“Not very good, poor thing,” said Lavendersympathetically. “She was crying and saying she’drather leave the castle forever than stay here ifUmbridge is still here, and I don’t blame her.

Umbridge was horrible to her, wasn’t she?”

“I’ve got a feeling Umbridge has only just startedbeing horrible,” said Hermione darkly.

“Impossible,” said Ron, who was tucking into a largeplate of eggs and bacon. “She can’t get any worsethan she’s been already.”

“You mark my words, she’s going to want revenge onDumbledore for appointing a new teacher withoutconsulting her,” said Hermione, closing thenewspaper. “Especially another part-human. You sawthe look on her face when she saw Firenze...”

After breakfast Hermione departed for her Arithmancyclass and Harry and Ron followed Parvati andLavender into the entrance hall, heading forDivination.

“Aren’t we going up to North Tower?” asked Ron,looking puzzled, as Parvati bypassed the marblestaircase.

Parvati looked scornfully over her shoulder at him.

Page | 764Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“How d’you expect Firenze to climb that ladder? We’rein classroom eleven now, it was on the notice boardyesterday.”

Classroom eleven was situated in the ground-floorcorridor leading off the entrance hall on the oppositeside to the Great Hall. Harry knew it to be one ofthose classrooms that were never used regularly, andthat it therefore had the slightly neglected feeling of acupboard or storeroom. When he entered it rightbehind Ron, and found himself right in the middle ofa forest clearing, he was therefore momentarilystunned.

“What the — ?”

The classroom floor had become springily mossy andtrees were growing out of it; their leafy branchesfanned across the ceiling and windows, so that theroom was full of slanting shafts of soft, dappled, greenlight. The students who had already arrived weresitting on the earthy floor with their backs restingagainst tree trunks or boulders, arms wrappedaround their knees or folded tightly across theirchests, looking rather nervous. In the middle of theroom, where there were no trees, stood Firenze.

“Harry Potter,” he said, holding out a hand whenHarry entered.

“Er — hi,” said Harry, shaking hands with thecentaur, who surveyed him unblinkingly throughthose astonishingly blue eyes but did not smile. “Er —good to see you ...”

“And you,” said the centaur, inclining his white-blondhead. “It was foretold that we would meet again.”

Page | 765Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry noticed that there was the shadow of a hoof-shaped bruise on Firenze’s chest. As he turned to jointhe rest of the class upon the floor, he saw that theywere all looking at him with awe, apparently deeplyimpressed that he was on speaking terms withFirenze, whom they seemed to find intimidating.

When the door was closed and the last student hadsat down upon a tree stump beside the wastepaperbasket, Firenze gestured around the room.

“Professor Dumbledore has kindly arranged thisclassroom for us,” said Firenze, when everyone hadsettled down, “in imitation of my natural habitat. Iwould have preferred to teach you in the ForbiddenForest, which was — until Monday — my home ... butthis is not possible.”

“Please — er — sir —” said Parvati breathlessly,raising her hand, “why not? We’ve been in there withHagrid, we’re not frightened!”

“It is not a question of your bravery,” said Firenze,“but of my position. I can no longer return to theforest. My herd has banished me.”

“Herd?” said Lavender in a confused voice, and Harryknew she was thinking of cows. “What — oh!”Comprehension dawned on her face. “There are moreof you?” she said, stunned.

“Did Hagrid breed you, like the thestrals?” askedDean eagerly.

Firenze turned his head very slowly to face Dean, whoseemed to realize at once that he had said somethingvery offensive.

Page | 766Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I didn’t — I meant — sorry,” he finished in a hushedvoice.

“Centaurs are not the servants or playthings ofhumans,” said Firenze quietly. There was a pause,then Parvati raised her hand again.

“Please, sir ... why have the other centaurs banishedyou?”

“Because I have agreed to work for ProfessorDumbledore,” said Firenze. “They see this as abetrayal of our kind.”

Harry remembered how, nearly four years ago, thecentaur Bane had shouted at Firenze for allowingHarry to ride to safety upon his back, calling him a“common mule.” He wondered whether it had beenBane who had kicked Firenze in the chest.

“Let us begin,” said Firenze. He swished his longpalomino tail, raised his hand toward the leafycanopy overhead then lowered it slowly, and as he didso, the light in the room dimmed, so that they nowseemed to be sitting in a forest clearing by twilight,and stars emerged upon the ceiling. There were oohsand gasps, and Ron said audibly, “Blimey!”

“Lie back upon the floor,” said Firenze in his calmvoice, “and observe the heavens. Here is written, forthose who can see, the fortune of our races.”

Harry stretched out on his back and gazed upward atthe ceiling. A twinkling red star winked at him fromoverhead.

“I know that you have learned the names of theplanets and their moons in Astronomy,” said Firenze’scalm voice, “and that you have mapped the stars’

Page | 767Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

progress through the heavens. Centaurs haveunraveled the mysteries of these movements overcenturies. Our findings teach us that the future maybe glimpsed in the sky above us...”

“Professor Trelawney did Astrology with us!” saidParvati excitedly, raising her hand in front of her sothat it stuck up in the air as she lay on her back.“Mars causes accidents and burns and things likethat, and when it makes an angle to Saturn, like now”— she drew a right angle in the air above her — “thatmeans that people need to be extra careful whenhandling hot things —”

“That,” said Firenze calmly, “is human nonsense.”

Parvati’s hand fell limply to her side.

“Trivial hurts, tiny human accidents,” said Firenze, ashis hooves thudded over the mossy floor. “These areof no more significance than the scurryings of ants tothe wide universe, and are unaffected by planetarymovements.”

“Professor Trelawney —” began Parvati, in a hurt andindignant voice.

“— is a human,” said Firenze simply. “And istherefore blinkered and fettered by the limitations ofyour kind.”

Harry turned his head very slightly to look at Parvati.She looked very offended, as did several of the peoplesurrounding her.

“Sibyll Trelawney may have Seen, I do not know,”continued Firenze, and Harry heard the swishing ofhis tail again as he walked up and down before them,“but she wastes her time, in the main, on the self-

P a g e | 768Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

flattering nonsense humans call fortune-telling. I,however, am here to explain the wisdom of centaurs,which is impersonal and impartial. We watch theskies for the great tides of evil or change that aresometimes marked there. It may take ten years to besure of what we are seeing.”

Firenze pointed to the red star directly above Harry.

“In the past decade, the indications have been thatWizard-kind is living through nothing more than abrief calm between two wars. Mars, bringer of battle,shines brightly above us, suggesting that the fightmust break out again soon. How soon, centaurs mayattempt to divine by the burning of certain herbs andleaves, by the observation of fume and flame...”

It was the most unusual lesson Harry had everattended. They did indeed burn sage and mallowsweetthere on the classroom floor, and Firenze told them tolook for certain shapes and symbols in the pungentfumes, but he seemed perfectly unconcerned that notone of them could see any of the signs he described,telling them that humans were hardly ever good atthis, that it took centaurs years and years to becomecompetent, and finished by telling them that it wasfoolish to put too much faith in such things anyway,because even centaurs sometimes read them wrongly.He was nothing like any human teacher Harry hadever had. His priority did not seem to be to teachthem what he knew, but rather to impress upon themthat nothing, not even centaurs’ knowledge, wasfoolproof.

“He’s not very definite on anything, is he?” said Ronin a low voice, as they put out their mallowsweet fire.“I mean, I could do with a few more details about thiswar we’re about to have, couldn’t you?”

Page | 769Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The bell rang right outside the classroom door andeveryone jumped; Harry had completely forgotten thatthey were still inside the castle, quite convinced thathe was really in the forest. The class filed out, lookingslightly perplexed; Harry and Ron were on the point offollowing them when Firenze called, “Harry Potter, aword, please.”

Harry turned. The centaur advanced a little towardhim. Ron hesitated.

“You may stay,” Firenze told him. “But close the door,please.”

Ron hastened to obey.

“Harry Potter, you are a friend of Hagrid’s, are younot?” said the centaur.

“Yes,” said Harry.

“Then give him a warning from me. His attempt is notworking. He would do better to abandon it.”

“His attempt is not working?” Harry repeated blankly.

“And he would do better to abandon it,” said Firenze,nodding. “I would warn Hagrid myself, but I ambanished — it would be unwise for me to go too nearthe forest now — Hagrid has troubles enough,without a centaurs’ battle.”

“But — what’s Hagrid attempting to do?” said Harrynervously.

Firenze looked at Harry impassively.

“Hagrid has recently rendered me a great service,”said Firenze, “and he has long since earned my

Page | 770Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

respect for the care he shows all living creatures. Ishall not betray his secret. But he must be brought tohis senses. The attempt is not working. Tell him,Harry Potter. Good day to you.”

The happiness Harry had felt in the aftermath of TheQuibbler interview had long since evaporated. As adull March blurred into a squally April, his lifeseemed to have become one long series of worries andproblems again.

Umbridge had continued attending all Care of MagicalCreatures lessons, so it had been very difficult todeliver Firenze’s warning to Hagrid. At last Harry hadmanaged it by pretending he had lost his copy ofFantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them anddoubling back after class one day. When he passed onFirenze’s message, Hagrid gazed at him for a momentthrough his puffy, blackened eyes, apparently takenaback. Then he seemed to pull himself together.

“Nice bloke, Firenze,” he said gruffly, “but he don’know what he’s talkin’ abou’ on this. The attemp’scornin’ on fine.”

“Hagrid, what’re you up to?” asked Harry seriously.“Because you’ve got to be careful, Umbridge hasalready sacked Trelawney and if you ask me, she’s ona roll. If you’re doing anything you shouldn’t be —”

“There’s things more importan’ than keepin’ a job,”said Hagrid, though his hands shook slightly as hesaid this and a basin full of knarl droppings crashedto the floor. “Don’ worry abou’ me, Harry, jus’ getalong now, there’s a good lad...”

Page | 771Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry had no choice but to leave Hagrid mopping upthe dung all over his floor, but he felt thoroughlydispirited as he trudged back up to the castle.

Meanwhile, as the teachers and Hermione persistedin reminding them, the O.W.L.s were drawing evernearer. All the fifth years were suffering from stress tosome degree, but Hannah Abbott became the first toreceive a Calming Draught from Madam Pomfrey aftershe burst into tears during Herbology and sobbedthat she was too stupid to take exams and wanted toleave school now.

If it had not been for the D.A. lessons, Harry thoughthe would have been extremely unhappy. Hesometimes felt that he was living for the hours hespent in the Room of Requirement, working hard butthoroughly enjoying himself at the same time,swelling with pride as he looked around at his fellowD.A. members and saw how far they had come.

Indeed, Harry sometimes wondered how Umbridgewas going to react when all the members of the D.A.received “Outstanding” in their Defense Against theDark Arts O.W.L.s.

They had finally started work on Patronuses, whicheverybody had been very keen to practice, though asHarry kept reminding them, producing a Patronus inthe middle of a brightly lit classroom when they werenot under threat was very different to producing itwhen confronted by something like a dementor.

“Oh, don’t be such a killjoy,” said Cho brightly,watching her silvery swan-shaped Patronus soararound the Room of Requirement during their lastlesson before Easter. “They’re so pretty!”

“They’re not supposed to be pretty, they’re supposedto protect you,” said Harry patiently. “What we really

Page | 772Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

need is a boggart or something; that’s how I learned, Ihad to conjure a Patronus while the boggart waspretending to be a dementor —”

“But that would be really scary!” said Lavender, whowas shooting puffs of silver vapor out of the end ofher wand. “And I still — can’t — do it!” she addedangrily.

Neville was having trouble too. His face was screwedup in concentration, but only feeble wisps of silversmoke issued from his wand tip.

“You’ve got to think of something happy,” Harryreminded him.

“I’m trying,” said Neville miserably, who was trying sohard his round face was actually shining with sweat.

“Harry, I think I’m doing it!” yelled Seamus, who hadbeen brought along to his first ever D.A. meeting byDean. “Look — ah — it’s gone... But it was definitelysomething hairy, Harry!”

Hermione’s Patronus, a shining silver otter, wasgamboling around her.

“They are sort of nice, aren’t they?” she said, lookingat it fondly.

The door of the Room of Requirement opened andthen closed again; Harry looked around to see whohad entered, but there did not seem to be anybodythere. It was a few moments before he realized thatthe people close to the door had fallen silent. Nextthing he knew, something was tugging at his robessomewhere near the knee. He looked down and saw,to his very great astonishment, Dobby the house-elfpeering up at him from beneath his usual eight hats.Page | 773Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Hi, Dobby!” he said. “What are you — what’s wrong?”

For the elf’s eyes were wide with terror and he wasshaking. The members of the D.A. closest to Harryhad fallen silent now: Everybody in the room waswatching Dobby. The few Patronuses people hadmanaged to conjure faded away into silver mist,leaving the room looking much darker than before.

“Harry Potter, sir ...” squeaked the elf, trembling fromhead to foot, “Harry Potter, sir ... Dobby has come towarn you ... but the house-elves have been warnednot to tell ...”

He ran headfirst at the wall: Harry, who had someexperience of Dobby’s habits of self-punishment,made to seize him, but Dobby merely bounced off thestone, cushioned by his eight hats. Hermione and afew of the other girls let out squeaks of fear andsympathy.

“What’s happened, Dobby?” Harry asked, grabbingthe elf’s tiny arm and holding him away fromanything with which he might seek to hurt himself.

“Harry Potter ... she ... she ...”

Dobby hit himself hard on the nose with his free fist:Harry seized that too.

“Who’s ‘she,’ Dobby?”

But he thought he knew — surely only one “she”could induce such fear in Dobby? The elf looked up athim, slightly cross-eyed, and mouthed wordlessly.

“Umbridge?” asked Harry, horrified.

Page | 774Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Dobby nodded, then tried to bang his head off Harry’sknees; Harry held him at bay.

“What about her? Dobby — she hasn’t found outabout this — about us — about the D.A.?”

He read the answer in the elf’s stricken face. Hishands held fast by Harry, the elf tried to kick himselfand fell to the floor.

“Is she coming?” Harry asked quietly.

Dobby let out a howl, and began beating his bare feethard on the floor. “Yes, Harry Potter, yes!”

Harry straightened up and looked around at themotionless, terrified people gazing at the thrashingelf.

“WHAT ARE YOU WAITING FOR?” Harry bellowed.“RUN!”

They all pelted toward the exit at once, forming ascrum at the door, then people burst through; Harrycould hear them sprinting along the corridors andhoped they had the sense not to try and make it allthe way to their dormitories. It was only ten to nine, ifthey just took refuge in the library or the Owlery,which were both nearer —

“Harry, come on!” shrieked Hermione from the centerof the knot of people now fighting to get out.

He scooped up Dobby, who was still attempting to dohimself serious injury, and ran with the elf in hisarms to join the back of the queue.

“Dobby — this is an order — get back down to thekitchen with the other elves, and if she asks you

Page | 775Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

whether you warned me, lie and say no!” said Harry.“And I forbid you to hurt yourself!” he added,dropping the elf as he made it over the threshold atlast and slamming the door behind him.

“Thank you, Harry Potter!” squeaked Dobby, and hestreaked off. Harry glanced left and right, the otherswere all moving so fast that he caught only glimpsesof flying heels at either end of the corridor before theyvanished. He started to run right; there was a boys’bathroom up ahead, he could pretend he’d been inthere all the time if he could just reach it —

“AAARGH!”

Something caught him around the ankles and he fellspectacularly, skidding along on his front for six feetbefore coming to a halt. Someone behind him waslaughing. He rolled over onto his back and saw Malfoyconcealed in a niche beneath an ugly dragon-shapedvase.

“Trip Jinx, Potter!” he said. “Hey, Professor —PROFESSOR! I’ve got one!”

Umbridge came bustling around the far corner,breathless but wearing a delighted smile.

“It’s him!” she said jubilantly at the sight of Harry onthe floor. “Excellent, Draco, excellent, oh, very good —fifty points to Slytherin! I’ll take him from here...

Stand up, Potter!”

Harry got to his feet, glaring at the pair of them. Hehad never seen Umbridge looking so happy. Sheseized his arm in a vicelike grip and turned, beamingbroadly, to Malfoy. “You hop along and see if you canround up anymore of them, Draco,” she said. “Tell theothers to look in the library — anybody out of breathPage | 776Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

— check the bathrooms, Miss Parkinson can do thegirls’ ones — off you go — and you,” she added in hersoftest, most dangerous voice, as Malfoy walked away.“You can come with me to the headmaster’s office,Potter.”

They were at the stone gargoyle within minutes. Harrywondered how many of the others had been caught.

He thought of Ron — Mrs. Weasley would kill him —and of how Hermione would feel if she was expelledbefore she could take her O.W.L.s. And it had beenSeamus’s very first meeting ... and Neville had beengetting so good...

“Fizzing Whizbee,” sang Umbridge, and the stonegargoyle jumped aside, the wall behind split open,and they ascended the moving stone staircase. Theyreached the polished door with the griffin knocker,but Umbridge did not bother to knock, she strodestraight inside, still holding tight to Harry.

The office was full of people. Dumbledore was sittingbehind his desk, his expression serene, the tips of hislong fingers together. Professor McGonagall stoodrigidly beside him, her face extremely tense. CorneliusFudge, Minister of Magic, was rocking backward andforward on his toes beside the fire, apparentlyimmensely pleased with the situation. KingsleyShacklebolt and a tough-looking wizard Harry did notrecognize with very short, wiry hair were positionedon either side of the door like guards, and thefreckled, bespectacled form of Percy Weasley hoveredexcitedly beside the wall, a quill and a heavy scroll ofparchment in his hands, apparently poised to takenotes.

The portraits of old headmasters and mistresses werenot shamming sleep tonight. All of them werewatching what was happening below, alert and

Page | 777Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

serious. As Harry entered, a few flitted intoneighboring frames and whispered urgently into theirneighbors’ ears.

Harry pulled himself free of Umbridge’s grasp as thedoor swung shut behind them. Cornelius Fudge wasglaring at him with a kind of vicious satisfaction uponhis face.

“Well,” he said. “Well, well, well ...”

Harry replied with the dirtiest look he could muster.His heart drummed madly inside him, but his brainwas oddly cool and clear.

“He was heading back to Gryffindor Tower,” saidUmbridge. There was an indecent excitement in hervoice, the same callous pleasure Harry had heard asshe watched Professor Trelawney dissolving withmisery in the entrance hall. “The Malfoy boy corneredhim.”

“Did he, did he?” said Fudge appreciatively. “I mustremember to tell Lucius. Well, Potter ... I expect youknow why you are here?”

Harry fully intended to respond with a defiant “yes”:His mouth had opened and the word was half formedwhen he caught sight of Dumbledore’s face.Dumbledore was not looking directly at Harry; hiseyes were fixed upon a point just over his shoulder,but as Harry stared at him, he shook his head afraction of an inch to each side.

Harry changed direction mid-word.

“Yeh — no.”

“I beg your pardon?” said Fudge.

Page | 778Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry, firmly.

“You don’t know why you are here?”

“No, I don’t,” said Harry.

Fudge looked incredulously from Harry to ProfessorUmbridge; Harry took advantage of his momentaryinattention to steal another quick look atDumbledore, who gave the carpet the tiniest of nodsand the shadow of a wink.

“So you have no idea,” said Fudge in a voice positivelysagging with sarcasm, “why Professor Umbridge hasbrought you to this office? You are not aware that youhave broken any school rules?”

“School rules?” said Harry. “No.”

“Or Ministry decrees?” amended Fudge angrily.

“Not that I’m aware of,” said Harry blandly.

His heart was still hammering very fast. It was almostworth telling these lies to watch Fudge’s bloodpressure rising, but he could not see how on earth hewould get away with them. If somebody had tipped offUmbridge about the D.A. then he, the leader, mightas well be packing his trunk right now.

“So it’s news to you, is it,” said Fudge, his voice nowthick with anger, “that an illegal student organizationhas been discovered within this school?”

“Yes, it is,” said Harry, hoisting an unconvincing lookof innocent surprise onto his face.

Page | 779Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I think, Minister,” said Umbridge silkily from besidehim, “we might make better progress if I fetch ourinformant.”

“Yes, yes, do,” said Fudge, nodding, and he glancedmaliciously at Dumbledore as Umbridge left the room.“There’s nothing like a good witness, is there,Dumbledore?”

“Nothing at all, Cornelius,” said Dumbledore gravely,inclining his head.

There was a wait of several minutes, in which nobodylooked at each other, then Harry heard the door openbehind him. Umbridge moved past him into the room,gripping by the shoulder Cho’s curly-haired friendMarietta, who was hiding her face in her hands.

“Don’t be scared, dear, don’t be frightened,” saidProfessor Umbridge softly, patting her on the back,“it’s quite all right, now. You have done the rightthing. The minister is very pleased with you. He’ll betelling your mother what a good girl you’ve been.Marietta’s mother, Minister,” she added, looking up atFudge, “is Madam Edgecombe from the Department ofMagical Transportation. Floo Network office — she’sbeen helping us police the Hogwarts fires, you know.”

“Jolly good, jolly good!” said Fudge heartily. “Likemother, like daughter, eh? Well, come on, now, dear,look up, don’t be shy, let’s hear what you’ve got to —galloping gargoyles!”

As Marietta raised her head, Fudge leapt backward inshock, nearly landing himself in the fire. He cursedand stamped on the hem of his cloak, which hadstarted to smoke, and Marietta gave a wail and pulledthe neck of her robes right up to her eyes, but notbefore the whole room had seen that her face wasPage | 780Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

horribly disfigured by a series of close-set purplepustules that had spread across her nose and cheeksto form the word “SNEAK.”

“Never mind the spots now, dear,” said Umbridgeimpatiently, “just take your robes away from yourmouth and tell the Minister —”

But Marietta gave another muffled wail and shook herhead frantically.

“Oh, very well, you silly girl, I’ll tell him,” snappedUmbridge. She hitched her sickly smile back onto herface and said, “Well, Minister, Miss Edgecombe herecame to my office shortly after dinner this eveningand told me she had something she wanted to tell me.She said that if I proceeded to a secret room on theseventh floor, sometimes known as the Room ofRequirement, I would find out something to myadvantage. I questioned her a little further and sheadmitted that there was to be some kind of meetingthere. Unfortunately at that point this hex,” shewaved impatiently at Marietta’s concealed face, “cameinto operation and upon catching sight of her face inmy mirror the girl became too distressed to tell meany more.”

“Well, now,” said Fudge, fixing Marietta with what heevidently imagined was a kind and fatherly look. “It isvery brave of you, my dear, coming to tell ProfessorUmbridge, you did exactly the right thing. Now, willyou tell me what happened at this meeting? What wasits purpose? Who was there?”

But Marietta would not speak. She merely shook herhead again, her eyes wide and fearful.

Page | 781Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Haven’t we got a counterjinx for this?” Fudge askedUmbridge impatiently, gesturing at Marietta’s face.

“So she can speak freely?”

“I have not yet managed to find one,” Umbridgeadmitted grudgingly, and Harry felt a surge of pride inHermione’s jinxing ability. “But it doesn’t matter ifshe won’t speak, I can take up the story from here.

“You will remember, Minister, that I sent you a reportback in October that Potter had met a number offellow students in the Hog’s Head in Hogsmeade —”

“And what is your evidence for that?” cut in ProfessorMcGonagall.

“I have testimony from Willy Widdershins, Minerva,who happened to be in the bar at the time. He washeavily bandaged, it is true, but his hearing was quiteunimpaired,” said Umbridge smugly. “He heard everyword Potter said and hastened straight to the schoolto report to me —”

“Oh, so that’s why he wasn’t prosecuted for setting upall those regurgitating toilets!” said ProfessorMcGonagall, raising her eyebrows. “What aninteresting insight into our justice system!”

“Blatant corruption!” roared the portrait of thecorpulent, red-nosed wizard on the wall behindDumbledore’s desk. “The Ministry did not cut dealswith petty criminals in my day, no sir, they did not!”

“Thank you, Fortescue, that will do,” saidDumbledore softly.

“The purpose of Potter’s meeting with these students,”continued Professor Umbridge, “was to persuadethem to join an illegal society, whose aim was to learn

Page | 782Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

spells and curses the Ministry has decided areinappropriate for school-age —”

“I think you 11 find you’re wrong there, Dolores,” saidDumbledore quietly, peering at her over the half-moon spectacles perched halfway down his crookednose.

Harry stared at him. He could not see howDumbledore was going to talk him out of this one; ifWilly Widdershins had indeed heard every word hesaid in the Hog’s Head there was simply no escapingit.

“Oho!” said Fudge, bouncing up and down on theballs of his feet again. “Yes, do let’s hear the latestcock-and-bull story designed to pull Potter out oftrouble! Go on, then, Dumbledore, go on — WillyWiddershins was lying, was he? Or was it Potter’sidentical twin in the Hog’s Head that day? Or is therethe usual simple explanation involving a reversal oftime, a dead man coming back to life, and a couple ofinvisible dementors?”

Percy Weasley let out a hearty laugh.

“Oh, very good, Minister, very good!”

Harry could have kicked him. Then he saw, to hisastonishment, that Dumbledore was smiling gentlytoo.

“Cornelius, I do not deny — and nor, I am sure, doesHarry — that he was in the Hog’s Head that day, northat he was trying to recruit students to a DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts group. I am merely pointing outthat Dolores is quite wrong to suggest that such agroup was, at that time, illegal. If you remember, theMinistry decree banning all student societies was notPage | 783Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

put into effect until two days after Harry’s Hogsmeademeeting, so he was not breaking any rules in theHog’s Head at all.”

Percy looked as though he had been struck in theface by something very heavy. Fudge remainedmotionless in mid-bounce, his mouth hanging open.

Umbridge recovered first.

“That’s all very fine, Headmaster,” she said, smilingsweetly. “But we are now nearly six months on fromthe introduction of Educational Decree NumberTwenty-four. If the first meeting was not illegal, allthose that have happened since most certainly are.”

“Well,” said Dumbledore, surveying her with politeinterest over the top of his interlocked fingers, “theycertainly would be, if they had continued after thedecree came into effect. Do you have any evidencethat these meetings continued?”

As Dumbledore spoke, Harry heard a rustle behindhim and rather thought Kingsley whisperedsomething. He could have sworn too that he feltsomething brush against his side, a gentle somethinglike a draft or bird wings, but looking down he sawnothing there.

“Evidence?” repeated Umbridge with that horriblewide toadlike smile. “Have you not been listening,Dumbledore? Why do you think Miss Edgecombe ishere?”

“Oh, can she tell us about six months’ worth ofmeetings?” said Dumbledore, raising his eyebrows. “Iwas under the impression that she was merelyreporting a meeting tonight.”

Page | 784Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Miss Edgecombe,” said Umbridge at once, “tell ushow long these meetings have been going on, dear.You can simply nod or shake your head, I’m sure thatwon’t make the spots worse. Have they beenhappening regularly over the last six months?”

Harry felt a horrible plummeting in his stomach. Thiswas it, they had hit a dead end of solid evidence thatnot even Dumbledore would be able to shift aside...

“Just nod or shake your head, dear,” Umbridge saidcoaxingly to Marietta. “Come on, now, that won’tactivate the jinx further...”

Everyone in the room was gazing at the top ofMarietta’s face. Only her eyes were visible betweenthe pulled up robes and her curly fringe. Perhaps itwas a trick of the firelight, but her eyes looked oddlyblank. And then — to Harry’s utter amazement —Marietta shook her head.

Umbridge looked quickly at Fudge and then back atMarietta.

“I don’t think you understood the question, did you,dear? I’m asking whether you’ve been going to thesemeetings for the past six months? You have, haven’tyou?”

Again, Marietta shook her head.

“What do you mean by shaking your head, dear?”said Umbridge in a testy voice.

“I would have thought her meaning was quite clear,”said Professor McGonagall harshly. “There have beenno secret meetings for the past six months. Is thatcorrect, Miss Edgecombe?”

Page | 785Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Marietta nodded.

“But there was a meeting tonight!” said Umbridgefuriously. “There was a meeting, Miss Edgecombe,you told me about it, in the Room of Requirement!

And Potter was the leader, was he not, Potterorganized it, Potter — why are you shaking your head,girl?”

“Well, usually when a person shakes their head,” saidMcGonagall coldly, “they mean ‘no.’ So unless MissEdgecombe is using a form of sign language as yetunknown to humans —”

Professor Umbridge seized Marietta, pulled heraround to face her, and began shaking her very hard.A split second later Dumbledore was on his feet, hiswand raised. Kingsley started forward and Umbridgeleapt back from Marietta, waving her hands in the airas though they had been burned.

“I cannot allow you to manhandle my students,Dolores,” said Dumbledore, and for the first time, helooked angry.

“You want to calm yourself, Madam Umbridge,” saidKingsley in his deep, slow voice. “You don’t want toget yourself into trouble now.”

“No,” said Umbridge breathlessly, glancing up at thetowering figure of Kingsley. “I mean, yes — you’reright, Shacklebolt — I — I forgot myself.”

Marietta was standing exactly where Umbridge hadreleased her. She seemed neither perturbed byUmbridge’s sudden attack, nor relieved by herrelease. She was still clutching her robe up to heroddly blank eyes, staring straight ahead of her. Asudden suspicion connected to Kingsley’s whisperPage | 786Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and the thing he had felt shoot past him sprang intoHarry’s mind.

“Dolores,” said Fudge, with the air of trying to settlesomething once and for all, “the meeting tonight —the one we know definitely happened —”

“Yes,” said Umbridge, pulling herself together, “yes ...well, Miss Edgecombe tipped me off and I proceededat once to the seventh floor, accompanied by certaintrustworthy students, so as to catch those in themeeting red-handed. It appears that they wereforewarned of my arrival, however, because when wereached the seventh floor they were running in everydirection. It does not matter, however. I have all theirnames here, Miss Parkinson ran into the Room ofRequirement for me to see if they had left anythingbehind... We needed evidence and the room provided

And to Harry’s horror, she withdrew from her pocketthe list of names that had been pinned upon theRoom of Requirement’s wall and handed it to Fudge.

“The moment I saw Potter’s name on the list, I knewwhat we were dealing with,” she said softly.

“Excellent,” said Fudge, a smile spreading across hisface. “Excellent, Dolores. And ... by thunder ...”

He looked up at Dumbledore, who was still standingbeside Marietta, his wand held loosely in his hand.

“See what they’ve named themselves?” said Fudgequietly. “Dumbledore’sArmy.”

Dumbledore reached out and took the piece ofparchment from Fudge. He gazed at the headingscribbled by Hermione months before and for a

Page | 787Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

moment seemed unable to speak. Then he looked up,smiling.

“Well, the game is up,” he said simply. “Would youlike a written confession from me, Cornelius — or willa statement before these witnesses suffice?”

Harry saw McGonagall and Kingsley look at eachother. There was fear in both faces. He did notunderstand what was going on, and neither,apparently, did Fudge.

“Statement?” said Fudge slowly. “What — I don’t — ?”

“Dumbledore’s Army, Cornelius,” said Dumbledore,still smiling as he waved the list of names beforeFudge’s face. “Not Potter’s Army. Dumbledore’s Army.”

“But — but —”

Understanding blazed suddenly in Fudge’s face. Hetook a horrified step backward, yelped, and jumpedout of the fire again.

“You?” he whispered, stamping again on hissmoldering cloak.

“That’s right,” said Dumbledore pleasantly.

“You organized this?”

“I did,” said Dumbledore.

“You recruited these students for — for your army?”

“Tonight was supposed to be the first meeting,” saidDumbledore, nodding. “Merely to see whether theywould be interested in joining me. I see now that itwas a mistake to invite Miss Edgecombe, of course.”

Page | 788Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Marietta nodded. Fudge looked from her toDumbledore, his chest swelling.

“Then you have been plotting against me!” he yelled.“That’s right,” said Dumbledore cheerfully.

“NO!” shouted Harry.

Kingsley flashed a look of warning at him,

McGonagall widened her eyes threateningly, but ithad suddenly dawned upon Harry what Dumbledorewas about to do, and he could not let it happen.

“No — Professor Dumbledore!”

“Be quiet, Harry, or I am afraid you will have to leavemy office,” said Dumbledore calmly.

“Yes, shut up, Potter!” barked Fudge, who was stillogling Dumbledore with a kind of horrified delight.“Well, well, well — I came here tonight expecting toexpel Potter and instead —”

“Instead you get to arrest me,” said Dumbledore,smiling. “It’s like losing a Knut and finding a Galleon,isn’t it?”

“Weasley!” cried Fudge, now positively quivering withdelight, “Weasley, have you written it all down,everything he’s said, his confession, have you got it?”

“Yes, sir, I think so, sir!” said Percy eagerly, whosenose was splattered with ink from the speed of hisnote-taking.

“The bit about how he’s been trying to build up anarmy against the Ministry, how he’s been working todestabilize me?”

Page | 789Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, sir, I’ve got it, yes!” said Percy, scanning hisnotes joyfully.

“Very well, then,” said Fudge, now radiant with glee.“Duplicate your notes, Weasley, and send a copy tothe Daily Prophet at once. If we send a fast owl weshould make the morning edition!” Percy dashed fromthe room, slamming the door behind him, and Fudgeturned back to Dumbledore. “You will now beescorted back to the Ministry, where you will beformally charged and then sent to Azkaban to awaittrial!”

“Ah,” said Dumbledore gently, “yes. Yes, I thought wemight hit that little snag.”

“Snag?” said Fudge, his voice still vibrating with joy.

“I see no snag, Dumbledore!”

“Well,” said Dumbledore apologetically, “I’m afraid Ido.”

“Oh really?”

“Well — it’s just that you seem to be laboring underthe delusion that I am going to — what is the phrase?‘Come quietly. ’ I am afraid I am not going to comequietly at all, Cornelius. I have absolutely nointention of being sent to Azkaban. I could break out,of course — but what a waste of time, and frankly, Ican think of a whole host of things I would rather bedoing.”

Umbridge’s face was growing steadily redder, shelooked as though she was being filled with boilingwater. Fudge stared at Dumbledore with a very sillyexpression on his face, as though he had just beenstunned by a sudden blow and could not quite believeit had happened. He made a small choking noise andPage | 790Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

then looked around at Kingsley and the man withshort gray hair, who alone of everyone in the roomhad remained entirely silent so far. The latter gaveFudge a reassuring nod and moved forward a little,away from the wall. Harry saw his hand drift, almostcasually, toward his pocket.

“Don’t be silly, Dawlish,” said Dumbledore kindly.

“I’m sure you are an excellent Auror, I seem toremember that you achieved ‘Outstanding’ in all yourN.E.W.T.s, but if you attempt to — er — ‘bring me in’by force, I will have to hurt you.”

The man called Dawlish blinked, looking ratherfoolish. He looked toward Fudge again, but this timeseemed to be hoping for a clue as to what to do next.

“So,” sneered Fudge, recovering himself, “you intendto take on Dawlish, Shacklebolt, Dolores, and myselfsingle-handed, do you, Dumbledore?”

“Merlin’s beard, no,” said Dumbledore, smiling. “Notunless you are foolish enough to force me to.”

“He will not be single-handed!” said ProfessorMcGonagall loudly, plunging her hand inside herrobes.

“Oh yes he will, Minerva!” said Dumbledore sharply.“Hogwarts needs you!”

“Enough of this rubbish!” said Fudge, pulling out hisown wand. “Dawlish! Shacklebolt! Take him).”

A streak of silver light flashed around the room. Therewas a bang like a gunshot, and the floor trembled. Ahand grabbed the scruff of Harry’s neck and forcedhim down on the floor as a second silver flash wentoff— several of the portraits yelled, FawkesPage | 791Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

screeched, and a cloud of dust filled the air. Coughingin the dust, Harry saw a dark figure fall to the groundwith a crash in front of him. There was a shriek and athud and somebody cried, “No!” Then the sound ofbreaking glass, frantically scuffling footsteps, a groan

— and silence.

Harry struggled around to see who was half-strangling him and saw Professor McGonagallcrouched beside him. She had forced both him andMarietta out of harm’s way. Dust was still floatinggently down through the air onto them. Pantingslightly, Harry saw a very tall figure moving towardthem.

“Are you all right?” said Dumbledore.

“Yes!” said Professor McGonagall, getting up anddragging Harry and Marietta with her.

The dust was clearing. The wreckage of the officeloomed into view: Dumbledore’s desk had beenoverturned, all of the spindly tables had beenknocked to the floor, their silver instruments inpieces. Fudge, Umbridge, Kingsley, and Dawlish laymotionless on the floor. Fawkes the phoenix soared inwide circles above them, singing softly.

“Unfortunately, I had to hex Kingsley too, or it wouldhave looked very suspicious,” said Dumbledore in alow voice. “He was remarkably quick on the uptake,modifying Miss Edgecombe’s memory like that whileeveryone was looking the other way — thank him forme, won’t you, Minerva?

“Now, they will all awake very soon and it will be bestif they do not know that we had time to communicate

— you must act as though no time has passed, as

Page | 792Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

though they were merely knocked to the ground, theywill not remember —”

“Where will you go, Dumbledore?” whisperedProfessor McGonagall. “Grimmauld Place?”

“Oh no,” said Dumbledore with a grim smile. “I amnot leaving to go into hiding. Fudge will soon wishhe’d never dislodged me from Hogwarts, I promiseyou...”

“Professor Dumbledore ...” Harry began.

He did not know what to say first: how sorry he wasthat he had started the D.A. in the first place andcaused all this trouble, or how terrible he felt thatDumbledore was leaving to save him from expulsion?But Dumbledore cut him off before he could sayanother word.

“Listen to me, Harry,” he said urgently, “you muststudy Occlumency as hard as you can, do youunderstand me? Do everything Professor Snape tellsyou and practice it particularly every night beforesleeping so that you can close your mind to baddreams — you will understand why soon enough, butyou must promise me —”

The man called Dawlish was stirring. Dumbledoreseized Harry’s wrist.

“Remember — close your mind —”

But as Dumbledore’s fingers closed over Harry’s skin,a pain shot through the scar on his forehead, and hefelt again that terrible, snakelike longing to strikeDumbledore, to bite him, to hurt him —

“— you will understand,” whispered Dumbledore.

Page | 793Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Fawkes circled the office and swooped low over him.Dumbledore released Harry, raised his hand, andgrasped the phoenix’s long golden tail. There was aflash of fire and the pair of them had gone.

“Where is he?” yelled Fudge, pushing himself up fromthe ground. “Where is he?”

“I don’t know!” shouted Kingsley, also leaping to hisfeet.

“Well, he can’t have Disapparated!” cried Umbridge.“You can’t inside this school —”

“The stairs!” cried Dawlish, and he flung himself uponthe door, wrenched it open, and disappeared, followedclosely by Kingsley and Umbridge. Fudge hesitated,then got to his feet slowly, brushing dust from hisfront. There was a long and painful silence.

“Well, Minerva,” said Fudge nastily, straightening historn shirtsleeve, “I’m afraid this is the end of yourfriend Dumbledore.”

“You think so, do you?” said Professor McGonagallscornfully.

Fudge seemed not to hear her. He was looking aroundat the wrecked office. A few of the portraits hissed athim; one or two even made rude hand gestures.

“You’d better get those two off to bed,” said Fudge,looking back at Professor McGonagall with adismissive nod toward Harry and Marietta.

She said nothing, but marched Harry and Marietta tothe door. As it swung closed behind them, Harryheard Phineas Nigellus’s voice.

Page | 794Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You know, Minister, I disagree with Dumbledore onmany counts ... but you cannot deny he’s got style...”

Page | 795Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





SNAPE’S WORST MEMORY

— BY ORDER OF —

THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC

Dolores Jane Umbridge (High Inquisitor) has replacedAlbus Dumbledore as Head of Hogwarts School ofWitchcraft and Wizardry.

The above is in accordance with

Educational Decree Number Twenty-eight.

Signed:

Cornelius Oswald FudgeMINISTER OF MAGIC

The notices had gone up all over the school overnight,but they did not explain how every single personwithin the castle seemed to know that Dumbledore

Page | 796Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

had overcome two Aurors, the High Inquisitor, theMinister of Magic, and his Junior Assistant to escape.No matter where Harry went within the castle nextday, the sole topic of conversation was Dumbledore’sflight, and though some of the details might havegone awry in the retelling (Harry overheard onesecond-year girl assuring another that Fudge wasnow lying in St. Mungo’s with a pumpkin for a head),it was surprising how accurate the rest of theirinformation was. Everybody seemed aware, forinstance, that Harry and Marietta were the onlystudents to have witnessed the scene in Dumbledore’soffice, and as Marietta was now in the hospital wing,Harry found himself besieged with requests to give afirsthand account wherever he went.

“Dumbledore will be back before long,” said ErnieMacmillan confidently on the way back fromHerbology after listening intently to Harry’s story.“They couldn’t keep him away in our second year andthey won’t be able to this time. The Fat Friar told me...” He dropped his voice conspiratorially, so thatHarry, Ron, and Hermione had to lean closer to himto hear, "... that Umbridge tried to get back into hisoffice last night after they’d searched the castle andgrounds for him. Couldn’t get past the gargoyle. TheHead’s office has sealed itself against her.” Erniesmirked. “Apparently she had a right little tantrum...”

“Oh, I expect she really fancied herself sitting upthere in the Head’s office,” said Hermione viciously, asthey walked up the stone steps into the entrance hall.“Lording it over all the other teachers, the stupidpuffed-up, power-crazy old —”

“Now, do you really want to finish that sentence,Granger?”

Page | 797Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Draco Malfoy had slid out from behind the door,followed by Crabbe and Goyle. His pale, pointed facewas alight with malice.

“Afraid I’m going to have to dock a few points fromGryffindor and Hufflepuff,” he drawled.

“It’s only teachers that can dock points from Houses,Malfoy,” said Ernie at once.

“Yeah, we’re prefects too, remember?” snarled Ron.

“I know prefects can’t dock points, Weasel King,”sneered Malfoy; Crabbe and Goyle sniggered. “Butmembers of the Inquisitorial Squad —”

“The what?” said Hermione sharply.

“The Inquisitorial Squad, Granger,” said Malfoy,pointing toward a tiny silver I upon his robes justbeneath his prefect’s badge. “A select group ofstudents who are supportive of the Ministry of Magic,hand-picked by Professor Umbridge. Anyway,members of the Inquisitorial Squad do have the powerto dock points... So, Granger, I’ll have five from youfor being rude about our new headmistress...Macmillan, five for contradicting me... Five because Idon’t like you, Potter ... Weasley, your shirt’suntucked, so I’ll have another five for that... Oh yeah,

I forgot, you’re a Mudblood, Granger, so ten forthat...”

Ron pulled out his wand, but Hermione pushed itaway, whispering, “Don’t!”

“Wise move, Granger,” breathed Malfoy. “New Head,new times ... Be good now, Potty ... Weasel King ...”

Page | 798Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He strode away, laughing heartily with Crabbe andGoyle.

“He was bluffing,” said Ernie, looking appalled. “Hecan’t be allowed to dock points ... that would beridiculous... It would completely undermine theprefect system...”

But Harry, Ron, and Hermione had turnedautomatically toward the giant hourglasses set inniches along the wall behind them, which recordedthe House points. Gryffindor and Ravenclaw had beenneck and neck in the lead that morning. Even as theywatched, stones flew upward, reducing the amountsin the lower bulbs. In fact, the only glass that seemedunchanged was the emerald-filled one of Slytherin.

“Noticed, have you?” said Fred’s voice.

He and George had just come down the marblestaircase and joined Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Erniein front of the hourglasses.

“Malfoy just docked us all about fifty points,” saidHarry furiously, as they watched several more stonesfly upward from the Gryffindor hourglass.

“Yeah, Montague tried to do us during break,” saidGeorge.

“What do you mean, ‘tried’?” said Ron quickly.

“He never managed to get all the words out,” saidFred, “due to the fact that we forced him headfirstinto that Vanishing Cabinet on the first floor.”

Hermione looked very shocked.

“But you’ll get into terrible trouble!”

Page | 799Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Not until Montague reappears, and that could takeweeks, I dunno where we sent him,” said Fred coolly.“Anyway ... we’ve decided we don’t care about gettinginto trouble anymore.”

“Have you ever?” asked Hermione.

“ ’Course we have,” said George. “Never been expelled,have we?”

“We’ve always known where to draw the line,” saidFred.

“We might have put a toe across it occasionally,” saidGeorge.

“But we’ve always stopped short of causing realmayhem,” said Fred.

“But now?” said Ron tentatively.

“Well, now —” said George.

“— what with Dumbledore gone —” said Fred.

“— we reckon a bit of mayhem —” said George.

“— is exactly what our dear new Head deserves,” saidFred.

“You mustn’t!” whispered Hermione. “You reallymustn’t! She’d love a reason to expel you!”

“You don’t get it, Hermione, do you?” said Fred,smiling at her. “We don’t care about staying anymore.We’d walk out right now if we weren’t determined todo our bit for Dumbledore first. So anyway,” hechecked his watch, “phase one is about to begin. I’dget in the Great Hall for lunch if I were you, that way

Page | 800Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

the teachers will see you can’t have had anything todo with it.”

“Anything to do with what?” said Hermione anxiously.

“You’ll see,” said George. “Run along, now.”

Fred and George turned away and disappeared in theswelling crowd descending the stairs toward lunch.Looking highly disconcerted, Ernie mutteredsomething about unfinished Transfigurationhomework and scurried away.

“I think we should get out of here, you know,” saidHermione nervously. “Just in case ...”

“Yeah, all right,” said Ron, and the three of themmoved toward the doors to the Great Hall, but Harryhad barely glimpsed today’s ceiling of scudding whiteclouds when somebody tapped him on the shoulderand, turning, he found himself almost nose to nosewith Filch, the caretaker. He took several hasty stepsbackward; Filch was best viewed at a distance.

“The headmistress would like to see you, Potter,” heleered.

“I didn’t do it,” said Harry stupidly, thinking ofwhatever Fred and George were planning. Filch’sjowls wobbled with silent laughter.

“Guilty conscience, eh?” he wheezed. “Follow me...”

Harry glanced back at Ron and Hermione, who wereboth looking worried. He shrugged and followed Filchback into the entrance hall, against the tide of hungrystudents.

Page | 801Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Filch seemed to be in an extremely good mood; hehummed creakily under his breath as they climbedthe marble staircase. As they reached the first landinghe said, “Things are changing around here, Potter.”

“I’ve noticed,” said Harry coldly.

“Yerse ... I’ve been telling Dumbledore for years andyears he’s too soft with you all,” said Filch, chucklingnastily. “You filthy little beasts would never havedropped Stinkpellets if you’d known I had it in mypower to whip you raw, would you, now? Nobodywould have thought of throwing Fanged Frisbeesdown the corridors if I could’ve strung you up by theankles in my office, would they? But whenEducational Decree Twenty-nine comes in, Potter, I’llbe allowed to do them things... And she’s asked theMinister to sign an order for the expulsion of Peeves...Oh, things are going to be very different around herewith her in charge...”

Umbridge had obviously gone to some lengths to getFilch on her side, Harry thought, and the worst of itwas that he would probably prove an importantweapon; his knowledge of the school’s secretpassageways and hiding places was probably secondonly to the Weasley twins.

“Here we are,” he said, leering down at Harry as herapped three times upon Professor Umbridge’s doorand pushed it open. “The Potter boy to see you,ma’am.”

Umbridge’s office, so very familiar to Harry from hismany detentions, was the same as usual except forthe large wooden block lying across the front of herdesk on which golden letters spelled the wordHEADMISTRESS; also his Firebolt, and Fred’s andGeorge’s Clean-sweeps, which he saw with a pangPage | 802Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

were now chained and padlocked to a stout iron pegin the wall behind the desk. Umbridge was sittingbehind the desk, busily scribbling upon some of herpink parchment, but looked up and smiled widely attheir entrance.

“Thank you, Argus,” she said sweetly.

“Not at all, ma’am, not at all,” said Filch, bowing aslow as his rheumatism would permit, and exitingbackward.

“Sit,” said Umbridge curtly, pointing toward a chair,and Harry sat. She continued to scribble for a fewmoments. He watched some of the foul kittensgamboling around the plates over her head,wondering what fresh horror she had in store for him.

“Well now,” she said finally, setting down her quilland looking like a toad about to swallow aparticularly juicy fly. “What would you like to drink?”

“What?” said Harry, quite sure he had misheard her.

“To drink, Mr. Potter,” she said, smiling still morewidely. “Tea? Coffee? Pumpkin juice?”

As she named each drink, she gave her short wand awave, and a cup or glass of it appeared upon herdesk.

“Nothing, thank you,” said Harry.

“I wish you to have a drink with me,” she said, hervoice becoming more dangerously sweet. “Chooseone.”

“Fine ... tea then,” said Harry, shrugging.

Page | 803Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She got up and made quite a performance of addingmilk with her back to him. She then bustled aroundthe desk with it, smiling in sinisterly sweet fashion.

“There,” she said, handing it to him. “Drink it before itgets cold, won’t you? Well, now, Mr. Potter ... Ithought we ought to have a little chat, after thedistressing events of last night.”

He said nothing. She settled herself back into her seatand waited. When several long moments had passedin silence, she said gaily, “You’re not drinking up!”

He raised the cup to his lips and then, just assuddenly, lowered it. One of the horrible paintedkittens behind Umbridge had great round blue eyesjust like Mad-Eye Moody’s magical one, and it hadjust occurred to Harry what Mad-Eye would say if heever heard that Harry had drunk anything offered bya known enemy.

“What’s the matter?” said Umbridge, who was stillwatching him. “Do you want sugar?”

“No,” said Harry.

He raised the cup to his lips again and pretended totake a sip, though keeping his mouth tightly closed.Umbridge’s smile widened.

“Good,” she whispered. “Very good. Now then ...” Sheleaned forward a little. “Where is Albus Dumbledore?”

“No idea,” said Harry promptly.

“Drink up, drink up,” she said, still smiling. “Now,

Mr. Potter, let us not play childish games. I know thatyou know where he has gone. You and Dumbledore

Page | 804Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

have been in this together from the beginning.Consider your position, Mr. Potter...”

“I don’t know where he is.”

Harry pretended to drink again.

“Very well,” said Umbridge, looking displeased. “Inthat case, you will kindly tell me the whereabouts ofSirius Black.”

Harry’s stomach turned over and his hand holdingthe teacup shook so that the cup rattled in its saucer.He tilted the cup to his mouth with his lips pressedtogether, so that some of the hot liquid trickled downonto his robes.

“I don’t know,” he said a little too quickly.

“Mr. Potter,” said Umbridge, “let me remind you thatit was I who almost caught the criminal Black in theGryffindor fire in October. I know perfectly well it wasyou he was meeting and if I had had any proof neitherof you would be at large today, I promise you. Irepeat, Mr. Potter ... Where is Sirius Black?”

“No idea,” said Harry loudly. “Haven’t got a clue.”

They stared at each other so long that Harry felt hiseyes watering. Then she stood up.

“Very well, Potter, I will take your word for it thistime, but be warned: The might of the Ministry standsbehind me. All channels of communication in and outof this school are being monitored. A Floo NetworkRegulator is keeping watch over every fire in Hogwarts— except my own, of course. My Inquisitorial Squadis opening and reading all owl post entering andleaving the castle. And Mr. Filch is observing allPage | 805Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

secret passages in and out of the castle. If I find ashred of evidence ...”

BOOM!

The very floor of the office shook; Umbridge slippedsideways, clutching her desk for support, lookingshocked.

“What was — ?”

She was gazing toward the door; Harry took theopportunity to empty his almost full cup of tea intothe nearest vase of dried flowers. He could hearpeople running and screaming several floors below.

“Back to lunch with you, Potter!” cried Umbridge,raising her wand and dashing out of the office. Harrygave her a few seconds’ start then hurried after her tosee what the source of all the uproar was.

It was not difficult to find. One floor down,pandemonium reigned. Somebody (and Harry had avery shrewd idea who) had set off what seemed to bean enormous crate of enchanted fireworks.

Dragons comprised entirely of green-and-gold sparkswere soaring up and down the corridors, emittingloud fiery blasts and bangs as they went. Shocking-pink Catherine wheels five feet in diameter werewhizzing lethally through the air like so many flyingsaucers. Rockets with long tails of brilliant silver starswere ricocheting off the walls. Sparklers were writingswearwords in midair of their own accord.

Firecrackers were exploding like mines everywhereHarry looked, and instead of burning themselves out,fading from sight, or fizzling to a halt, thesepyrotechnical miracles seemed to be gaining in energyand momentum the longer he watched.

Page | 806Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Filch and Umbridge were standing, apparentlytransfixed with horror, halfway down the stairs. AsHarry watched, one of the larger Catherine wheelsseemed to decide that what it needed was more roomto maneuver; it whirled toward Umbridge and Filchwith a sinister voheeeeeeeeee. Both adults yelled withfright and ducked and it soared straight out of thewindow behind them and off across the grounds.Meanwhile, several of the dragons and a large purplebat that was smoking ominously took advantage ofthe open door at the end of the corridor to escapetoward the second floor.

“Hurry, Filch, hurry!” shrieked Umbridge. “They’ll beall over the school unless we do something —

Stupefy]”

A jet of red light shot out of the end of her wand andhit one of the rockets. Instead of freezing in midair, itexploded with such force that it blasted a hole in apainting of a soppy-looking witch in the middle of ameadow — she ran for it just in time, reappearingseconds later squashed into the painting next door,where a couple of wizards playing cards stood uphastily to make room for her.

“Don’t Stun them, Filch!” shouted Umbridge angrily,for all the world as though it had been his suggestion.

“Right you are, Headmistress!” wheezed Filch, whowas a Squib and could no more have Stunned thefireworks than swallowed them. He dashed to anearby cupboard, pulled out a broom, and beganswatting at the fireworks in midair; within secondsthe head of the broom was ablaze.

Harry had seen enough. Laughing, he ducked downlow, ran to a door he knew was concealed behind atapestry a little way along the corridor and slipped

Page | 807Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

through it to find Fred and George hiding just behindit, listening to Umbridge’s and Filch’s yells andquaking with suppressed mirth.

“Impressive,” Harry said quietly, grinning. “Veryimpressive ... You’ll put Dr. Filibuster out of business,no problem...”

“Cheers,” whispered George, wiping tears of laughterfrom his face. “Oh, I hope she tries Vanishing themnext... They multiply by ten every time you try...”

The fireworks continued to burn and to spread allover the school that afternoon. Though they causedplenty of disruption, particularly the firecrackers, theother teachers did not seem to mind them very much.

“Dear, dear,” said Professor McGonagall sardonically,as one of the dragons soared around her classroom,emitting loud bangs and exhaling flame. “Miss Brown,would you mind running along to the headmistressand informing her that we have an escaped fireworkin our classroom?”

The upshot of it all was that Professor Umbridgespent her first afternoon as headmistress running allover the school answering the summonses of theother teachers, none of whom seemed able to rid theirrooms of the fireworks without her. When the finalbell rang and the students were heading back toGryffindor Tower with their bags, Harry saw, withimmense satisfaction, a disheveled and soot-blackened Umbridge tottering sweaty-faced fromProfessor Flitwick’s classroom.

“Thank you so much, Professor!” said ProfessorFlitwick in his squeaky little voice. “I could have gotrid of the sparklers myself, of course, but I wasn’tsure whether I had the authority...”

Page | 808Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Beaming, he closed his classroom door in her snarlingface.

Fred and George were heroes that night in theGryffindor common room. Even Hermione fought herway through the excited crowd around them tocongratulate them.

“They were wonderful fireworks,” she said admiringly.

“Thanks,” said George, looking both surprised andpleased. “Weasleys’ Wildfire Whiz-Bangs. Only thingis, we used our whole stock, we’re going to have tostart again from scratch now...”

“It was worth it, though,” said Fred, who was takingorders from clamoring Gryffindors. “If you want toadd your name to the waiting list, Hermione, it’s fiveGalleons for your Basic Blaze box and twenty for theDeflagration Deluxe...”

Hermione returned to the table where Harry and Ronwere sitting staring at their schoolbags as thoughhoping their homework might spring out of it andstart doing itself.

“Oh, why don’t we have a night off?” said Hermionebrightly, as a silver-tailed Weasley rocket zoomed pastthe window. “After all, the Easter holidays start onFriday, we’ll have plenty of time then...”

“Are you feeling all right?” Ron asked, staring at herin disbelief.

“Now you mention it,” said Hermione happily, “d’youknow ... I think I’m feeling a bit ... rebellious.”

Harry could still hear the distant bangs of escapedfirecrackers when he and Ron went up to bed an hour

Page | 809Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

later, and as he got undressed a sparkler floated pastthe tower, still resolutely spelling out the word POO.

He got into bed, yawning. With his glasses off, theoccasional fire-work still passing the window becameblurred, looking like sparkling clouds, beautiful andmysterious against the black sky. He turned onto hisside, wondering how Umbridge was feeling about herfirst day in Dumbledore’s job, and how Fudge wouldreact when he heard that the school had spent mostof the day in a state of advanced disruption... Smilingto himself, he closed his eyes...

The whizzes and bangs of escaped fireworks in thegrounds seemed to be growing more distant ... orperhaps he, Harry, was simply speeding away fromthem...

He had fallen right into the corridor leading to theDepartment of Mysteries. He was speeding toward theplain black door... Let it open... Let it open...

It did. He was inside the circular room lined withdoors... He crossed it, placed his hand upon anidentical door, and it swung inward...

Now he was in a long, rectangular room full of an odd,mechanical clicking. There were dancing flecks oflight on the walls but he did not pause toinvestigate... He had to go on...

There was a door at the far end... It too opened at histouch...

And now he was in a dimly lit room as high and wideas a church, full of nothing but rows and rows oftowering shelves, each laden with small, dusty, spun-glass spheres... Now Harry’s heart was beating fastwith excitement... He knew where to go... He ranPage | 810Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

forward, but his footsteps made no noise in theenormous, deserted room...

There was something in this room he wanted very,very much...

Something he wanted... or somebody else wanted...

His scar was hurting...

BANG! Harry awoke instantly, confused and angry.The dark dormitory was full of the sound of laughter.

“Cool!” said Seamus, who was silhouetted against thewindow.

“I think one of those Catherine wheels hit a rocketand it’s like they mated, come and see!”

Harry heard Ron and Dean scramble out of bed for abetter look. He lay quite still and silent while the painin his scar subsided and disappointment washed overhim. He felt as though a wonderful treat had beensnatched from him at the very last moment... He hadgot so close that time...

Glittering, pink-and-silver winged piglets were nowsoaring past the windows of Gryffindor Tower. Harrylay and listened to the appreciative whoops ofGryffindors in the dormitories below them. Hisstomach gave a sickening jolt as he remembered thathe had Occlumency the following evening...

Harry spent the whole of the next day dreading whatSnape was going to say if he found out how muchfarther into the Department of Mysteries he hadpenetrated during his last dream. With a surge ofguilt he realized that he had not practicedOcclumency once since their last lesson: There hadPage | 811Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

been too much going on since Dumbledore had left.

He was sure he would not have been able to emptyhis mind even if he had tried. He doubted, however,whether Snape would accept that excuse...

He attempted a little last-minute practice duringclasses that day, but it was no good, Hermione keptasking him what was wrong whenever he fell silenttrying to rid himself of all thought and emotion and,after all, the best moment to empty his brain was notwhile teachers were firing review questions at theclass.

Resigned to the worst, he set off for Snape’s officeafter dinner. Halfway across the entrance hall,however, Cho came hurrying up to him.

“Over here,” said Harry, glad of a reason to postponehis meeting with Snape and beckoning her across tothe corner of the entrance hall where the gianthourglasses stood. Gryffindor’s was now almostempty. “Are you okay? Umbridge hasn’t been askingyou about the D.A., has she?”

“Oh no,” said Cho hurriedly. “No, it was only ... Well, Ijust wanted to say ... Harry, I never dreamed Mariettawould tell...”

“Yeah, well,” said Harry moodily. He did feel Chomight have chosen her friends a bit more carefully. Itwas small consolation that the last he had heard,Marietta was still up in the hospital wing and MadamPomfrey had not been able to make the slightestimprovement to her pimples.

“She’s a lovely person really,” said Cho. “She justmade a mistake —”

Harry looked at her incredulously.

Page | 812Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“A lovely person who made a mistake? She sold us allout, including you!”

“Well ... we all got away, didn’t we?” said Chopleadingly. “You know, her mum works for theMinistry, it’s really difficult for her —”

“Ron’s dad works for the Ministry too!” Harry saidfuriously. “And in case you hadn’t noticed, he hasn’tgot ‘sneak’ written across his face —”

“That was a really horrible trick of HermioneGranger’s,” said Cho fiercely. “She should have toldus she’d jinxed that list —”

“I think it was a brilliant idea,” said Harry coldly. Choflushed and her eyes grew brighter.

“Oh yes, I forgot — of course, if it was darlingHermione’s idea —”

“Don’t start crying again,” said Harry warningly.

“I wasn’t going to!” she shouted.

“Yeah ... well ... good,” he said. “I’ve got enough tocope with at the moment.”

“Go and cope with it then!” she said furiously, turningon her heel and stalking off.

Fuming, Harry descended the stairs to Snape’sdungeon, and though he knew from experience howmuch easier it would be for Snape to penetrate hismind if he arrived angry and resentful, he succeededin nothing but thinking of a few more good things heshould have said to Cho about Marietta beforereaching the dungeon door.

Page | 813Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You’re late, Potter,” said Snape coldly, as Harryclosed the door behind him.

Snape was standing with his back to Harry, removing,as usual, certain of his thoughts and placing themcarefully in Dumbledore’s Pensieve. He dropped thelast silvery strand into the stone basin and turned toface Harry.

“So,” he said. “Have you been practicing?”

“Yes,” Harry lied, looking carefully at one of the legs ofSnape’s desk.

“Well, we’ll soon find out, won’t we?” said Snapesmoothly. “Wand out, Potter.”

Harry moved into his usual position, facing Snapewith the desk between them. His heart was pumpingfast with anger at Cho and anxiety about how muchSnape was about to extract from his mind.

“On the count of three then,” said Snape lazily. “One— two —”

Snape’s office door banged open and Draco Malfoysped in.

“Professor Snape, sir — oh — sorry —”

Malfoy was looking at Snape and Harry in somesurprise.

“It’s all right, Draco,” said Snape, lowering his wand.“Potter is here for a little Remedial Potions.”

Harry had not seen Malfoy look so gleeful sinceUmbridge had turned up to inspect Hagrid.

Page | 814Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I didn’t know,” he said, leering at Harry, who knewhis face was burning. He would have given a greatdeal to be able to shout the truth at Malfoy — or, evenbetter, to hit him with a good curse.

“Well, Draco, what is it?” asked Snape.

“It’s Professor Umbridge, sir — she needs your help,”said Malfoy. “They’ve found Montague, sir. He’sturned up jammed inside a toilet on the fourth floor.”

“How did he get in there?” demanded Snape.

“I don’t know, sir, he’s a bit confused...”

“Very well, very well — Potter,” said Snape, “we shallresume this lesson tomorrow evening instead.”

He turned and swept from his office. Malfoy mouthed“Remedial Potions?” at Harry behind Snape’s backbefore following him.

Seething, Harry replaced his wand inside his robesand made to leave the room. At least he had twenty-four more hours in which to practice; he knew heought to feel grateful for the narrow escape, though itwas hard that it came at the expense of Malfoy tellingthe whole school that he needed Remedial Potions...

He was at the office door when he saw it: a patch ofshivering light dancing on the door frame. Hestopped, looking at it, reminded of something... Thenhe remembered: It was a little like the lights he hadseen in his dream last night, the lights in the secondroom he had walked through on his journey throughthe Department of Mysteries.

He turned around. The light was coming from thePensieve sitting on Snape’s desk. The silver-white

Page | 815Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

contents were ebbing and swirling within. Snape’sthoughts ... things he did not want Harry to see if hebroke through Snape’s defenses accidentally...

Harry gazed at the Pensieve, curiosity welling insidehim... What was it that Snape was so keen to hidefrom Harry?

The silvery lights shivered on the wall... Harry tooktwo steps toward the desk, thinking hard. Could itpossibly be information about the Department ofMysteries that Snape was determined to keep fromhim?

Harry looked over his shoulder, his heart nowpumping harder and faster than ever. How long wouldit take Snape to release Montague from the toilet?Would he come straight back to his office afterward,or accompany Montague to the hospital wing? Surelythe latter ... Montague was Captain of the SlytherinQuidditch team, Snape would want to make sure hewas all right...

Harry walked the remaining few feet to the Pensieveand stood over it, gazing into its depths. He hesitated,listening, then pulled out his wand again. The officeand the corridor beyond were completely silent. Hegave the contents of the Pensieve a small prod withthe end of his wand.

The silvery stuff within began to swirl very fast. Harryleaned forward over it and saw that it had becometransparent. He was, once again, looking down into aroom as though through a circular window in theceiling... In fact, unless he was much mistaken, hewas looking down upon the Great Hall...

His breath was actually fogging the surface of Snape’sthoughts... His brain seemed to be in limbo... It would

Page | 816Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

be insane to do the thing that he was so stronglytempted to do... He was trembling... Snape could beback at any moment ... but Harry thought of Cho’sanger, of Malfoy’s jeering face, and a reckless daringseized him.

He took a great gulp of breath and plunged his faceinto the surface of Snape’s thoughts. At once, thefloor of the office lurched, tipping Harry headfirst intothe Pensieve...

He was falling through cold blackness, spinningfuriously as he went, and then —

He was standing in the middle of the Great Hall, butthe four House tables were gone. Instead there weremore than a hundred smaller tables, all facing thesame way, at each of which sat a student, head bentlow, scribbling on a roll of parchment. The only soundwas the scratching of quills and the occasional rustleas somebody adjusted their parchment. It was clearlyexam time.

Sunshine was streaming through the high windowsonto the bent heads, which shone chestnut andcopper and gold in the bright light. Harry lookedaround carefully. Snape had to be here somewhere...This was his memory...

And there he was, at a table right behind Harry.

Harry stared. Snape-the-teenager had a stringy, pallidlook about him, like a plant kept in the dark. His hairwas lank and greasy and was flopping onto the table,his hooked nose barely half an inch from the surfaceof the parchment as he scribbled. Harry movedaround behind Snape and read the heading of theexamination paper:

DEFENSE AGAINST THE DARK ARTS —

Page | 817Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

ORDINARY WIZARDING LEVEL

So Snape had to be fifteen or sixteen, around Harry’sown age. His hand was flying across the parchment;he had written at least a foot more than his closestneighbors, and yet his writing was minuscule andcramped.

“Five more minutes!”

The voice made Harry jump; turning, he saw the topof Professor Flitwick’s head moving between the desksa short distance away. Professor Flitwick was walkingpast a boy with untidy black hair ... very untidy blackhair...

Harry moved so quickly that, had he been solid, hewould have knocked desks flying. Instead he seemedto slide, dreamlike, across two aisles and up a third.The back of the black-haired boy’s head drew nearerand nearer... He was straightening up now, puttingdown his quill, pulling his roll of parchment towardhim so as to reread what he had written...

Harry stopped in front of the desk and gazed down athis fifteen-year-old father.

Excitement exploded in the pit of his stomach: It wasas though he was looking at himself but withdeliberate mistakes. James’s eyes were hazel, hisnose was slightly longer than Harry’s, and there wasno scar on his forehead, but they had the same thinface, same mouth, same eyebrows. James’s hairstuck up at the back exactly as Harry’s did, his handscould have been Harry’s, and Harry could tell thatwhen James stood up, they would be within an inchof each other’s heights.

Page | 818Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

James yawned hugely and rumpled up his hair,making it even messier than it had been. Then, with aglance toward Professor Flitwick, he turned in hisseat and grinned at a boy sitting four seats behindhim.

With another shock of excitement, Harry saw Siriusgive James the thumbs-up. Sirius was lounging in hischair at his ease, tilting it back on two legs. He wasvery good-looking; his dark hair fell into his eyes witha sort of casual elegance neither James’s nor Harry’scould ever have achieved, and a girl sitting behindhim was eyeing him hopefully, though he didn’t seemto have noticed. And two seats along from this girl —Harry’s stomach gave another pleasurable squirm —was Remus Lupin. He looked rather pale and peaky(was the full moon approaching?) and was absorbedin the exam: As he reread his answers he scratchedhis chin with the end of his quill, frowning slightly.

So that meant Wormtail had to be around heresomewhere too ... and sure enough, Harry spottedhim within seconds: a small, mousy-haired boy with apointed nose. Wormtail looked anxious; he waschewing his fingernails, staring down at his paper,scuffing the ground with his toes. Every now and thenhe glanced hopefully at his neighbor’s paper. Harrystared at Wormtail for a moment, then back atJames, who was now doodling on a bit of scrapparchment. He had drawn a Snitch and was nowtracing the letters L. E. What did they stand for?

“Quills down, please!” squeaked Professor Flitwick.“That means you too, Stebbins! Please remain seatedwhile I collect your parchment! Acciol”

More than a hundred rolls of parchment zoomed intothe air and into Professor Flitwick’s outstretchedarms, knocking him backward off his feet. Several

Page | 819Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

people laughed. A couple of students at the frontdesks got up, took hold of Professor Flitwick beneaththe elbows, and lifted him onto his feet again.

“Thank you ... thank you,” panted Professor Flitwick.“Very well, everybody, you’re free to go!”

Harry looked down at his father, who had hastilycrossed out the L. E. he had been embellishing,jumped to his feet, stuffed his quill and the examquestion paper into his bag, which he slung over hisback, and stood waiting for Sirius to join him.

Harry looked around and glimpsed Snape a short wayaway, moving between the tables toward the doorsinto the entrance hall, still absorbed in his ownexamination paper. Round-shouldered yet angular, hewalked in a twitchy manner that recalled a spider, hisoily hair swinging about his face.

A gang of chattering girls separated Snape fromJames and Sirius, and by planting himself in themidst of this group, Harry managed to keep Snape insight while straining his ears to catch the voices ofJames and his friends.

“Did you like question ten, Moony?” asked Sirius asthey emerged into the entrance hall.

“Loved it,” said Lupin briskly. “ ‘Give five signs thatidentify the werewolf.’ Excellent question.”

“D’you think you managed to get all the signs?” saidJames in tones of mock concern.

“Think I did,” said Lupin seriously, as they joined thecrowd thronging around the front doors eager to getout into the sunlit grounds. “One: He’s sitting on my

Page | 820Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

chair. Two: He’s wearing my clothes. Three: Hisname’s Remus Lupin ...”

Wormtail was the only one who didn’t laugh.

“I got the snout shape, the pupils of the eyes, and thetufted tail,” he said anxiously, “but I couldn’t thinkwhat else —”

“How thick are you, Wormtail?” said Jamesimpatiently. “You run round with a werewolf once amonth —”

“Keep your voice down,” implored Lupin.

Harry looked anxiously behind him again. Snaperemained close by, still buried in his examinationquestions; but this was Snape’s memory, and Harrywas sure that if Snape chose to wander off in adifferent direction once outside in the grounds, he,Harry, would not be able to follow James any farther.To his intense relief, however, when James and histhree friends strode off down the lawn toward thelake, Snape followed, still poring over the paper andapparently with no fixed idea of where he was going.By jogging a little ahead of him, Harry managed tomaintain a close watch on James and the others.

“Well, I thought that paper was a piece of cake,” heheard Sirius say. “I’ll be surprised if I don’t getOutstanding on it at least.”

“Me too,” said James. He put his hand in his pocketand took out a struggling Golden Snitch.

“Where’d you get that?”

“Nicked it,” said James casually. He started playingwith the Snitch, allowing it to fly as much as a foot

Page | 821Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

away and seizing it again; his reflexes were excellent.Wormtail watched him in awe.

They stopped in the shade of the very same beech treeon the edge of the lake where Harry, Ron, andHermione had spent a Sunday finishing theirhomework, and threw themselves down on the grass.

Harry looked over his shoulder yet again and saw, tohis delight, that Snape had settled himself on thegrass in the dense shadows of a clump of bushes. Hewas as deeply immersed in the O.W.L. paper as ever,which left Harry free to sit down on the grass betweenthe beech and the bushes and watch the foursomeunder the tree.

The sunlight was dazzling on the smooth surface ofthe lake, on the bank of which the group of laughinggirls who had just left the Great Hall were sitting withshoes and socks off, cooling their feet in the water.

Lupin had pulled out a book and was reading. Siriusstared around at the students milling over the grass,looking rather haughty and bored, but veryhandsomely so. James was still playing with theSnitch, letting it zoom farther and farther away,almost escaping but always grabbed at the lastsecond. Wormtail was watching him with his mouthopen. Every time James made a particularly difficultcatch, Wormtail gasped and applauded. After fiveminutes of this, Harry wondered why James didn’ttell Wormtail to get a grip on himself, but Jamesseemed to be enjoying the attention. Harry noticed hisfather had a habit of rumpling up his hair as thoughto make sure it did not get too tidy, and also that hekept looking over at the girls by the water’s edge.

“Put that away, will you?” said Sirius finally, asJames made a fine catch and Wormtail let out a

Page | 822Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

cheer. “Before Wormtail wets himself fromexcitement.”

Wormtail turned slightly pink but James grinned.

“If it bothers you,” he said, stuffing the Snitch back inhis pocket. Harry had the distinct impression thatSirius was the only one for whom James would havestopped showing off.

“I’m bored,” said Sirius. “Wish it was full moon.”

“You might,” said Lupin darkly from behind his book.“We’ve still got Transfiguration, if you’re bored youcould test me... Here.” He held out his book.

Sirius snorted. “I don’t need to look at that rubbish, Iknow it all.”

“This’ll liven you up, Padfoot,” said James quietly.“Look who it is...”

Sirius’s head turned. He had become very still, like adog that has scented a rabbit.

“Excellent,” he said softly. “Snivellus.”

Harry turned to see what Sirius was looking at.

Snape was on his feet again, and was stowing theO.W.L. paper in his bag. As he emerged from theshadows of the bushes and set off across the grass,Sirius and James stood up. Lupin and Wormtailremained sitting: Lupin was still staring down at hisbook, though his eyes were not moving and a faintfrown line had appeared between his eyebrows.Wormtail was looking from Sirius and James toSnape with a look of avid anticipation on his face.

Page | 823Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“All right, Snivellus?” said James loudly.

Snape reacted so fast it was as though he had beenexpecting an attack: Dropping his bag, he plunged hishand inside his robes, and his wand was halfway intothe air when James shouted, “ExpelliarmusV’

Snape’s wand flew twelve feet into the air and fell witha little thud in the grass behind him. Sirius let out abark of laughter.

“Impedimental” he said, pointing his wand at Snape,who was knocked off his feet, halfway through a divetoward his own fallen wand.

Students all around had turned to watch. Some ofthem had gotten to their feet and were edging nearerto watch. Some looked apprehensive, othersentertained.

Snape lay panting on the ground. James and Siriusadvanced on him, wands up, James glancing over hisshoulder at the girls at the water’s edge as he went.Wormtail was on his feet now, watching hungrily,edging around Lupin to get a clearer view.

“How’d the exam go, Snivelly?” said James.

“I was watching him, his nose was touching theparchment,” said Sirius viciously. “There’ll be greatgrease marks all over it, they won’t be able to read aword.”

Several people watching laughed; Snape was clearlyunpopular. Wormtail sniggered shrilly. Snape wastrying to get up, but the jinx was still operating onhim; he was struggling, as though bound by invisibleropes.

Page | 824Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You — wait,” he panted, staring up at James with anexpression of purest loathing. “You — wait...”

“Wait for what?” said Sirius coolly. “What’re you goingto do, Snivelly, wipe your nose on us?”

Snape let out a stream of mixed swearwords andhexes, but his wand being ten feet away nothinghappened.

“Wash out your mouth,” said James coldly.

“ Scourgifyl”

Pink soap bubbles streamed from Snape’s mouth atonce; the froth was covering his lips, making him gag,choking him —

“Leave him ALONE!”

James and Sirius looked around. James’s free handjumped to his hair again.

It was one of the girls from the lake edge. She hadthick, dark red hair that fell to her shoulders andstartlingly green almond-shaped eyes — Harry’s eyes.

Harry’s mother ...

“All right, Evans?” said James, and the tone of hisvoice was suddenly pleasant, deeper, more mature.

“Leave him alone,” Lily repeated. She was looking atJames with every sign of great dislike. “What’s hedone to you?”

“Well,” said James, appearing to deliberate the point,“it’s more the fact that he exists, if you know what Imean...”

Page | 825Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Many of the surrounding watchers laughed, Siriusand Wormtail included, but Lupin, still apparentlyintent on his book, didn’t, and neither did Lily.

“You think you’re funny,” she said coldly. “But you’rejust an arrogant, bullying toerag, Potter. Leave himalone.”

“I will if you go out with me, Evans,” said Jamesquickly. “Go on ... Go out with me, and I’ll never lay awand on old Snivelly again.”

Behind him, the Impediment Jinx was wearing off.Snape was beginning to inch toward his fallen wand,spitting out soapsuds as he crawled.

“I wouldn’t go out with you if it was a choice betweenyou and the giant squid,” said Lily.

“Bad luck, Prongs,” said Sirius briskly, turning backto Snape. “OY!”

But too late; Snape had directed his wand straight atJames; there was a flash of light and a gash appearedon the side of James’s face, spattering his robes withblood. James whirled about; a second flash of lightlater, Snape was hanging upside down in the air, hisrobes falling over his head to reveal skinny, pallid legsand a pair of graying underpants.

Many people in the small crowd watching cheered.Sirius, James, and Wormtail roared with laughter.

Lily, whose furious expression had twitched for aninstant as though she was going to smile, said, “Lethim down!”

“Certainly,” said James and he jerked his wandupward. Snape fell into a crumpled heap on the

Page | 826Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

ground. Disentangling himself from his robes, he gotquickly to his feet, wand up, but Sirius said,

“Petrificus Totalusl” and Snape keeled over again atonce, rigid as a board.

“LEAVE HIM ALONE!” Lily shouted. She had her ownwand out now. James and Sirius eyed it warily.

“Ah, Evans, don’t make me hex you,” said Jamesearnestly.

“Take the curse off him, then!”

James sighed deeply, then turned to Snape andmuttered the countercurse.

“There you go,” he said, as Snape struggled to his feetagain, “you’re lucky Evans was here, Snivellus —”

“I don’t need help from filthy little Mudbloods likeher!”

Lily blinked. “Fine,” she said coolly. “I won’t bother infuture. And I’d wash your pants if I were you,Snivellus.”

“Apologize to Evans!” James roared at Snape, hiswand pointed threateningly at him.

“I don’t want you to make him apologize,” Lilyshouted, rounding on James. “You’re as bad as heis...”

“What?” yelped James. “I’d NEVER call you a — you-know-what!”

“Messing up your hair because you think it looks coolto look like you’ve just got off your broomstick,showing off with that stupid Snitch, walking down

Page | 827Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

corridors and hexing anyone who annoys you justbecause you can — I’m surprised your broomstickcan get off the ground with that fat head on it. Youmake me SICK.”

She turned on her heel and hurried away.

“Evans!” James shouted after her, “Hey, EVANS!”

But she didn’t look back.

“What is it with her?” said James, trying and failing tolook as though this was a throwaway question of noreal importance to him.

“Reading between the lines, I’d say she thinks you’rea bit conceited, mate,” said Sirius.

“Right,” said James, who looked furious now, “right —

There was another flash of light, and Snape was onceagain hanging upside down in the air.

“Who wants to see me take off Snivelly’s pants?”

But whether James really did take off Snape’s pants,Harry never found out. A hand had closed tight overhis upper arm, closed with a pincerlike grip. Wincing,Harry looked around to see who had hold of him, andsaw, with a thrill of horror, a fully grown, adult-sizedSnape standing right beside him, white with rage.

“Having fun?”

Harry felt himself rising into the air. The summer’sday evaporated around him, he was floating upwardthrough icy blackness, Snape’s hand still tight uponhis upper arm. Then, with a swooping feeling as

Page | 828Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

though he had turned head over heels in midair, hisfeet hit the stone floor of Snape’s dungeon, and hewas standing again beside the Pensieve on Snape’sdesk in the shadowy, present-day Potions master’sstudy.

“So,” said Snape, gripping Harry’s arm so tightlyHarry’s hand was starting to feel numb. “So ... beenenjoying yourself, Potter?”

“N-no ...” said Harry, trying to free his arm.

It was scary: Snape’s lips were shaking, his face waswhite, his teeth were bared.

“Amusing man, your father, wasn’t he?” said Snape,shaking Harry so hard that his glasses slipped downhis nose.

“I — didn’t —”

Snape threw Harry from him with all his might. Harryfell hard onto the dungeon floor.

“You will not tell anybody what you saw!” Snapebellowed.

“No,” said Harry, getting to his feet as far from Snapeas he could. “No, of course I w —”

“Get out, get out, I don’t want to see you in this officeever again!”

And as Harry hurtled toward the door, ajar of deadcockroaches exploded over his head. He wrenched thedoor open and flew away up the corridor, stoppingonly when he had put three floors between himselfand Snape. There he leaned against the wall, panting,and rubbing his bruised arm.

Page | 829Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He had no desire at all to return to Gryffindor Towerso early, nor to tell Ron and Hermione what he hadjust seen. What was making Harry feel so horrifiedand unhappy was not being shouted at or having jarsthrown at him — it was that he knew how it felt to behumiliated in the middle of a circle of onlookers, knewexactly how Snape had felt as his father had tauntedhim, and that judging from what he had just seen, hisfather had been every bit as arrogant as Snape hadalways told him.

Page | 830Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



CAREER ADVICE

“But why haven’t you got Occlumency lessonsanymore?” said Hermione, frowning.

“I’ve told you,” Harry muttered. “Snape reckons I cancarry on by myself now I’ve got the basics...”

“So you’ve stopped having funny dreams?” saidHermione skeptically.

“Pretty much,” said Harry, not looking at her.

“Well, I don’t think Snape should stop until you’reabsolutely sure you can control them!” said Hermioneindignantly. “Harry, I think you should go back tohim and ask —”

“No,” said Harry forcefully. “Just drop it, Hermione,okay?”

It was the first day of the Easter holidays andHermione, as was her custom, had spent a large partof the day drawing up study schedules for the three of

Page | 831Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

them. Harry and Ron had let her do it — it was easierthan arguing with her and, in any case, they mightcome in useful.

Ron had been startled to discover that there were onlysix weeks left until their exams.

“How can that come as a shock?” Hermionedemanded, as she tapped each little square on Ron’sschedule with her wand so that it flashed a differentcolor according to its subject.

“I dunno ...” said Ron, “there’s been a lot going on...”

“Well, there you are,” she said, handing him hisschedule, “if you follow that you should do fine.”

Ron looked down it gloomily, but then brightened.

“You’ve given me an evening off every week!”

“That’s for Quidditch practice,” said Hermione.

The smile faded from Ron’s face.

“What’s the point?” he said. “We’ve got about as muchchance of winning the Quidditch Cup this year asDad’s got of becoming Minister of Magic...”

Hermione said nothing. She was looking at Harry,who was staring blankly at the opposite wall of thecommon room while Crookshanks pawed at his hand,trying to get his ears scratched.

“What’s wrong, Harry?”

“What?” he said quickly. “Nothing ...”

Page | 832Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He seized his copy of Defensive Magical Theory andpretended to be looking something up in the index.Crookshanks gave him up as a bad job and slunkaway under Hermione’s chair.

“I saw Cho earlier,” said Hermione tentatively, “andshe looked really miserable too... Have you two had arow again?”

“Wha — oh yeah, we have,” said Harry, seizinggratefully on the excuse.

“What about?”

“That sneak friend of hers, Marietta,” said Harry.

“Yeah, well, I don’t blame you!” said Ron angrily,setting down his study schedule. “If it hadn’t been forher ...”

Ron went into a rant about Marietta Edgecombe,which Harry found helpful. All he had to do was lookangry, nod, and say “yeah” and “that’s right”whenever Ron drew breath, leaving his mind free todwell, ever more miserably, on what he had seen inthe Pensieve.

He felt as though the memory of it was eating himfrom inside. He had been so sure that his parents hadbeen wonderful people that he never had the slightestdifficulty in disbelieving Snape’s aspersions on hisfather’s character. Hadn’t people like Hagrid andSirius told Harry how wonderful his father had been?

(Yeah, well, look what Sirius was like himself, said anagging voice inside Harry’s head... He was as bad,wasn’t he?) Yes, he had once overheard ProfessorMcGonagall saying that his father and Sirius hadbeen troublemakers at school, but she had describedthem as forerunners of the Weasley twins, and HarryPage | 833Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

could not imagine Fred and George dangling someoneupside down for the fun of it ... not unless they reallyloathed them ... Perhaps Malfoy, or somebody whoreally deserved it ...

Harry tried to make a case for Snape having deservedwhat he had suffered at James’s hands — but hadn’tLily asked, “What’s he done to you?” And hadn’tJames replied, “It’s more the fact that he exists, if youknow what I mean?” Hadn’t James started it allsimply because Sirius said he was bored? Harryremembered Lupin saying back in Grimmauld Placethat Dumbledore had made him prefect in the hopethat he would be able to exercise some control overJames and Sirius... But in the Pensieve, he had satthere and let it all happen...

Harry reminded himself that Lily had intervened; hismother had been decent, yet the memory of the lookon her face as she had shouted at James disturbedhim quite as much as anything else. She had clearlyloathed James and Harry simply could notunderstand how they could have ended up married.Once or twice he even wondered whether James hadforced her into it...

For nearly five years the thought of his father hadbeen a source of comfort, of inspiration. Wheneversomeone had told him he was like James he hadglowed with pride inside. And now ... now he felt coldand miserable at the thought of him.

The weather grew breezier, brighter, and warmer asthe holidays passed, but Harry was stuck with therest of the fifth and seventh years, who were alltrapped inside, traipsing back and forth to the library.Harry pretended that his bad mood had no othercause but the approaching exams, and as his fellow

Page | 834Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Gryffindors were sick of studying themselves, hisexcuse went unchallenged.

“Harry, I’m talking to you, can you hear me?”

“Huh?”

He looked around. Ginny Weasley, looking verywindswept, had joined him at the library table wherehe had been sitting alone. It was late on Sundayevening; Hermione had gone back to Gryffindor Towerto review Ancient Runes; Ron had Quidditch practice.

“Oh hi,” said Harry, pulling his books back towardhim. “How come you’re not at practice?”

“It’s over,” said Ginny. “Ron had to take Jack Sloperup to the hospital wing.”

“Why?”

“Well, we’re not sure, but we think he knocked himselfout with his own bat.” She sighed heavily. “Anyway ...a package just arrived, it’s only just got throughUmbridge’s new screening process...”

She hoisted a box wrapped in brown paper onto thetable; it had clearly been unwrapped and carelesslyrewrapped, and there was a scribbled note across it inred ink, reading INSPECTED AND PASSED BY THEHOGWARTS HIGH INQUISITOR.

“It’s Easter eggs from Mum,” said Ginny. “There’s onefor you... There you go...”

She handed him a handsome chocolate egg decoratedwith small, iced Snitches and, according to thepackaging, containing a bag of Fizzing Whizbees.

Page | 835Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked at it for a moment, then, to his horror,felt a hard lump rise in his throat.

“Are you okay, Harry?” asked Ginny quietly.

“Yeah, I’m fine,” said Harry gruffly. The lump in histhroat was painful. He did not understand why anEaster egg should have made him feel like this.

“You seem really down lately,” Ginny persisted. “Youknow, I’m sure if you just talked to Cho ...”

“It’s not Cho I want to talk to,” said Harry brusquely.

“Who is it, then?” asked Ginny.

He glanced around to make quite sure that nobodywas listening; Madam Pince was several shelves away,stamping out a pile of books for a frantic-lookingHannah Abbott.

“I wish I could talk to Sirius,” he muttered. “But Iknow I can’t.”

More to give himself something to do than because hereally wanted any, Harry unwrapped his Easter egg,broke off a large bit, and put it into his mouth.

“Well,” said Ginny slowly, helping herself to a bit ofegg too, “if you really want to talk to Sirius, I expectwe could think of a way to do it...”

“Come on,” said Harry hopelessly. “With Umbridgepolicing the fires and reading all our mail?”

“The thing about growing up with Fred and George,”said Ginny thoughtfully, “is that you sort of start

Page | 836Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

thinking anything’s possible if you’ve got enoughnerve.”

Harry looked at her. Perhaps it was the effect of thechocolate — Lupin had always advised eating someafter encounters with dementors — or simply becausehe had finally spoken aloud the wish that had beenburning inside him for a week, but he felt a bit morehopeful...

“WHAT DO YOU THINK YOU ARE DOING?”

“Oh damn,” whispered Ginny, jumping to her feet. “Iforgot—”

Madam Pince was swooping down upon them, hershriveled face contorted with rage.

“Chocolate in the library\” she screamed. “Out — out— OUT!”

And whipping out her wand, she caused Harry’sbooks, bag, and ink bottle to chase him and Ginnyfrom the library, whacking them repeatedly over thehead as they ran.

As though to underline the importance of theirupcoming examinations, a batch of pamphlets,leaflets, and notices concerning various Wizardingcareers appeared on the tables in Gryffindor Towershortly before the end of the holidays, along with yetanother notice on the board, which read:

CAREER ADVICE

All fifth years will be required to attend a shortmeeting with their Head of House during the firstweek of the Summer term, in which they will be given

Page | 837Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

the opportunity to discuss their future careers. Timesof individual appointments are listed below.

Harry looked down the list and found that he wasexpected in Professor McGonagall’s office at half-pasttwo on Monday, which would mean missing most ofDivination. He and the other fifth years spent aconsiderable part of the final weekend of the Easterbreak reading all the career information that hadbeen left there for their perusal.

“Well, I don’t fancy Healing,” said Ron on the lastevening of the holidays. He was immersed in a leafletthat carried the crossed bone-and-wand emblem ofSt. Mungo’s on its front. “It says here you need atleast an E at N.E.W.T. level in Potions, Herbology,Transfiguration, Charms, and Defense Against theDark Arts. I mean ... blimey... Don’t want much, dothey?”

“Well, it’s a very responsible job, isn’t it?” saidHermione absently. She was poring over a brightpink-and-orange leaflet that was headed SO YOUTHINK YOU’D LIKE TO WORK IN MUGGLERELATIONS? “You don’t seem to need manyqualifications to liaise with Muggles... All they want isan O.W.L. in Muggle Studies... ‘Much more importantis your enthusiasm, patience, and a good sense offunV

“You’d need more than a good sense of fun to liaisewith my uncle,” said Harry darkly. “Good sense ofwhen to duck, more like ...” He was halfway througha pamphlet on Wizard banking. “Listen to this:

“ ‘Are you seeking a challenging career involving travel,adventure, and substantial, danger-related treasurebonuses? Then consider a position with GringottsWizarding Bank, who are currently recruiting Curse-

P a g e | 838Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Breakers for thrilling opportunities abroad...’ Theywant Arithmancy, though... You could do it,Hermione!”

“I don’t much fancy banking,” said Hermione vaguely,now immersed in HAVE YOU GOT WHAT IT TAKESTO TRAIN SECURITY TROLLS?

“Hey,” said a voice in Harry’s ear. He looked around;Fred and George had come to join them. “Ginny’s hada word with us about you,” said Fred, stretching outhis legs on the table in front of them and causingseveral booklets on careers with the Ministry of Magicto slide off onto the floor. “She says you need to talkto Sirius?”

“What?” said Hermione sharply, freezing with herhand halfway toward picking up MAKE A BANG ATTHE DEPARTMENT OF MAGICAL ACCIDENTS ANDCATASTROPHES.

“Yeah ...” said Harry, trying to sound casual, “yeah, Ithought I’d like —”

“Don’t be so ridiculous,” said Hermione, straighteningup and looking at him as though she could notbelieve her eyes. “With Umbridge groping around inthe fires and frisking all the owls?”

“Well, we think we can find a way around that,” saidGeorge, stretching and smiling. “It’s a simple matterof causing a diversion. Now, you might have noticedthat we have been rather quiet on the mayhem frontduring the Easter holidays?”

“What was the point, we asked ourselves, ofdisrupting leisure time?” continued Fred. “No point atall, we answered ourselves. And of course, we’d have

Page | 839Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

messed up people’s studying too, which would be thevery last thing we’d want to do.”

He gave Hermione a sanctimonious little nod. Shelooked rather taken aback by this thoughtfulness.

“But it’s business as usual from tomorrow,” Fredcontinued briskly. “And if we’re going to be causing abit of uproar, why not do it so that Harry can have hischat with Sirius?”

“Yes, but still,” said Hermione with an air ofexplaining something very simple to somebody veryobtuse, “even if you do cause a diversion, how isHarry supposed to talk to him?”

“Umbridge’s office,” said Harry quietly.

He had been thinking about it for a fortnight andcould think of no alternative; Umbridge herself hadtold him that the only fire that was not being watchedwas her own.

“Are — you — insane?” said Hermione in a hushedvoice.

Ron had lowered his leaflet on jobs in the cultivatedfungus trade and was watching the conversationwarily.

“I don’t think so,” said Harry, shrugging.

“And how are you going to get in there in the firstplace?”

Harry was ready for this question.

“Sirius’s knife,” he said.

Page | 840Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Excuse me?”

“Christmas before last Sirius gave me a knife that’llopen any lock,” said Harry. “So even if she’sbewitched the door so Alohomora won’t work, which Ibet she has —”

“What do you think about this?” Hermione demandedof Ron, and Harry was reminded irresistibly of Mrs.Weasley appealing to her husband during Harry’s firstdinner in Grimmauld Place.

“I dunno,” said Ron, looking alarmed at being askedto give an opinion. “If Harry wants to do it, it’s up tohim, isn’t it?”

“Spoken like a true friend and Weasley,” said Fred,clapping Ron hard on the back. “Right, then. We’rethinking of doing it tomorrow, just after lessons,because it should cause maximum impact ifeverybody’s in the corridors — Harry, we’ll set it off inthe east wing somewhere, draw her right away fromher own office — I reckon we should be able toguarantee you, what, twenty minutes?” he said,looking at George.

“Easy,” said George.

“What sort of diversion is it?” asked Ron.

“You’ll see, little bro,” said Fred, as he and George gotup again. “At least, you will if you trot along toGregory the Smarmy’s corridor round about fiveo’clock tomorrow.”

Harry awoke very early the next day, feeling almost asanxious as he had done on the morning of his hearingat the Ministry of Magic. It was not only the prospectof breaking into Umbridge’s office and using her fire

Page | 841Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

to speak to Sirius that was making him feel nervous,though that was certainly bad enough — today alsohappened to be the first time he would be in closeproximity with Snape since Snape had thrown himout of his office, as they had Potions that day.

After lying in bed for a while thinking about the dayahead, Harry got up very quietly and moved across tothe window beside Neville’s bed, staring out on a trulyglorious morning. The sky was a clear, misty,opalescent blue. Directly ahead of him, Harry couldsee the towering beech tree below which his fatherhad once tormented Snape. He was not sure whatSirius could possibly say to him that would make upfor what he had seen in the Pensieve, but he wasdesperate to hear Sirius’s own account of what hadhappened, to know of any mitigating factors theremight have been, any excuse at all for his father’sbehavior...

Something caught Harry’s attention: movement onthe edge of the Forbidden Forest. Harry squinted intothe sun and saw Hagrid emerging from between thetrees. He seemed to be limping. As Harry watched,Hagrid staggered to the door of his cabin anddisappeared inside it. Harry watched the cabin forseveral minutes. Hagrid did not emerge again, butsmoke furled from the chimney, so Hagrid could notbe so badly injured that he was unequal to stokingthe fire...

Harry turned away from the window, headed back tohis trunk, and started to dress.

With the prospect of forcing entry into Umbridge’soffice ahead, Harry had never expected the day to be arestful one, but he had not reckoned on Hermione’salmost continual attempts to dissuade him from whathe was planning to do at five o’clock. For the first timePage | 842Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

ever, she was at least as inattentive to ProfessorBinns in History of Magic as Harry and Ron were,keeping up a stream of whispered admonitions thatHarry tried very hard to ignore.

"... and if she does catch you there, apart from beingexpelled, shell be able to guess you’ve been talking toSnuffles and this time I expect she’ll force you todrink Veritaserum and answer her questions...”

“Hermione,” said Ron in a low and indignant voice,“are you going to stop telling Harry off and listen toBinns, or am I going to have to take notes instead?”

“You take notes for a change, it won’t kill you!”

By the time they reached the dungeons, neither Harrynor Ron was speaking to Hermione any longer.Undeterred, she took advantage of their silence tomaintain an uninterrupted flow of dire warnings, alluttered under her breath in a vehement hiss thatcaused Seamus to waste five whole minutes checkinghis cauldron for leaks.

Snape, meanwhile, seemed to have decided to act asthough Harry were invisible. Harry was, of course,well used to this tactic, as it was one of UncleVernon’s favorites, and on the whole was grateful hehad to suffer nothing worse. In fact, compared towhat he usually had to endure from Snape in the wayof taunts and snide remarks, he found the newapproach something of an improvement and waspleased to find that when left well alone, he was ableto concoct an Invigoration Draught quite easily. At theend of the lesson he scooped some of the potion into aflask, corked it, and took it up to Snape’s desk formarking, feeling that he might at last have scraped anE.

Page | 843Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He had just turned away when he heard a smashingnoise; Malfoy gave a gleeful yell of laughter. Harrywhipped around again. His potion sample lay inpieces on the floor, and Snape was watching him witha look of gloating pleasure.

“Whoops,” he said softly. “Another zero, then, Potter

Harry was too incensed to speak. He strode back tohis cauldron, intending to fill another flask and forceSnape to mark it, but saw to his horror that the restof the contents had vanished.

“I’m sorry!” said Hermione with her hands over hermouth. “I’m really sorry, Harry, I thought you’dfinished, so I cleared up!”

Harry could not bring himself to answer. When thebell rang he hurried out of the dungeon without abackward glance and made sure that he foundhimself a seat between Neville and Seamus for lunchso that Hermione could not start nagging him aboutusing Umbridge’s office again.

He was in such a bad mood by the time that he got toDivination that he had quite forgotten his careerappointment with Professor McGonagall,remembering only when Ron asked him why hewasn’t in her office. He hurtled back upstairs andarrived out of breath, only a few minutes late.

“Sorry, Professor,” he panted, as he closed the door. “Iforgot...”

“No matter, Potter,” she said briskly, but as shespoke, somebody else sniffed from the corner. Harrylooked around.

Page | 844Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Professor Umbridge was sitting there, a clipboard onher knee, a fussy little pie-frill around her neck, and asmall, horribly smug smile on her face.

“Sit down, Potter,” said Professor McGonagall tersely.Her hands shook slightly as she shuffled the manypamphlets littering her desk.

Harry sat down with his back to Umbridge and didhis best to pretend he could not hear the scratchingof her quill on her clipboard.

“Well, Potter, this meeting is to talk over any careerideas you might have, and to help you decide whichsubjects you should continue into sixth and seventhyears,” said Professor McGonagall. “Have you had anythoughts about what you would like to do after youleave Hogwarts?”

“Er,” said Harry.

He was finding the scratching noise from behind himvery distracting.

“Yes?” Professor McGonagall prompted Harry.

“Well, I thought of, maybe, being an Auror,” Harrymumbled.

“You’d need top grades for that,” said ProfessorMcGonagall, extracting a small, dark leaflet fromunder the mass on her desk and opening it. “They askfor a minimum of five N.E.W.T.s, and nothing under‘Exceeds Expectations’ grade, I see. Then you wouldbe required to undergo a stringent series of characterand aptitude tests at the Auror office. It’s a difficultcareer path, Potter; they only take the best. In fact, Idon’t think anybody has been taken on in the lastthree years.”

Page | 845Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

At this moment Professor Umbridge gave a very tinycough, as though she was trying to see how quietlyshe could do it. Professor McGonagall ignored her.

“You’ll want to know which subjects you ought totake, I suppose?” she went on, talking a little moreloudly than before.

“Yes,” said Harry. “Defense Against the Dark Arts, Isuppose?”

“Naturally,” said Professor McGonagall crisply. “Iwould also advise —”

Professor Umbridge gave another cough, a little moreaudible this time. Professor McGonagall closed hereyes for a moment, opened them again, andcontinued as though nothing had happened.

“I would also advise Transfiguration, because Aurorsfrequently need to Transfigure or Untransfigure intheir work. And I ought to tell you now, Potter, that Ido not accept students into my N.E.W.T. classesunless they have achieved ‘Exceeds Expectations’ orhigher at Ordinary Wizarding Level. I’d say you’reaveraging ‘Acceptable’ at the moment, so you’ll needto put in some good hard work before the exams tostand a chance of continuing. Then you ought to doCharms, always useful, and Potions. Yes, Potter,Potions,” she added, with the merest flicker of a smile.“Poisons and antidotes are essential study for Aurors.And I must tell you that Professor Snape absolutelyrefuses to take students who get anything other than‘Outstanding’ in their O.W.L.s, so —”

Professor Umbridge gave her most pronounced coughyet.

Page | 846Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“May I offer you a cough drop, Dolores?” ProfessorMcGonagall asked curtly, without looking at ProfessorUmbridge.

“Oh no, thank you very much,” said Umbridge, withthat simpering laugh Harry hated so much. “I justwondered whether I could make the teensiestinterruption, Minerva?”

“I daresay you 11 find you can,” said ProfessorMcGonagall through tightly gritted teeth.

“I was just wondering whether Mr. Potter has quitethe temperament for an Auror?” said ProfessorUmbridge sweetly.

“Were you?” said Professor McGonagall haughtily.“Well, Potter,” she continued, as though there hadbeen no interruption, “if you are serious in thisambition, I would advise you to concentrate hard onbringing your Transfiguration and Potions up toscratch. I see Professor Flitwick has graded youbetween Acceptable’ and ‘Exceeds Expectations’ forthe last two years, so your Charm work seemssatisfactory; as for Defense Against the Dark Arts,your marks have been generally high, Professor Lupinin particular thought you — are you quite sure youwouldn’t like a cough drop, Dolores?”

“Oh, no need, thank you, Minerva,” simperedProfessor Umbridge, who had just coughed herloudest yet. “I was just concerned that you might nothave Harry’s most recent Defense Against the DarkArts marks in front of you. I’m quite sure I slipped ina note ...”

“What, this thing?” said Professor McGonagall in atone of revulsion, as she pulled a sheet of pinkparchment from between the leaves of Harry’s folder.

Page | 847Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She glanced down it, her eyebrows slightly raised,then placed it back into the folder without comment.

“Yes, as I was saying, Potter, Professor Lupin thoughtyou showed a pronounced aptitude for the subject,and obviously for an Auror —”

“Did you not understand my note, Minerva?” askedProfessor Umbridge in honeyed tones, quite forgettingto cough.

“Of course I understood it,” said ProfessorMcGonagall, her teeth clenched so tightly that thewords came out a little muffled.

“Well, then, I am confused... I’m afraid I don’t quiteunderstand how you can give Mr. Potter false hopethat —”

“False hope?” repeated Professor McGonagall, stillrefusing to look round at Professor Umbridge. “He hasachieved high marks in all his Defense Against theDark Arts tests —”

“I’m terribly sorry to have to contradict you, Minerva,but as you will see from my note, Harry has beenachieving very poor results in his classes with me —”

“I should have made my meaning plainer,” saidProfessor McGonagall, turning at last to lookUmbridge directly in the eyes. “He has achieved highmarks in all Defense Against the Dark Arts tests setby a competent teacher.”

Professor Umbridge’s smile vanished as suddenly as alightbulb blowing. She sat back in her chair, turned asheet on her clipboard, and began scribbling very fastindeed, her bulging eyes rolling from side to side.

Page | 848Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Professor McGonagall turned back to Harry, her thinnostrils flared, her eyes burning.

“Any questions, Potter?”

“Yes,” said Harry. “What sort of character andaptitude tests do the Ministry do on you, if you getenough N.E.W.T.s?”

“Well, you’ll need to demonstrate the ability to reactwell to pressure and so forth,” said ProfessorMcGonagall, “perseverance and dedication, becauseAuror training takes a further three years, not tomention very high skills in practical defense. It willmean a lot more study even after you’ve left school, sounless you’re prepared to —”

“I think you’ll also find,” said Umbridge, her voicevery cold now, “that the Ministry looks into therecords of those applying to be Aurors. Their criminalrecords.”

“— unless you’re prepared to take even more examsafter Hogwarts, you should really look at another —”

“— which means that this boy has as much chance ofbecoming an Auror as Dumbledore has of everreturning to this school.”

“A very good chance, then,” said ProfessorMcGonagall.

“Potter has a criminal record,” said Umbridge loudly.

“Potter has been cleared of all charges,” said ProfessorMcGonagall, even more loudly.

Professor Umbridge stood up. She was so short thatthis did not make a great deal of difference, but her

Page | 849Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

fussy, simpering demeanor had given place to a hardfury that made her broad, flabby face look oddlysinister.

“Potter has no chance whatsoever of becoming anAuror!”

Professor McGonagall got to her feet too, and in hercase this was a much more impressive move. Shetowered over Professor Umbridge.

“Potter,” she said in ringing tones, “I will assist you tobecome an Auror if it is the last thing I do! If I have tocoach you nightly I will make sure you achieve therequired results!”

“The Minister of Magic will never employ HarryPotter!” said Umbridge, her voice rising furiously.

“There may well be a new Minister of Magic by thetime Potter is ready to join!” shouted ProfessorMcGonagall.

“Aha!” shrieked Professor Umbridge, pointing astubby finger at McGonagall. “Yes! Yes, yes, yes! Ofcourse! That’s what you want, isn’t it, MinervaMcGonagall? You want Cornelius Fudge replaced byAlbus Dumbledore! You think you’ll be where I am,don’t you, Senior Undersecretary to the Minister andheadmistress to boot!”

“You are raving,” said Professor McGonagall, superblydisdainful. “Potter, that concludes our careerconsultation.”

Harry swung his bag over his shoulder and hurriedout of the room, not daring to look at Umbridge. Hecould hear her and Professor McGonagall continuing

Page | 850Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

to shout at each other all the way back along thecorridor.

Professor Umbridge was still breathing as though shehad just run a race when she strode into theirDefense Against the Dark Arts lesson that afternoon.

“I hope you’ve thought better of what you wereplanning to do, Harry,” Hermione whispered, themoment they had opened their books to chapterthirty-four (“Non-Retaliation and Negotiation”).“Umbridge looks like she’s in a really bad moodalready...”

Every now and then Umbridge shot glowering looks atHarry, who kept his head down, staring at DefensiveMagical Theory, his eyes unfocused, thinking...

He could just imagine Professor McGonagall’sreaction if he were caught trespassing in ProfessorUmbridge’s office mere hours after she had vouchedfor him... There was nothing to stop him simply goingback to Gryffindor Tower and hoping that sometimeduring the next summer holiday he would have achance to ask Sirius about the scene he hadwitnessed in the Pensieve... Nothing, except that thethought of taking this sensible course of action madehim feel as though a lead weight had dropped into hisstomach... And then there was the matter of Fred andGeorge, whose diversion was already planned, not tomention the knife Sirius had given him, which wascurrently residing in his schoolbag along with hisfather’s old Invisibility Cloak...

But the fact remained that if he were caught ...

“Dumbledore sacrificed himself to keep you in school,Harry!” whispered Hermione, raising her book to hide

Page | 851Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

her face from Umbridge. “And if you get thrown outtoday it will all have been for nothing!”

He could abandon the plan and simply learn to livewith the memory of what his father had done on asummer’s day more than twenty years ago...

And then he remembered Sirius in the fire upstairs inthe Gryffindor common room...’’You’re less like yourfather than I thought... The risk would’ve been whatmade it fun for James...”

But did he want to be like his father anymore?

“Harry, don’t do it, please don’t do it!” Hermione saidin anguished tones as the bell rang at the end of theclass.

He did not answer; he did not know what to do. Ronseemed determined to give neither his opinion nor hisadvice. He would not look at Harry, though whenHermione opened her mouth to try dissuading Harrysome more, he said in a low voice, “Give it a rest,okay? He can make up his own mind.”

Harry’s heart beat very fast as he left the classroom.He was halfway along the corridor outside when heheard the unmistakable sounds of a diversion goingoff in the distance. There were screams and yellsreverberating from somewhere above them. Peopleexiting the classrooms all around Harry were stoppingin their tracks and looking up at the ceiling fearfully

Then Umbridge came pelting out of her classroom asfast as her short legs would carry her. Pulling out herwand, she hurried off in the opposite direction: It wasnow or never.

Page | 852Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Harry — please!” said Hermione weakly.

But he had made up his mind — hitching his bagmore securely onto his shoulder he set off at a run,weaving in and out of students now hurrying in theopposite direction, off to see what all the fuss wasabout in the east wing...

Harry reached the corridor where Umbridge’s officewas situated and found it deserted. Dashing behind alarge suit of armor whose helmet creaked around towatch him, he pulled open his bag, seized Sirius’sknife, and donned the Invisibility Cloak. He thencrept slowly and carefully back out from behind thesuit of armor and along the corridor until he reachedUmbridge’s door.

He inserted the blade of the magical knife into thecrack around it and moved it gently up and down,then withdrew it. There was a tiny click, and the doorswung open. He ducked inside the office, closed thedoor quickly behind him, and looked around.

It was empty; nothing was moving except the horriblekittens on the plates continuing to frolic on the wallabove the confiscated broomsticks.

Harry pulled off his cloak and, striding over to thefireplace, found what he was looking for withinseconds: a small box containing glittering Floopowder.

He crouched down in front of the empty grate, hishands shaking. He had never done this before,though he thought he knew how it must work.Sticking his head into the fireplace, he took a largepinch of powder and dropped it onto the logs stackedneatly beneath him. They exploded at once intoemerald-green flames.

Page | 853Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Number twelve, Grimmauld Place!” Harry said loudlyand clearly.

It was one of the most curious sensations he had everexperienced; he had traveled by Floo powder before, ofcourse, but then it had been his entire body that hadspun around and around in the flames through thenetwork of Wizarding fireplaces that stretched overthe country: This time, his knees remained firm uponthe cold floor of Umbridge’s office, and only his headhurtled through the emerald fire...

And then, abruptly as it had begun, the spinningstopped. Feeling rather sick and as though he waswearing an exceptionally hot muffler around his head,Harry opened his eyes to find that he was looking upout of the kitchen fireplace at the long, wooden table,where a man sat poring over a piece of parchment.

“Sirius?”

The man jumped and looked around. It was notSirius, but Lupin.

“Harry!” he said, looking thoroughly shocked. “Whatare you — what’s happened, is everything all right?”

“Yeah,” said Harry. “I just wondered — I mean, I justfancied a — a chat with Sirius.”

“I’ll call him,” said Lupin, getting to his feet, stilllooking perplexed. “He went upstairs to look forKreacher, he seems to be hiding in the attic again...”

And Harry saw Lupin hurry out of the kitchen. Nowhe was left with nothing to look at but the chair andtable legs. He wondered why Sirius had nevermentioned how very uncomfortable it was to speakout of the fire — his knees were already objectingPage | 854Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

painfully to their prolonged contact with Umbridge’shard stone floor.

Lupin returned with Sirius at his heels momentslater.

“What is it?” said Sirius urgently, sweeping his longdark hair out of his eyes and dropping to the groundin front of the fire, so that he and Harry were on alevel; Lupin knelt down too, looking very concerned.“Are you all right? Do you need help?”

“No,” said Harry, “it’s nothing like that... I just wantedto talk ... about my dad...”

They exchanged a look of great surprise, but Harrydid not have time to feel awkward or embarrassed; hisknees were becoming sorer by the second, and heguessed that five minutes had already passed fromthe start of the diversion — George had onlyguaranteed him twenty. He therefore plungedimmediately into the story of what he had seen in thePensieve.

When he had finished, neither Sirius nor Lupin spokefor a moment. Then Lupin said quietly, “I wouldn’tlike you to judge your father on what you saw there,Harry. He was only fifteen —”

“I’m fifteen!” said Harry heatedly.

“Look, Harry,” said Sirius placatingly, “James andSnape hated each other from the moment they seteyes on each other, it was just one of those things,you can understand that, can’t you? I think Jameswas everything Snape wanted to be — he waspopular, he was good at Quidditch, good at prettymuch everything. And Snape was just this littleoddball who was up to his eyes in the Dark Arts andPage | 855Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

James — whatever else he may have appeared to you,Harry — always hated the Dark Arts.”

“Yeah,” said Harry, “but he just attacked Snape for nogood reason, just because — well, just because yousaid you were bored,” he finished with a slightlyapologetic note in his voice.

“I’m not proud of it,” said Sirius quickly.

Lupin looked sideways at Sirius and then said, “Look,Harry, what you’ve got to understand is that yourfather and Sirius were the best in the school atwhatever they did — everyone thought they were theheight of cool — if they sometimes got a bit carriedaway —”

“If we were sometimes arrogant little berks, youmean,” said Sirius.

Lupin smiled.

“He kept messing up his hair,” said Harry in a painedvoice.

Sirius and Lupin laughed.

“I’d forgotten he used to do that,” said Siriusaffectionately.

“Was he playing with the Snitch?” said Lupin eagerly.

“Yeah,” said Harry, watching uncomprehendingly asSirius and Lupin beamed reminiscently. “Well ... Ithought he was a bit of an idiot.”

“Of course he was a bit of an idiot!” said Siriusbracingly. “We were all idiots! Well — not Moony so

Page | 856Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

much,” he said fairly, looking at Lupin, but Lupinshook his head.

“Did I ever tell you to lay off Snape?” he said. “Did Iever have the guts to tell you I thought you were outof order?”

“Yeah, well,” said Sirius, “you made us feel ashamedof ourselves sometimes... That was something...”

“And,” said Harry doggedly, determined to sayeverything that was on his mind now he was here, “hekept looking over at the girls by the lake, hoping theywere watching him!”

“Oh, well, he always made a fool of himself wheneverLily was around,” said Sirius, shrugging. “He couldn’tstop himself showing off whenever he got near her.”

“How come she married him?” Harry asked miserably.“She hated him!”

“Nah, she didn’t,” said Sirius.

“She started going out with him in seventh year,” saidLupin.

“Once James had deflated his head a bit,” said Sirius.

“And stopped hexing people just for the fun of it,” saidLupin.

“Even Snape?” said Harry.

“Well,” said Lupin slowly, “Snape was a special case. Imean, he never lost an opportunity to curse James,so you couldn’t really expect James to take that lyingdown, could you?”

Page | 857Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“And my mum was okay with that?”

“She didn’t know too much about it, to tell you thetruth,” said Sirius. “I mean, James didn’t take Snapeon dates with her and jinx him in front of her, didhe?”

Sirius frowned at Harry, who was still lookingunconvinced.

“Look,” he said, “your father was the best friend I everhad, and he was a good person. A lot of people areidiots at the age of fifteen. He grew out of it.”

“Yeah, okay,” said Harry heavily. “I just never thoughtI’d feel sorry for Snape.”

“Now you mention it,” said Lupin, a faint creasebetween his eyebrows, “how did Snape react when hefound you’d seen all this?”

“He told me he’d never teach me Occlumency again,”said Harry indifferently, “like that’s a big disappoint

“He WHAT?” shouted Sirius, causing Harry to jumpand inhale a mouthful of ashes.

“Are you serious, Harry?” said Lupin quickly. “He’sstopped giving you lessons?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, surprised at what he considered agreat overreaction. “But it’s okay, I don’t care, it’s abit of a relief to tell you the —”

“I’m coming up there to have a word with Snape!” saidSirius forcefully and he actually made to stand up,but Lupin wrenched him back down again.

Page | 858Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“If anyone’s going to tell Snape it will be me!” he saidfirmly. “But Harry, first of all, you’re to go back toSnape and tell him that on no account is he to stopgiving you lessons — when Dumbledore hears —”

“I can’t tell him that, he’d kill me!” said Harry,outraged. “You didn’t see him when we got out of thePensieve —”

“Harry, there is nothing so important as you learningOcclumency!” said Lupin sternly. “Do you understandme? Nothing!”

“Okay, okay,” said Harry, thoroughly discomposed,not to mention annoyed. “I’ll ... I’ll try and saysomething to him... But it won’t be ...”

He fell silent. He could hear distant footsteps.

“Is that Kreacher coming downstairs?”

“No,” said Sirius, glancing behind him. “It must besomebody your end ...”

Harry’s heart skipped several beats.

“I’d better go!” he said hastily and he pulled his headbackward out of Grimmauld Place’s fire. For amoment his head seemed to be revolving on hisshoulders, and then he found himself kneeling infront of Umbridge’s fire with his head firmly back on,watching the emerald flames flicker and die.

“Quickly, quickly!” he heard a wheezy voice mutterright outside the office door. “Ah, she’s left it open...”

Harry dived for the Invisibility Cloak and had justmanaged to pull it back over himself when Filch burstinto the office. He looked absolutely delighted about

Page | 859Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

something and was talking to himself feverishly as hecrossed the room, pulled open a drawer in Umbridge’sdesk, and began rifling through the papers inside it.

“Approval for Whipping ... Approval for Whipping ... Ican do it at last... They’ve had it coming to them foryears...”

He pulled out a piece of parchment, kissed it, thenshuffled rapidly back out of the door, clutching it tohis chest.

Harry leapt to his feet and, making sure that he hadhis bag and the Invisibility Cloak was completelycovering him, he wrenched open the door and hurriedout of the office after Filch, who was hobbling alongfaster than Harry had ever seen him go.

One landing down from Umbridge’s office and Harrythought it was safe to become visible again; he pulledoff the cloak, shoved it in his bag and hurriedonward. There was a great deal of shouting andmovement coming from the entrance hall. He randown the marble staircase and found what looked likemost of the school assembled there.

It was just like the night when Trelawney had beensacked. Students were standing all around the wallsin a great ring (some of them, Harry noticed, coveredin a substance that looked very like Stinksap);teachers and ghosts were also in the crowd.

Prominent among the onlookers were members of theInquisitorial Squad, who were all lookingexceptionally pleased with themselves, and Peeves,who was bobbing overhead, gazed down upon Fredand George, who stood in the middle of the floor withthe unmistakable look of two people who had justbeen cornered.

Page | 860Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“So!” said Umbridge triumphantly, whom Harryrealized was standing just a few stairs in front of him,once more looking down upon her prey. “So ... youthink it amusing to turn a school corridor into aswamp, do you?”

“Pretty amusing, yeah,” said Fred, looking back up ather without the slightest sign of fear.

Filch elbowed his way closer to Umbridge, almostcrying with happiness.

“I’ve got the form, Headmistress,” he said hoarsely,waving the piece of parchment Harry had just seenhim take from her desk. “I’ve got the form and I’ve gotthe whips waiting... Oh, let me do it now...”

“Very good, Argus,” she said. “You two,” she went on,gazing down at Fred and George, “are about to learnwhat happens to wrongdoers in my school.”

“You know what?” said Fred. “I don’t think we are.”

He turned to his twin.

“George,” said Fred, “I think we’ve outgrown full-timeeducation.”

“Yeah, I’ve been feeling that way myself,” said Georgelightly.

“Time to test our talents in the real world, d’youreckon?” asked Fred.

“Definitely,” said George.

And before Umbridge could say a word, they raisedtheir wands and said together, “Accio BroomsV’

Page | 861Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry heard a loud crash somewhere in the distance.Looking to his left he ducked just in time — Fred andGeorge’s broomsticks, one still trailing the heavychain and iron peg with which Umbridge had fastenedthem to the wall, were hurtling along the corridortoward their owners. They turned left, streaked downthe stairs, and stopped sharply in front of the twins,the chain clattering loudly on the flagged stone floor.

“We won’t be seeing you,” Fred told ProfessorUmbridge, swinging his leg over his broomstick.

“Yeah, don’t bother to keep in touch,” said George,mounting his own.

Fred looked around at the assembled students, andat the silent, watchful crowd.

“If anyone fancies buying a Portable Swamp, asdemonstrated upstairs, come to number ninety-three,Diagon Alley — Weasleys’ Wizarding Wheezes,” hesaid in a loud voice. “Our new premises!”

“Special discounts to Hogwarts students who swearthey’re going to use our products to get rid of this oldbat,” added George, pointing at Professor Umbridge.

“STOP THEM!” shrieked Umbridge, but it was too late.As the Inquisitorial Squad closed in, Fred and Georgekicked off from the floor, shooting fifteen feet into theair, the iron peg swinging dangerously below. Fredlooked across the hall at the poltergeist bobbing onhis level above the crowd.

“Give her hell from us, Peeves.”

And Peeves, whom Harry had never seen take anorder from a student before, swept his belled hat fromhis head and sprang to a salute as Fred and George

Page | 862Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

wheeled about to tumultuous applause from thestudents below and sped out of the open front doorsinto the glorious sunset.

Page | 863Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





GRAWP

The story of Fred and George’s flight to freedom wasretold so often over the next few days that Harrycould tell it would soon become the stuff of Hogwartslegend. Within a week, even those who had beeneyewitnesses were half-convinced that they had seenthe twins dive-bomb Umbridge on their brooms,pelting her with Dungbombs before zooming out ofthe doors. In the immediate aftermath of theirdeparture there was a great wave of talk aboutcopying them, so that Harry frequently heardstudents saying things like, “Honestly, some days Ijust feel like jumping on my broom and leaving thisplace,” or else, “One more lesson like that and I mightjust do a Weasley...”

Fred and George had made sure that nobody waslikely to forget them very soon. For one thing, theyhad not left instructions on how to remove the swampthat now filled the corridor on the fifth floor of theeast wing. Umbridge and Filch had been observedtrying different means of removing it but withoutsuccess. Eventually the area was roped off and Filch,Page | 864Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

gnashing his teeth furiously, was given the task ofpunting students across it to their classrooms. Harrywas certain that teachers like McGonagall or Flitwickcould have removed the swamp in an instant, but justas in the case of Fred and George’s Wildfire Whiz-Bangs, they seemed to prefer to watch Umbridgestruggle.

Then there were the two large broom-shaped holes inUmbridge’s office door, through which Fred andGeorge’s Cleansweeps had smashed to rejoin theirmasters. Filch fitted a new door and removed Harry’sFirebolt to the dungeons where, it was rumored,Umbridge had set an armed security troll to guard it.However, her troubles were far from over.

Inspired by Fred and George’s example, a greatnumber of students were now vying for the newlyvacant positions of Troublemakers-in-Chief. In spiteof the new door, somebody managed to slip a hairy-snouted niffler into Umbridge’s office, which promptlytore the place apart in its search for shiny objects,leapt on Umbridge on her re-entrance, and tried tognaw the rings off her stubby fingers. Dungbombsand Stinkpellets were dropped so frequently in thecorridors that it became the new fashion for studentsto perform Bubble-Head Charms on themselvesbefore leaving lessons, which ensured them a supplyof fresh clean air, even though it gave them all thepeculiar appearance of wearing upside-down goldfishbowls on their heads.

Filch prowled the corridors with a horsewhip ready inhis hands, desperate to catch miscreants, but theproblem was that there were now so many of themthat he did not know which way to turn. TheInquisitorial Squad were attempting to help him, butodd things kept happening to its members.

Warrington of the Slytherin Quidditch team reportedPage | 865Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

to the hospital wing with a horrible skin complaintthat made him look as though he had been coated incornflakes. Pansy Parkinson, to Hermione’s delight,missed all her lessons the following day, as she hadsprouted antlers.

Meanwhile it became clear just how many SkivingSnackboxes Fred and George had managed to sellbefore leaving Hogwarts. Umbridge only had to enterher classroom for the students assembled there tofaint, vomit, develop dangerous fevers, or else spoutblood from both nostrils. Shrieking with rage andfrustration she attempted to trace the mysterioussymptoms to their source, but the students told herstubbornly they were suffering “Umbridge-itis.” Afterputting four successive classes in detention andfailing to discover their secret she was forced to giveup and allow the bleeding, swooning, sweating, andvomiting students to leave her classes in droves.

But not even the users of the Snackboxes couldcompete with that master of chaos, Peeves, whoseemed to have taken Fred’s parting words deeply toheart. Cackling madly, he soared through the school,upending tables, bursting out of blackboards, andtoppling statues and vases. Twice he shut Mrs. Norrisinside suits of armor, from which she was rescued,yowling loudly, by the furious caretaker. He smashedlanterns and snuffed out candles, juggled burningtorches over the heads of screaming students, causedneatly stacked piles of parchment to topple into firesor out of windows, flooded the second floor when hepulled off all the taps in the bathrooms, dropped abag of tarantulas in the middle of the Great Hallduring breakfast and, whenever he fancied a break,spent hours at a time floating along after Umbridgeand blowing loud raspberries every time she spoke.

Page | 866Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

None of the staff but Filch seemed to be stirringthemselves to help her. Indeed, a week after Fred andGeorge’s departure Harry witnessed ProfessorMcGonagall walking right past Peeves, who wasdeterminedly loosening a crystal chandelier, andcould have sworn he heard her tell the poltergeist outof the corner of her mouth, “It unscrews the otherway.”

To cap matters, Montague had still not recovered fromhis sojourn in the toilet. He remained confused anddisorientated and his parents were to be observed oneTuesday morning striding up the front drive, lookingextremely angry.

“Should we say something?” said Hermione in aworried voice, pressing her cheek against the Charmswindow so that she could see Mr. and Mrs. Montaguemarching inside. “About what happened to him? Incase it helps Madam Pomfrey cure him?”

“ ’Course not, he’ll recover,” said Ron indifferently.

“Anyway, more trouble for Umbridge, isn’t it?” saidHarry in a satisfied voice.

He and Ron both tapped the teacups they weresupposed to be charming with their wands. Harry’sspouted four very short legs that would not reach thedesk and wriggled pointlessly in midair. Ron’s grewfour very thin spindly legs that hoisted the cup off thedesk with great difficulty, trembled for a few seconds,then folded, causing the cup to crack into two.

“Reparo\” said Hermione quickly, mending Ron’s cupwith a wave of her wand. “That’s all very well, butwhat if Montague’s permanently injured?”

Page | 867Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Who cares?” said Ron irritably, while his teacupstood drunkenly again, trembling violently at theknees. “Montague shouldn’t have tried to take allthose points from Gryffindor, should he? If you wantto worry about anyone, Hermione, worry about me!”

“You?” she said, catching her teacup as it scamperedhappily away across the desk on four sturdy littlewillow-patterned legs and replacing it in front of her.“Why should I be worried about you?”

“When Mum’s next letter finally gets throughUmbridge’s screening process,” said Ron bitterly, nowholding his cup up while its frail legs tried feebly tosupport its weight, “I’m going to be in deep trouble. Iwouldn’t be surprised if she’s sent a Howler again.”

“But —”

“It’ll be my fault Fred and George left, you wait,” saidRon darkly. “She’ll say I should’ve stopped themleaving, I should’ve grabbed the ends of their broomsand hung on or something... Yeah, it’ll be all myfault...”

“Well, if she does say that it’ll be very unfair, youcouldn’t have done anything! But I’m sure she won’t, Imean, if it’s really true they’ve got premises in DiagonAlley now, they must have been planning this forages...”

“Yeah, but that’s another thing, how did they getpremises?” said Ron, hitting his teacup so hard withhis wand that its legs collapsed again and it laytwitching before him. “It’s a bit dodgy, isn’t it? They’llneed loads of Galleons to afford the rent on a place inDiagon Alley, she’ll want to know what they’ve beenup to, to get their hands on that sort of gold...”

Page | 868Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, yes, that occurred to me too,” said Hermione,allowing her teacup to jog in neat little circles aroundHarry’s, whose stubby little legs were still unable totouch the desktop. “I’ve been wondering whetherMundungus has persuaded them to sell stolen goodsor something awful...”

“He hasn’t,” said Harry curtly.

“How do you know?” said Ron and Hermione together.

“Because —” Harry hesitated, but the moment toconfess finally seemed to have come. There was nogood to be gained in keeping silent if it meant anyonesuspected that Fred and George were criminals.“Because they got the gold from me. I gave them myTriwizard winnings last June.”

There was a shocked silence, then Hermione’s teacupjogged right over the edge of the desk and smashed onthe floor.

“Oh, Harry, you didn’t” she said.

“Yes, I did,” said Harry mutinously. “And I don’t regretit either — I didn’t need the gold, and they’ll be greatat a joke shop...”

“But this is excellent!” said Ron, looking thrilled. “It’sall your fault, Harry — Mum can’t blame me at all!

Can I tell her?”

“Yeah, I suppose you’d better,” said Harry dully. “’Specially if she thinks they’re receiving stolencauldrons or something...”

Hermione said nothing at all for the rest of the lesson,but Harry had a shrewd suspicion that her self-restraint was bound to crack before long. Sure

Page | 869Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

enough, once they had left the castle for break andwere standing around in the weak May sunshine, shefixed Harry with a beady eye and opened her mouthwith a determined air.

Harry interrupted her before she had even started.

“It’s no good nagging me, it’s done,” he said firmly.“Fred and George have got the gold — spent a goodbit of it too, by the sounds of it — and I can’t get itback from them and I don’t want to. So save yourbreath, Hermione.”

“I wasn’t going to say anything about Fred andGeorge!” she said in an injured voice.

Ron snorted disbelievingly and Hermione threw him avery dirty look.

“No, I wasn’t!” she said angrily. “As a matter of fact, Iwas going to ask Harry when he’s going to go back toSnape and ask for Occlumency lessons again!”

Harry’s heart sank. Once they had exhausted thesubject of Fred and George’s dramatic departure,which admittedly had taken many hours, Ron andHermione had wanted to hear news of Sirius. AsHarry had not confided in them the reason he hadwanted to talk to Sirius in the first place, it had beenhard to think of things to tell them. He had ended upsaying to them truthfully that Sirius wanted Harry toresume Occlumency lessons. He had been regrettingthis ever since; Hermione would not let the subjectdrop and kept reverting to it when Harry leastexpected it.

“You can’t tell me you’ve stopped having funnydreams,” Hermione said now, “because Ron told melast night you were muttering in your sleep again...”

Page | 870Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry threw Ron a furious look. Ron had the grace tolook ashamed of himself.

“You were only muttering a bit,” he mumbledapologetically. “Something about ‘just a bit farther.’ ”

“I dreamed I was watching you lot play Quidditch,”Harry lied brutally. “I was trying to get you to stretchout a bit farther to grab the Quaffle.”

Ron’s ears went red. Harry felt a kind of vindictivepleasure: He had not, of course, dreamed anything ofthe sort.

Last night he had once again made the journey alongthe Department of Mysteries corridor. He had passedthrough the circular room, then the room full ofclicking and dancing light, until he found himselfagain inside that cavernous room full of shelves onwhich were ranged dusty glass spheres...

He had hurried straight toward row number ninety-seven, turned left, and ran along it... It had probablybeen then that he had spoken aloud... Just a bitfarther ... for he could feel his conscious selfstruggling to wake ... and before he had reached theend of the row, he had found himself lying in bedagain, gazing up at the canopy of his four-poster.

“You are trying to block your mind, aren’t you?” saidHermione, looking beadily at Harry. “You are keepinggoing with your Occlumency?”

“Of course I am,” said Harry, trying to sound asthough this question was insulting, but not quitemeeting her eye. The truth was that he was sointensely curious about what was hidden in thatroom full of dusty orbs that he was quite keen for thedreams to continue.

Page | 871Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The problem was that with just under a month to gountil the exams and every free moment devoted tostudying, his mind seemed saturated withinformation when he went to bed so that he found itvery difficult to get to sleep at all. When he did, hisoverwrought brain presented him most nights withstupid dreams about the exams. He also suspectedthat part of his mind — the part that often spoke inHermione’s voice — now felt guilty on the occasions itstrayed down that corridor ending in the black door,and sought to wake him before he could reachjourney’s end.

“You know,” said Ron, whose ears were still flamingred, “if Montague doesn’t recover before Slytherin playHufflepuff, we might be in with a chance of winningthe Cup.”

“Yeah, I s’pose so,” said Harry, glad of a change ofsubject.

“I mean, we’ve won one, lost one — if Slytherin lose toHufflepuff next Saturday —”

“Yeah, that’s right,” said Harry, losing track of whathe was agreeing to: Cho Chang had just walkedacross the courtyard, determinedly not looking athim.

The final match of the Quidditch season, Gryffindorversus Ravenclaw, was to take place on the lastweekend of May. Although Slytherin had beennarrowly defeated by Hufflepuff in their last match,Gryffindor was not daring to hope for victory, duemainly (though of course nobody said it to him) toRon’s abysmal goalkeeping record. He, however,seemed to have found a new optimism.

Page | 872Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I mean, I can’t get any worse, can I?” he told Harryand Hermione grimly over breakfast on the morningof the match. “Nothing to lose now, is there?”

“You know,” said Hermione, as she and Harry walkeddown to the pitch a little later in the midst of a veryexcitable crowd, “I think Ron might do better withoutFred and George around. They never exactly gave hima lot of confidence...”

Luna Lovegood overtook them with what appeared tobe a live eagle perched on top of her head.

“Oh gosh, I forgot!” said Hermione, watching the eagleflapping its wings as Luna walked serenely past agroup of cackling and pointing Slytherins. “Cho willbe playing, won’t she?”

Harry, who had not forgotten this, merely grunted.

They found seats in the topmost row of the stands. Itwas a fine, clear day. Ron could not wish for better,and Harry found himself hoping against hope thatRon would not give the Slytherins cause for morerousing choruses of “Weasley Is Our King.”

Lee Jordan, who had been very dispirited since Fredand George had left, was commentating as usual. Asthe teams zoomed out onto the pitches he named theplayers with something less than his usual gusto.

"... Bradley ... Davies ... Chang,” he said, and Harryfelt his stomach perform, less of a back flip, more afeeble lurch as Cho walked out onto the pitch, hershiny black hair rippling in the slight breeze. He wasnot sure what he wanted to happen anymore, exceptthat he could not stand any more rows. Even thesight of her chatting animatedly to Roger Davies as

Page | 873Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

they prepared to mount their brooms caused him onlya slight twinge of jealousy.

“And they’re off!” said Lee. “And Davies takes theQuaffle immediately, Ravenclaw Captain Davies withthe Quaffle, he dodges Johnson, he dodges Bell, hedodges Spinnet as well... He’s going straight for goal!He’s going to shoot — and — and —” Lee swore veryloudly. “And he’s scored.”

Harry and Hermione groaned with the rest of theGryffindors. Predictably, horribly, the Slytherins onthe other side of the stands began to sing:

Weasley cannot save a thing,

He cannot block a single ring ...

“Harry,” said a hoarse voice in Harry’s ear. “Hermione

Harry looked around and saw Hagrid’s enormousbearded face sticking between the seats; apparentlyhe had squeezed his way all along the row behind, forthe first and second years he had just passed had aruffled, flattened look about them. For some reason,Hagrid was bent double as though anxious not to beseen, though he was still at least four feet taller thaneverybody else.

“Listen,” he whispered, “can yeh come with me? Now?While ev’ryone’s watchin’ the match?”

“Er ... can’t it wait, Hagrid?” asked Harry. “Till thematch is over?

“No,” said Hagrid. “No, Harry, it’s gotta be now ...while ev’ryone’s lookin’ the other way... Please?”

Page | 874Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid’s nose was gently dripping blood. His eyeswere both blackened. Harry had not seen him thisclose up since his return to the school; he lookedutterly woebegone.

“ ’Course,” said Harry at once, “ ’course we’ll come...”

He and Hermione edged back along their row of seats,causing much grumbling among the students whohad to stand up for them. The people in Hagrid’s rowwere not complaining, merely attempting to makethemselves as small as possible.

“I ’ppreciate this, you two, I really do,” said Hagrid asthey reached the stairs. He kept looking aroundnervously as they descended toward the lawn below.

“I jus’ hope she doesn’ notice us goin’...”

“You mean Umbridge?” said Harry. “She won’t, she’sgot her whole Inquisitorial Squad sitting with her,didn’t you see? She must be expecting trouble at thematch.”

“Yeah, well, a bit o’ trouble wouldn’ hurt,” saidHagrid, pausing to peer around the edge of the standsto make sure the stretch of lawn between there andhis cabin was deserted. “Give us more time ...”

“What is it, Hagrid?” said Hermione, looking up athim with a concerned expression on her face as theyhurried across the lawn toward the edge of the forest.

“Yeh — yeh’ll see in a mo’,” said Hagrid, looking overhis shoulder as a great roar rose from the standsbehind them. “Hey — did someone jus’ score?”

“It’ll be Ravenclaw,” said Harry heavily.

Page | 875Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Good ... good ...” said Hagrid distractedly. “Tha’sgood...”

They had to jog to keep up with him as he strodeacross the lawn, looking around with every other step.When they reached his cabin, Hermione turnedautomatically left toward the front door; Hagrid,however, walked straight past it into the shade of thetrees on the outermost edge of the forest, where hepicked up a crossbow that was leaning against a tree.When he realized they were no longer with him, heturned.

“We’re goin’ in here,” he said, jerking his shaggy headbehind him.

“Into the forest?” said Hermione, perplexed.

“Yeah,” said Hagrid. “C’mon now, quick, before we’respotted!”

Harry and Hermione looked at each other, thenducked into the cover of the trees behind Hagrid, whowas already striding away from them into the greengloom, his crossbow over his arm. Harry andHermione ran to catch up with him.

“Hagrid, why are you armed?” said Harry.

“Jus’ a precaution,” said Hagrid, shrugging hismassive shoulders.

“You didn’t bring your crossbow the day you showedus the thestrals,” said Hermione timidly.

“Nah, well, we weren’ goin’ in so far then,” saidHagrid. “An’ anyway, tha’ was before Firenze left theforest, wasn’ it?”

Page | 876Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Why does Firenze leaving make a difference?” askedHermione curiously.

“ ’Cause the other centaurs are good an’ riled at me,tha’s why,” said Hagrid quietly, glancing around.“They used ter be — well, yeh couldn’ call ’em friendly— but we got on all righ’. Kept ’emselves to ’emselves,bu’ always turned up if I wanted a word. Not anymore

He sighed deeply.

“Firenze said that they’re angry because he went towork for Dumbledore?” Harry asked, tripping on aprotruding root because he was busy watchingHagrid’s profile.

“Yeah,” said Hagrid heavily. “Well, angry doesn’ coverit. Ruddy livid. If I hadn’ stepped in, I reckon they’d’vekicked Firenze ter death —”

“They attacked him?” said Hermione, soundingshocked.

“Yep,” said Hagrid gruffly, forcing his way throughseveral low-hanging branches. “He had half the herdonto him —”

“And you stopped it?” said Harry, amazed andimpressed. “By yourself?”

“ ’Course I did, couldn’t stand by an’ watch ’em killhim, could I?” said Hagrid. “Lucky I was passin’,really ... an’ I’d’ve thought Firenze mightaremembered tha’ before he started sendin’ me stupidwarnin’s!” he added hotly and unexpectedly.

Harry and Hermione looked at each other, startled,but Hagrid, scowling, did not elaborate.

Page | 877Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Anyway,” he said, breathing a little more heavilythan usual, “since then the other centaurs Ve bin lividwith me an’ the trouble is, they’ve got a lot ofinfluence in the forest... Cleverest creatures in here

“Is that why we’re here, Hagrid?” asked Hermione.“The centaurs?”

“Ah no,” said Hagrid, shaking his head dismissively,“no, it’s not them... Well, o’ course, they couldcomplicate the problem, yeah... But yeh’ll see what Imean in a bit...”

On this incomprehensible note he fell silent andforged a little ahead, taking one stride for every threeof theirs, so that they had great trouble keeping upwith him.

The path was becoming increasingly overgrown andthe trees grew so closely together as they walkedfarther and farther into the forest that it was as darkas dusk. They were soon a long way past the clearingwhere Hagrid had shown them the thestrals, butHarry felt no sense of unease until Hagrid steppedunexpectedly off the path and began wending his wayin and out of trees toward the dark heart of the forest.

“Hagrid?” said Harry, fighting his way through thicklyknotted brambles over which Hagrid had steppedeasily and remembering very vividly what hadhappened to him on the other occasions he hadstepped off the forest path. “Where are we going?”

“Bit further,” said Hagrid over his shoulder. “C’mon,Harry... We need ter keep together now...”

It was a great struggle to keep up with Hagrid, whatwith branches and thickets of thorn through which

Page | 878Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid marched as easily as though they werecobwebs, but which snagged Harry and Hermione’srobes, frequently entangling them so severely thatthey had to stop for minutes at a time to freethemselves. Harry’s arms and legs were soon coveredin small cuts and scratches. They were so deep in theforest now that sometimes all Harry could see ofHagrid in the gloom was a massive dark shape aheadof him. Any sound seemed threatening in the muffledsilence. The breaking of a twig echoed loudly and thetiniest rustle of movement, though it might have beenmade by an innocent sparrow, caused Harry to peerthrough the gloom for a culprit. It occurred to himthat he had never managed to get this far into theforest without meeting some kind of creature — theirabsence struck him as rather ominous.

“Hagrid, would it be all right if we lit our wands?” saidHermione quietly.

“Er ... all righ’,” Hagrid whispered back. “In fact ...”

He stopped suddenly and turned around; Hermionewalked right into him and was knocked overbackward. Harry caught her just before she hit theforest floor.

“Maybe we bes’jus’ stop fer a momen’, so I can ... fillyeh in,” said Hagrid. “Before we ge’ there, like.”

“Good!” said Hermione, as Harry set her back on herfeet. They both murmured “Lumos\” and their wandtips ignited. Hagrid’s face swam through the gloom bythe light of the two wavering beams and Harry sawthat he looked nervous and sad again.

“Righ,” said Hagrid. “Well ... see ... the thing is ...”

He took a great breath.

Page | 879Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, there’s a good chance I’m goin’ ter be gettin’ thesack any day now,” he said.

Harry and Hermione looked at each other, then backat him.

“But you’ve lasted this long —” Hermione saidtentatively. “What makes you think —”

“Umbridge reckons it was me that put tha’ niffler inher office.”

“And was it?” said Harry, before he could stophimself.

“No, it ruddy well wasn’!” said Hagrid indignantly.“On’y anythin’ ter do with magical creatures an’ shethinks it’s got somethin’ ter do with me. Yeh knowshe’s bin lookin’ fer a chance ter get rid of me eversince I got back. I don’ wan’ ter go, o’ course, but if itwasn’ fer ... well ... the special circumstances I’mabou’ ter explain to yeh, I’d leave righ now, beforeshe’s go’ the chance ter do it in front o’ the wholeschool, like she did with Trelawney.”

Harry and Hermione both made noises of protest, butHagrid overrode them with a wave of one of hisenormous hands.

“It’s not the end o’ the world, I’ll be able ter helpDumbledore once I’m outta here, I can be useful terthe Order. An’ you lot’ll have Grubbly-Plank, yeh’ll —yeh’ll get through yer exams fine...” His voicetrembled and broke.

“Don’ worry abou’ me,” he said hastily, as Hermionemade to pat his arm. He pulled his enormous spottedhandkerchief from the pocket of his waistcoat andmopped his eyes with it. “Look, I wouldn’ be tellin’ yer

Page | 880Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

this at all if I didn’ have ter. See, if I go ... well, I can’leave withou’ ... withou’ fellin’ someone ... because I’ll— I’ll need you two ter help me. An’ Ron, if he’swillin’.”

“Of course well help you,” said Harry at once. “Whatdo you want us to do?”

Hagrid gave a great sniff and patted Harry wordlesslyon the shoulder with such force that Harry wasknocked sideways into a tree.

“I knew yeh’d say yes,” said Hagrid into hishandkerchief, “but I won’ ... never ... forget ... Well ...c’mon ... jus’ a little bit further through here ... Watchyerselves, now, there’s nettles...”

They walked on in silence for another fifteen minutes.Harry had opened his mouth to ask how much fartherthey had to go when Hagrid threw out his right arm tosignal that they should stop.

“Really easy,” he said softly. “Very quiet, now ...”

They crept forward and Harry saw that they werefacing a large, smooth mound of earth nearly as tallas Hagrid that he thought, with a jolt of dread, wassure to be the lair of some enormous animal. Treeshad been ripped up at the roots all around themound, so that it stood on a bare patch of groundsurrounded by heaps of trunks and boughs thatformed a kind of fence or barricade, behind whichHarry, Hermione, and Hagrid now stood.

“Sleepin’,” breathed Hagrid.

Sure enough, Harry could hear a distant, rhythmicrumbling that sounded like a pair of enormous lungsat work. He glanced sideways at Hermione, who was

Page | 881Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

gazing at the mound with her mouth slightly open.

She looked utterly terrified.

“Hagrid,” she said in a whisper barely audible overthe sound of the sleeping creature, “who is he?”

Harry found this an odd question... “What is it?” wasthe one he had been planning on asking.

“Hagrid, you told us,” said Hermione, her wand nowshaking in her hand, “you told us none of themwanted to come!”

Harry looked from her to Hagrid and then, asrealization hit him, he looked back at the mound witha small gasp of horror.

The great mound of earth, on which he, Hermione,and Hagrid could easily have stood, was movingslowly up and down in time with the deep, gruntingbreathing. It was not a mound at all. It was thecurved back of what was clearly ...

“Well — no — he didn’ want ter come,” said Hagrid,sounding desperate. “But I had ter bring him,Hermione, I had ter!”

“But why?” asked Hermione, who sounded as thoughshe wanted to cry. “Why — what — oh, Hagrid\”

“I knew if I jus’ got him back,” said Hagrid, soundingclose to tears himself, “an’ — an’ taught him a fewmanners — I’d be able ter take him outside an’ showev’ryone he’s harmless!”

“Harmless!” said Hermione shrilly, and Hagrid madefrantic hushing noises with his hands as theenormous creature before them grunted loudly andshifted in its sleep. “He’s been hurting you all this

Page | 882Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

time, hasn’t he? That’s why you’ve had all theseinjuries!”

“He don’ know his own strength!” said Hagridearnestly. “An’ he’s gettin’ better, he’s not fightin’ somuch anymore —”

“So this is why it took you two months to get home!”said Hermione distractedly. “Oh Hagrid, why did youbring him back if he didn’t want to come, wouldn’t hehave been happier with his own people?”

“They were all bullyin’ him, Hermione, ’cause he’s sosmall!” said Hagrid.

“Small?” said Hermione. “Small?”

“Hermione, I couldn’ leave him,” said Hagrid, tearsnow trickling down his bruised face into his beard.“See — he’s my brother!”

Hermione simply stared at him, her mouth open.

“Hagrid, when you say ‘brother,’ ” said Harry slowly,“do you mean — ?”

“Well — half-brother,” amended Hagrid. “Turns outme mother took up with another giant when she leftme dad, an’ she went an’ had Grawp here —”

“Grawp?” said Harry.

“Yeah ... well, tha’s what it sounds like when he sayshis name,” said Hagrid anxiously. “He don’ speak a lotof English... I’ve bin tryin’ ter teach him... Anyway,she don’ seem ter have liked him much more’n sheliked me... See, with giantesses, what counts isproducin’ good big kids, and he’s always been a bit onthe runty side fer a giant — on’y sixteen foot —”

Page | 883Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh yes, tiny!” said Hermione, with a kind ofhysterical sarcasm. “Absolutely minuscule!”

“He was bein’ kicked around by all o’ them — I jus’couldn’ leave him —”

“Did Madame Maxime want to bring him back?”asked Harry.

“She — well, she could see it was right importan’ terme,” said Hagrid, twisting his enormous hands. “Bu’— bu’ she got a bit tired of him after a while, I mustadmit ... so we split up on the journey home... Shepromised not ter tell anyone though...”

“How on earth did you get him back without anyonenoticing?” said Harry.

“Well, tha’s why it took so long, see,” said Hagrid.“Could on’y travel by nigh an’ through wild countryan’ stuff. ’Course, he covers the ground pretty wellwhen he wants ter, but he kep’ wantin’ ter go back...”

“Oh Hagrid, why on earth didn’t you let him!” saidHermione, flopping down onto a ripped-up tree andburying her face in her hands. “What do you thinkyou’re going to do with a violent giant who doesn’teven want to be here!”

“Well, now — Violent’ — tha’s a bit harsh,” saidHagrid, still twisting his hands agitatedly. “I’ll admithe mighta taken a couple o’ swings at me when he’sbin in a bad mood, but he’s gettin’ better, loadsbetter, settlin’down well...”

“What are those ropes for, then?” Harry asked.

He had just noticed ropes thick as saplings stretchingfrom around the trunks of the largest nearby trees

Page | 884Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

toward the place where Grawp lay curled on theground with his back to them.

“You have to keep him tied up?” said Hermionefaintly.

“Well ... yeah ...” said Hagrid, looking anxious. “See —it’s like I say — he doesn’ really know his strength —”

Harry understood now why there had been such asuspicious lack of any other living creature in thispart of the forest.

“So what is it you want Harry and Ron and me to do?”Hermione asked apprehensively.

“Look after him,” said Hagrid croakily. “After I’mgone.”

Harry and Hermione exchanged miserable looks,

Harry uncomfortably aware that he had alreadypromised Hagrid that he would do whatever he asked.

“What — what does that involve, exactly?” Hermioneinquired.

“Not food or anythin’!” said Hagrid eagerly. “He canget his own food, no problem. Birds an’ deer an’ stuff... No, it’s company he needs. If I jus’ knew someonewas carryin’ on tryin’ ter help him a bit ... teachin’him, yeh know ...”

Harry said nothing, but turned to look back at thegigantic form lying asleep on the ground in front ofthem. Grawp had his back to them. Unlike Hagrid,who simply looked like a very oversize human, Grawplooked strangely misshapen. What Harry had taken tobe a vast mossy boulder to the left of the greatearthen mound he now recognized as Grawp’s head.Page | 885Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It was much larger in proportion to the body than ahuman head, almost perfectly round and covered withtightly curling, close-growing hair the color ofbracken. The rim of a single large, fleshy ear wasvisible on top of the head, which seemed to sit, ratherlike Uncle Vernon’s, directly upon the shoulders withlittle or no neck in between. The back, under whatlooked like a dirty brownish smock comprised ofanimal skins sewn roughly together, was very broad,and as Grawp slept, it seemed to strain a little at therough seams of the skins. The legs were curled upunder the body; Harry could see the soles ofenormous, filthy, bare feet, large as sledges, restingone on top of the other on the earthy forest floor.

“You want us to teach him,” Harry said in a hollowvoice. He now understood what Firenze’s warning hadmeant. His attempt is not working. He would do betterto abandon it. Of course, the other creatures who livedin the forest would have heard Hagrid’s fruitlessattempts to teach Grawp English...

“Yeah — even if yeh jus’ talk ter him a bit,” saidHagrid hopefully. “ ’Cause I reckon, if he can talk terpeople, he’ll understand more that we all like himreally, an’ want him to stay...”

Harry looked at Hermione, who peered back at himfrom between the fingers over her face.

“Kind of makes you wish we had Norbert back,doesn’t it?” he said and she gave a very shaky laugh.

“Yeh’ll do it, then?” said Hagrid, who did not seem tohave caught what Harry had just said.

“We’ll ...” said Harry, already bound by his promise.“We’ll try, Hagrid...”

Page | 886Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I knew I could count on yeh, Harry,” Hagrid said,beaming in a very watery way and dabbing at his facewith his handkerchief again. “An’ I don’ wan’ yeh terput yerself out too much, like... I know yeh’ve gotexams... If yeh could jus’ nip down here in yerInvisibility Cloak maybe once a week an’ have a littlechat with him ... I’ll wake him up, then — introduceyou —”

“Wha — no!” said Hermione, jumping up, “Hagrid, no,don’t wake him, really, we don’t need —”

But Hagrid had already stepped over the great trunkin front of them and was proceeding toward Grawp.When he was around ten feet away, he lifted a long,broken bough from the ground, smiled reassuringlyover his shoulder at Harry and Hermione, and thenpoked Grawp hard in the middle of the back with theend of the bough.

The giant gave a roar that echoed around the silentforest. Birds in the treetops overhead rose twitteringfrom their perches and soared away. In front of Harryand Hermione, meanwhile, the gigantic Grawp wasrising from the ground, which shuddered as he placedan enormous hand upon it to push himself onto hisknees and turned his head to see who and what haddisturbed him.

“All righ’, Grawpy?” said Hagrid in a would-be cheeryvoice, backing away with the long bough raised, readyto poke Grawp again. “Had a nice sleep, eh?”

Harry and Hermione retreated as far as they couldwhile still keeping the giant within their sights. Grawpknelt between two trees he had not yet uprooted.

They looked up into his startlingly huge face, whichresembled a gray full moon swimming in the gloom ofthe clearing. It was as though the features had beenPage | 887Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

hewn onto a great stone ball. The nose was stubbyand shapeless, the mouth lopsided and full ofmisshapen yellow teeth the size of half-bricks. Thesmall eyes were a muddy greenish-brown and justnow were half gummed together with sleep. Grawpraised dirty knuckles as big as cricket balls to hiseyes, rubbed vigorously, then, without warning,pushed himself to his feet with surprising speed andagility.

“Oh my ...” Harry heard Hermione squeal, terrified,beside him.

The trees to which the other ends of the ropes aroundGrawp’s wrists and ankles were attached creakedominously. He was, as Hagrid had said, at leastsixteen feet tall. Gazing blearily around, he reachedout a hand the size of a beach umbrella, seized abird’s nest from the upper branches of a toweringpine and turned it upside down with a roar ofapparent displeasure that there was no bird in it —eggs fell like grenades toward the ground and Hagridthrew his arms over his head to protect himself.

“Anyway, Grawpy,” shouted Hagrid, looking upapprehensively in case of further falling eggs, “I’vebrought some friends ter meet yeh. Remember, I toldyeh I might? Remember, when I said I might have tergo on a little trip an’ leave them ter look after yeh fera bit? Remember that, Grawpy?”

But Grawp merely gave another low roar; it was hardto say whether he was listening to Hagrid or whetherhe even recognized the sounds Hagrid was making asspeech. He had now seized the top of the pine treeand was pulling it toward him, evidently for thesimple pleasure of seeing how far it would springback when he let go.

Page | 888Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Now, Grawpy, don’ do that!” shouted Hagrid. “Tha’show you ended up pullin’ up the others —”

And sure enough, Harry could see the earth aroundthe tree’s roots beginning to crack.

“I got company fer yeh!” Hagrid shouted. “Company,see! Look down, yeh big buffoon, I brought yeh somefriends!”

“Oh Hagrid, don’t,” moaned Hermione, but Hagridhad already raised the bough again and gave Grawp’sknee a sharp poke.

The giant let go of the top of the pine tree, whichswayed menacingly and deluged Hagrid with a rain ofneedles, and looked down.

“This,” said Hagrid, hastening over to where Harryand Hermione stood, “is Harry, Grawp! Harry Potter!He migh’ be cornin’ ter visit yeh if I have ter go away,understand?”

The giant had only just realized that Harry andHermione were there. They watched, in greattrepidation, as he lowered his huge boulder of a headso that he could peer blearily at them.

“An’ this is Hermione, see? Her —” Hagrid hesitated.Turning to Hermione he said, “Would yeh mind if hecalled yeh Hermy, Hermione? On’y it’s a difficultname fer him ter remember...”

“No, not at all,” squeaked Hermione.

“This is Hermy, Grawp! An’ she’s gonna be cornin’ an’all! Is’n tha’ nice? Eh? Two friends fer yeh ter —GRAWPY, NO!”

Page | 889Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Grawp’s hand had shot out of nowhere towardHermione — Harry seized her and pulled herbackward behind the tree, so that Grawp’s fistscraped the trunk but closed on thin air.

“BAD BOY, GRAWPY!” Harry heard Hagrid yelling, asHermione clung to Harry behind the tree, shakingand whimpering. “VERY BAD BOY! YEH DON’ GRAB

— OUCH!”

Harry poked his head out from around the trunk andsaw Hagrid lying on his back, his hand over his nose.Grawp, apparently losing interest, had straightenedup again and was again engaged in pulling back thepine as far as it would go.

“Righ’,” said Hagrid thickly, getting up with one handpinching his bleeding nose and the other grasping hiscrossbow. “Well ... there yeh are... Yeh’ve met him an’

— an’ now he’ll know yeh when yeh come back. Yeah...well...”

He looked up at Grawp, who was now pulling backthe pine with an expression of detached pleasure onhis boulderish face; the roots were creaking as heripped them away from the ground...

“Well, I reckon tha’s enough fer one day,” said Hagrid.“We’ll — er — we’ll go back now, shall we?”

Harry and Hermione nodded. Hagrid shouldered hiscrossbow again and, still pinching his nose, led theway back into the trees.

Nobody spoke for a while, not even when they heardthe distant crash that meant Grawp had pulled overthe pine tree at last. Hermione’s face was pale andset. Harry could not think of a single thing to say.What on earth was going to happen when somebodyPage | 890Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

found out that Hagrid had hidden Grawp in theforest? And he had promised that he, Ron, andHermione would continue Hagrid’s totally pointlessattempts to civilize the giant... How could Hagrid,even with his immense capacity to delude himselfthat fanged monsters were lovably harmless, foolhimself that Grawp would ever be fit to mix withhumans?

“Hold it,” said Hagrid abruptly, just as Harry andHermione were struggling through a patch of thickknotgrass behind him. He pulled an arrow out of thequiver over his shoulder and fitted it into thecrossbow. Harry and Hermione raised their wands;now that they had stopped walking, they too couldhear movement close by.

“Oh blimey,” said Hagrid quietly.

“I thought that we told you, Hagrid,” said a deep malevoice, “that you are no longer welcome here?”

A man’s naked torso seemed for an instant to befloating toward them through the dappled green half-light. Then they saw that his waist joined smoothlywith a horse’s chestnut body. This centaur had aproud, high-cheekboned face and long black hair.

Like Hagrid, he was armed: A quiverful of arrows anda long bow were slung over his shoulders.

“How are yeh, Magorian?” said Hagrid warily.

The trees behind the centaur rustled and four or fivemore emerged behind him. Harry recognized theblack-bodied and bearded Bane, whom he had metnearly four years ago on the same night he had metFirenze. Bane gave no sign that he had ever seenHarry before.

Page | 891Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“So,” he said, with a nasty inflection in his voice,before turning immediately to Magorian. “We agreed, Ithink, what we would do if this human showed hisface in the forest again?”

“ This human’ now, am I?” said Hagrid testily. “Jus’fer stoppin’ all of yeh committin’ murder?”

“You ought not to have meddled, Hagrid,” saidMagorian. “Our ways are not yours, nor are our laws.Firenze has betrayed and dishonored us.”

“I dunno how yeh work that out,” said Hagridimpatiently. “He’s done nothin’ except help AlbusDumbledore —”

“Firenze has entered into servitude to humans,” saida gray centaur with a hard, deeply lined face.

“Servitude!” said Hagrid scathingly. “He’s doin’Dumbledore a favor is all —”

“He is peddling our knowledge and secrets amonghumans,” said Magorian quietly. “There can be noreturn from such disgrace.”

“If yeh say so,” said Hagrid, shrugging, “butpersonally I think yeh’re makin’ a big mistake —”

“As are you, human,” said Bane, “coming back intoour forest when we warned you —”

“Now, you listen ter me,” said Hagrid angrily. “I’ll haveless of the ‘our’ forest, if it’s all the same ter you. It’snot up ter you who comes an’ goes in here —”

“No more is it up to you, Hagrid,” said Magoriansmoothly. “I shall let you pass today because you areaccompanied by your young —”

Page | 892Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“They’re not his!” interrupted Bane contemptuously.“Students, Magorian, from up at the school! Theyhave probably already profited from the traitorFirenze’s teachings...”

“Nevertheless,” said Magorian calmly, “the slaughterof foals is a terrible crime... We do not touch theinnocent. Today, Hagrid, you pass. Henceforth, stayaway from this place. You forfeited the friendship ofthe centaurs when you helped the traitor Firenzeescape us.”

“I won’ be kept outta the fores’ by a bunch of muleslike you!” said Hagrid loudly.

“Hagrid,” said Hermione in a high-pitched andterrified voice, as both Bane and the gray centaurpawed at the ground, “let’s go, please lets go!

Hagrid moved forward, but his crossbow was stillraised and his eyes were still fixed threateningly uponMagorian.

“We know what you are keeping in the forest, Hagrid!”Magorian called after them, as the centaurs slippedout of sight. “And our tolerance is waning!”

Hagrid turned and gave every appearance of wantingto walk straight back to Magorian again.

“You’ll tolerate him as long as he’s here, it’s as muchhis forest as yours!” he yelled, while Harry andHermione both pushed with all their might againstHagrid’s moleskin waistcoat in an effort to keep himmoving forward. Still scowling, he looked down; hisexpression changed to mild surprise at the sight ofthem both pushing him. He seemed not to have felt it.

Page | 893Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Calm down, you two,” he said, turning to walk onwhile they panted along behind him. “Ruddy old nagsthough, eh?”

“Hagrid,” said Hermione breathlessly, skirting thepatch of nettles they had passed on their way there,“if the centaurs don’t want humans in the forest, itdoesn’t really look as though Harry and I will be able

“Ah, you heard what they said,” said Hagriddismissively “They wouldn’t hurt foals — I mean,kids. Anyway, we can’ let ourselves be pushed aroundby that lot...”

“Nice try,” Harry murmured to Hermione, who lookedcrestfallen.

At last they rejoined the path and after another tenminutes, the trees began to thin. They were able tosee patches of clear blue sky again and hear, in thedistance, the definite sounds of cheering andshouting.

“Was that another goal?” asked Hagrid, pausing inthe shelter of the trees as the Quidditch stadiumcame into view. “Or d’you reckon the match is over?”

“I don’t know,” said Hermione miserably. Harry sawthat she looked much the worse for wear; her hairwas full of bits of twig and leaves, her robes wereripped in several places and there were numerousscratches on her face and arms. He knew he couldlook little better.

“I reckon it’s over, yeh know!” said Hagrid, stillsquinting toward the stadium. “Look — there’s peoplecornin’ out already — if you two hurry yeh’ll be able

Page | 894Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

ter blend in with the crowd an’ no one’ll know youweren’t there!”

“Good idea,” said Harry. “Well ... see you later, then,Hagrid...”

“I don’t believe him,” said Hermione in a veryunsteady voice, the moment they were out of earshotof Hagrid. “I don’t believe him. I really don’t believehim...”

“Calm down,” said Harry.

“Calm down!” she said feverishly. “A giant! A giant inthe forest! And we’re supposed to give him Englishlessons! Always assuming, of course, we can get pastthe herd of murderous centaurs on the way in andout! I — don’t — believe — him!”

“We haven’t got to do anything yet!” Harry tried toreassure her in a quiet voice, as they joined a streamof jabbering Hufflepuffs heading back toward thecastle. “He’s not asking us to do anything unless hegets chucked out and that might not even happen —”

“Oh come off it, Harry!” said Hermione angrily,stopping dead in her tracks so that the people behindher had to swerve to avoid her. “Of course he’s goingto be chucked out and to be perfectly honest, afterwhat we’ve just seen, who can blame Umbridge?”

There was a pause in which Harry glared at her, andher eyes filled slowly with tears.

“You didn’t mean that,” said Harry quietly.

“No ... well ... all right ... I didn’t,” she said, wipingher eyes angrily. “But why does he have to make lifeso difficult for himself — for us?”

Page | 895Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I dunno —”

Weasley is our King,

Weasley is our King,

He didn’t let the Quaffle in,

Weasley is our King ...

“And I wish they’d stop singing that stupid song,” saidHermione miserably, “haven’t they gloated enough?”

A great tide of students was moving up the slopinglawns from the pitch.

“Oh, let’s get in before we have to meet theSlytherins,” said Hermione.

Weasley can save anything,

He never leaves a single ringThat’s why Gryffindors all sing:

Weasley is our King.

“Hermione ...” said Harry slowly.

The song was growing louder, but it was issuing notfrom a crowd of green-and-silver-clad Slytherins, butfrom a mass of red and gold moving slowly toward thecastle, which was bearing a solitary figure upon itsmany shoulders...

Weasley is our King,

Weasley is our King,

He didn’t let the Quaffle in,

Weasley is our King ...

“No!” said Hermione in a hushed voice.

“YES!” said Harry loudly.

Page | 896Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“HARRY! HERMIONE!” yelled Ron, waving the silverQuidditch Cup in the air and looking quite besidehimself. “WE DID IT! WE WON!”

They beamed up at him as he passed; there was ascrum at the door of the castle and Ron’s head gotrather badly bumped on the lintel, but nobodyseemed to want to put him down. Still singing, thecrowd squeezed itself into the entrance hall and out ofsight. Harry and Hermione watched them go,beaming, until the last echoing strains of “Weasley IsOur King” died away. Then they turned to each other,their smiles fading.

“We’ll save our news till tomorrow, shall we?” saidHarry.

“Yes, all right,” said Hermione wearily. “I’m not in anyhurry...”

They climbed the steps together. At the front doorsboth instinctively looked back at the ForbiddenForest. Harry was not sure whether it was hisimagination or not, but he rather thought he saw asmall cloud of birds erupting into the air over thetreetops in the distance, almost as though the tree inwhich they had been nesting had just been pulled upby the roots.

Page | 897Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





O.W.L.S

Ron’s euphoria at helping Gryffindor scrape theQuidditch Cup was such that he could not settle toanything next day. All he wanted to do was talk overthe match and Harry and Hermione found it verydifficult to find an opening in which to mentionGrawp — not that either of them tried very hard;neither was keen to be the one to bring Ron back toreality in quite such a brutal fashion. As it wasanother fine, warm day, they persuaded him to jointhem in studying under the beech tree on the edge ofthe lake, where they stood less chance of beingoverheard than in the common room. Ron was notparticularly keen on this idea at first; he wasthoroughly enjoying being patted on the back byGryffindors walking past his chair, not to mention theoccasional outbursts of “Weasley Is Our King,” butagreed after a while that some fresh air might do himgood.

They spread their books out in the shade of the beechtree and sat down while Ron talked them through his

Page | 898Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

first save of the match for what felt like the dozenthtime.

“Well, I mean, I’d already let in that one of Davies’s,so I wasn’t feeling that confident, but I dunno, whenBradley came toward me, just out of nowhere, Ithought — you can do this\ And I had about a secondto decide which way to fly, you know, because helooked like he was aiming for the right goal hoop —my right, obviously, his left — but I had a funnyfeeling that he was feinting, and so I took the chanceand flew left — his right, I mean — and — well — yousaw what happened,” he concluded modestly,sweeping his hair back quite unnecessarily so that itlooked interestingly windswept and glancing aroundto see whether the people nearest to them — a bunchof gossiping third-year Hufflepuffs — had heard him.“And then, when Chambers came at me about fiveminutes later — what?” Ron said, stopping mid-sentence at the look on Harry’s face. “Why are yougrinning?”

“I’m not,” said Harry quickly, looking down at hisTransfiguration notes and attempting to straightenhis face. The truth was that Ron had just remindedHarry forcibly of another Gryffindor Quidditch playerwho had once sat rumpling his hair under this verytree. “I’m just glad we won, that’s all.”

“Yeah,” said Ron slowly, savoring the words, “we won.Did you see the look on Chang’s face when Ginny gotthe Snitch right out from under her nose?”

“I suppose she cried, did she?” said Harry bitterly.

“Well, yeah — more out of temper than anything,though ...” Ron frowned slightly. “But you saw herchuck her broom away when she got back to theground, didn’t you?”

Page | 899Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Er —” said Harry.

“Well, actually ... no, Ron,” said Hermione with aheavy sigh, putting down her book and looking at himapologetically. “As a matter of fact, the only bit of thematch Harry and I saw was Davies’s first goal.”

Ron’s carefully ruffled hair seemed to wilt withdisappointment.

“You didn’t watch?” he said faintly, looking from oneto the other. “You didn’t see me make any of thosesaves?”

“Well — no,” said Hermione, stretching out aplacatory hand toward him. “But Ron, we didn’t wantto leave — we had to!”

“Yeah?” said Ron, whose face was growing rather red.“How come?”

“It was Hagrid,” said Harry. “He decided to tell us whyhe’s been covered in injuries ever since he got backfrom the giants. He wanted us to go into the forestwith him, we had no choice, you know how he gets...Anyway ...”

The story was told in five minutes, by the end ofwhich Ron’s indignation had been replaced by a lookof total incredulity.

“He brought one back and hid it in the forest?”

“Yep,” said Harry grimly.

“No,” said Ron, as though by saying this he couldmake it untrue. “No, he can’t have...”

Page | 900Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, he has,” said Hermione firmly. “Grawp’s aboutsixteen feet tall, enjoys ripping up twenty-foot pinetrees, and knows me,” she snorted, “as Hermy.”

Ron gave a nervous laugh.

“And Hagrid wants us to ... ?”

“Teach him English, yeah,” said Harry.

“He’s lost his mind,” said Ron in an almost awedvoice.

“Yes,” said Hermione irritably, turning a page ofIntermediate Transfiguration and glaring at a series ofdiagrams showing an owl turning into a pair of operaglasses. “Yes, I’m starting to think he has. Butunfortunately, he made Harry and me promise.”

“Well, you’re just going to have to break your promise,that’s all,” said Ron firmly. “I mean, come on ... We’vegot exams and we’re about that far,” he held up hishand to show thumb and forefinger a millimeterapart, “from being chucked out as it is. And anyway... remember Norbert? Remember Aragog? Have weever come off better for mixing with any of Hagrid’smonster mates?”

“I know, it’s just that — we promised,” said Hermionein a small voice.

Ron smoothed his hair flat again, lookingpreoccupied.

“Well,” he sighed, “Hagrid hasn’t been sacked yet, hashe? He’s hung on this long, maybe he’ll hang on tillthe end of term and we won’t have to go near Grawpat all.”

Page | 901Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The castle grounds were gleaming in the sunlight asthough freshly painted; the cloudless sky smiled atitself in the smoothly sparkling lake, the satin-greenlawns rippled occasionally in a gentle breeze: Junehad arrived, but to the fifth years this meant only onething: Their O.W.L.s were upon them at last.

Their teachers were no longer setting themhomework; lessons were devoted to reviewing thosetopics their teachers thought most likely to come upin the exams. The purposeful, feverish atmospheredrove nearly everything but the O.W.L.s from Harry’smind, though he did wonder occasionally duringPotions lessons whether Lupin had ever told Snapethat he must continue giving Harry Occlumencytuition: If he had, then Snape had ignored Lupin asthoroughly as he was now ignoring Harry. This suitedHarry very well; he was quite busy and tense enoughwithout extra classes with Snape, and to his reliefHermione was much too preoccupied these days tobadger him about Occlumency. She was spending alot of time muttering to herself and had not laid outany elf clothes for days.

She was not the only person acting oddly as theO.W.L.s drew steadily nearer. Ernie Macmillan haddeveloped an irritating habit of interrogating peopleabout their study habits.

“How many hours d’you think you’re doing a day?” hedemanded of Harry and Ron as they queued outsideHerbology, a manic gleam in his eyes.

“I dunno,” said Ron. “A few ...”

“More or less than eight?”

“Less, I s’pose,” said Ron, looking slightly alarmed.

Page | 902Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm doing eight,” said Ernie, puffing out his chest.“Eight or nine. I’m getting an hour in before breakfastevery day. Eight’s my average. I can do ten on a goodweekend day. I did nine and a half on Monday. Not sogood on Tuesday — only seven and a quarter. Thenon Wednesday —■”

Harry was deeply thankful that Professor Sproutushered them into greenhouse three at that point,forcing Ernie to abandon his recital.

Meanwhile Draco Malfoy had found a different way toinduce panic.

“Of course, it’s not what you know,” he was heard totell Crabbe and Goyle loudly outside Potions a fewdays before the exams were to start, “it’s who youknow. Now, Father’s been friendly with the head ofthe Wizarding Examinations Authority for years — oldGriselda Marchbanks — we’ve had her round fordinner and everything...”

“Do you think that’s true?” Hermione whispered toHarry and Ron, looking frightened.

“Nothing we can do about it if it is,” said Rongloomily.

“I don’t think it’s true,” said Neville quietly frombehind them. “Because Griselda Marchbanks is afriend of my gran’s, and she’s never mentioned theMalfoys.”

“What’s she like, Neville?” asked Hermione at once.

“Is she strict?”

“Bit like Gran, really,” said Neville in a subdued voice.

Page | 903Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Knowing her won’t hurt your chances though, willit?” Ron told him encouragingly.

“Oh, I don’t think it will make any difference,” saidNeville, still more miserably. “Gran’s always tellingProfessor Marchbanks I’m not as good as my dad...Well ... you saw what she’s like at St. Mungo’s...”

Neville looked fixedly at the floor. Harry, Ron, andHermione glanced at one another, but didn’t knowwhat to say. It was the first time that Neville hadacknowledged that they had met at the Wizardinghospital.

Meanwhile a flourishing black-market trade in aids toconcentration, mental agility, and wakefulness hadsprung up among the fifth and seventh years. Harryand Ron were much tempted by the bottle ofBaruffio’s Brain Elixir offered to them by Ravenclawsixth year Eddie Carmichael, who swore it was solelyresponsible for the nine “Outstanding” O.W.L.s hehad gained the previous summer and was offering thewhole pint for a mere twelve Galleons. Ron assuredHarry he would reimburse him for his half themoment he left Hogwarts and got a job, but beforethey could close the deal, Hermione had confiscatedthe bottle from Carmichael and poured the contentsdown a toilet.

“Hermione, we wanted to buy that!” shouted Ron.

“Don’t be stupid,” she snarled. “You might as welltake Harold Dingle’s powdered dragon claw and havedone with it.”

“Dingle’s got powdered dragon claw?” said Roneagerly.

Page | 904Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Not anymore,” said Hermione. “I confiscated that too.None of these things actually works you know —”

“Dragon claw does work!” said Ron. “It’s supposed tobe incredible, really gives your brain a boost, youcome over all cunning for a few hours — Hermione,let me have a pinch, go on, it can’t hurt —”

“This stuff can,” said Hermione grimly. “I’ve had alook at it, and it’s actually dried doxy droppings.”

This information took the edge off Harry and Ron’sdesire for brain stimulants.

They received their examination schedules and detailsof the procedure for O.W.L.s during their nextTransfiguration lesson.

“As you can see,” Professor McGonagall told the classwhile they copied down the dates and times of theirexams from the blackboard, “your O.W.L.s are spreadover two successive weeks. You will sit the theoryexams in the mornings and the practice in theafternoons. Your practical Astronomy examinationwill, of course, take place at night.

“Now, I must warn you that the most stringent Anti-Cheating Charms have been applied to yourexamination papers. Auto-Answer Quills are bannedfrom the examination hall, as are Remembralls,Detachable Cribbing Cuffs, and Self-Correcting Ink.Every year, I am afraid to say, seems to harbor atleast one student who thinks that he or she can getaround the Wizarding Examinations Authority’s rules.I can only hope that it is nobody in Gryffindor. Ournew — headmistress” — Professor McGonagallpronounced the word with the same look on her facethat Aunt Petunia had whenever she wascontemplating a particularly stubborn bit of dirt —Page | 905Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“has asked the Heads of House to tell their studentsthat cheating will be punished most severely —because, of course, your examination results willreflect upon the headmistress’s new regime at theschool...”

Professor McGonagall gave a tiny sigh. Harry saw thenostrils of her sharp nose flare.

“However, that is no reason not to do your very best.You have your own futures to think about.”

“Please, Professor,” said Hermione, her hand in theair, “when will we find out our results?”

“An owl will be sent to you some time in July,” saidProfessor McGonagall.

“Excellent,” said Dean Thomas in an audible whisper,“so we don’t have to worry about it till the holidays...”

Harry imagined sitting in his bedroom in Privet Drivein six weeks’ time, waiting for his O.W.L. results.

Well, he thought, at least he would be sure of one bitof post next summer...

Their first exam, Theory of Charms, was scheduled forMonday morning. Harry agreed to test Hermione afterlunch on Sunday but regretted it almost at once. Shewas very agitated and kept snatching the book backfrom him to check that she had gotten the answercompletely right, finally hitting him hard on the nosewith the sharp edge of Achievements in Charming.

“Why don’t you just do it yourself?” he said firmly,handing the book back to her, his eyes watering.

Meanwhile Ron was reading two years of Charmsnotes with his fingers in his ears, his lips moving

Page | 906Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

soundlessly; Seamus was lying flat on his back on thefloor, reciting the definition of a Substantive Charm,while Dean checked it against The Standard Book ofSpells, Grade 5; and Parvati and Lavender, who werepracticing basic locomotion charms, were makingtheir pencil cases race each other around the edge ofthe table.

Dinner was a subdued affair that night. Harry andRon did not talk much, but ate with gusto, havingstudied hard all day. Hermione on the other handkept putting down her knife and fork and divingunder the table for her bag, from which she wouldseize a book to check some fact or figure. Ron wasjust telling her that she ought to eat a decent meal orshe would not sleep that night, when her fork slidfrom her limp fingers and landed with a loud tinkle onher plate.

“Oh, my goodness,” she said faintly, staring into theentrance hall. “Is that them? Is that the examiners?”

Harry and Ron whipped around on their bench.Through the doors to the Great Hall they could seeUmbridge standing with a small group of ancient-looking witches and wizards. Umbridge, Harry waspleased to see, looked rather nervous.

“Shall we go and have a closer look?” said Ron.

Harry and Hermione nodded and they hastenedtoward the double doors into the entrance hall,slowing down as they stepped over the threshold towalk sedately past the examiners. Harry thoughtProfessor Marchbanks must be the tiny, stoopedwitch with a face so lined it looked as though it hadbeen draped in cobwebs; Umbridge was speaking toher very deferentially. Professor Marchbanks seemed

Page | 907Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

to be a little deaf; she was answering Umbridge veryloudly considering that they were only a foot apart.

“Journey was fine, journey was fine, we’ve made itplenty of times before!” she said impatiently. “Now, Ihaven’t heard from Dumbledore lately!” she added,peering around the hall as though hopeful he mightsuddenly emerge from a broom cupboard. “No ideawhere he is, I suppose?”

“None at all,” said Umbridge, shooting a malevolentlook at Harry, Ron, and Hermione, who were nowdawdling around the foot of the stairs as Ronpretended to do up his shoelace. “But I daresay theMinistry of Magic will track him down soon enough...”

“I doubt it,” shouted tiny Professor Marchbanks, “notif Dumbledore doesn’t want to be found! I shouldknow... Examined him personally in Transfigurationand Charms when he did N.E.W.T.s ... Did thingswith a wand I’d never seen before ...”

“Yes ... well ...” said Professor Umbridge as Harry,Ron, and Hermione dragged their feet up the marblestaircase as slowly as they dared, “let me show you tothe staffroom ... I daresay you’d like a cup of tea afteryour journey...”

It was an uncomfortable sort of an evening. Everyonewas trying to do some last-minute studying butnobody seemed to be getting very far. Harry went tobed early but then lay awake for what felt like hours.He remembered his careers consultation andMcGonagall’s furious declaration that she would helphim become an Auror if it was the last thing she did...He wished he had expressed a more achievableambition now that exam time was here... He knewthat he was not the only one lying awake, but none of

Page | 908Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

the others in the dormitory spoke and finally, one byone, they fell asleep.

None of the fifth years talked very much at breakfastnext day either. Parvati was practicing incantationsunder her breath while the salt cellar in front of hertwitched, Hermione was rereading Achievement inCharming so fast that her eyes appeared blurred, andNeville kept dropping his knife and fork and knockingover the marmalade.

Once breakfast was over, the fifth and seventh yearsmilled around in the entrance hall while the otherstudents went off to lessons. Then, at half-past nine,they were called forward class by class to reenter theGreat Hall, which was now arranged exactly as Harryhad seen it in the Pensieve when his father, Sirius,and Snape had been taking their O.W.L.s. The fourHouse tables had been removed and replaced insteadwith many tables for one, all facing the staff-table endof the Hall where Professor McGonagall stood facingthem. When they were all seated and quiet she said,“You may begin,” and turned over an enormoushourglass on the desk beside her, on which were alsospare quills, ink bottles, and rolls of parchment.

Harry turned over his paper, his heart thumpinghard... Three rows to his right and four seats ahead,Hermione was already scribbling... He lowered hiseyes to the first question: a) Give the incantation, andb) describe the wand movement required to makeobjects fly...

Harry had a fleeting memory of a club soaring highinto the air and landing loudly on the thick skull of atroll... Smiling slightly, he bent over the paper andbegan to write...

Page | 909Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, it wasn’t too bad, was it?” asked Hermioneanxiously in the entrance hall two hours later, stillclutching the exam paper. “I’m not sure I did myselfjustice on Cheering Charms, I just ran out of time —did you put in the countercharm for hiccups? I wasn’tsure whether I ought to, it felt like too much — andon question twenty-three —”

“Hermione,” said Ron sternly, “we’ve been throughthis before... We’re not going through every examafterward, it’s bad enough doing them once.”

The fifth years ate lunch with the rest of the school(the four House tables reappeared over the lunchhour) and then trooped off into the small chamberbeside the Great Hall, where they were to wait untilcalled for their practical examination. As small groupsof students were called forward in alphabetical order,those left behind muttered incantations and practicedwand movements, occasionally poking one another inthe back or eye by mistake.

Hermione’s name was called. Trembling, she left thechamber with Anthony Goldstein, Gregory Goyle, andDaphne Greengrass. Students who had already beentested did not return afterward, so Harry and Ronhad no idea how Hermione had done.

“She’ll be fine — remember she got a hundred andtwelve percent on one of our Charms tests?” said Ron.

Ten minutes later, Professor Flitwick called,“Parkinson, Pansy — Patil, Padma — Patil, Parvati —Potter, Harry.”

“Good luck,” said Ron quietly. Harry walked into theGreat Hall, clutching his wand so tightly his handshook.

Page | 910Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Professor Tofty is free, Potter,” squeaked ProfessorFlitwick, who was standing just inside the door. Hepointed Harry toward what looked like the very oldestand baldest examiner, who was sitting behind a smalltable in a far corner, a short distance from ProfessorMarchbanks, who was halfway through testing DracoMalfoy.

“Potter, is it?” said Professor Tofty, consulting hisnotes and peering over his pince-nez at Harry as heapproached. “The famous Potter?”

Out of the corner of his eye, Harry distinctly sawMalfoy throw a scathing look over at him; the wineglass Malfoy had been levitating fell to the floor andsmashed. Harry could not suppress a grin. ProfessorTofty smiled back at him encouragingly.

“That’s it,” he said in his quavery old voice, “no needto be nervous... Now, if I could ask you to take thiseggcup and make it do some cartwheels for me...”

On the whole Harry thought it went rather well; hisLevitation Charm was certainly much better thanMalfoy’s had been, though he wished he had notmixed up the incantations for Color-Change andGrowth Charms, so that the rat he was supposed tobe turning orange swelled shockingly and was the sizeof a badger before Harry could rectify his mistake. Hewas glad Hermione had not been in the Hall at thetime and neglected to mention it to her afterward. Hecould tell Ron, though; Ron had caused a dinner plateto mutate into a large mushroom and had no ideahow it had happened.

There was no time to relax that night — they wentstraight to the common room after dinner andsubmerged themselves in studying for Transfiguration

Page | 911Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

next day. Harry went to bed, his head buzzing withcomplex spell models and theories.

He forgot the definition of a Switching Spell during hiswritten exam next morning, but thought his practicalcould have been a lot worse. At least he managed tovanish the whole of his iguana, whereas poor HannahAbbott lost her head completely at the next table andsomehow managed to multiply her ferret into a flockof flamingos, causing the examination to be halted forten minutes while the birds were captured andcarried out of the Hall.

They had their Herbology exam on Wednesday (otherthan a small bite from a Fanged Geranium, Harry felthe had done reasonably well) and then, on Thursday,Defense Against the Dark Arts. Here, for the firsttime, Harry felt sure he had passed. He had noproblem with any of the written questions and tookparticular pleasure, during the practical examination,in performing all the counterjinxes and defensivespells right in front of Umbridge, who was watchingcoolly from near the doors into the entrance hall.

“Oh bravo!” cried Professor Tofty, who was examiningHarry again, when Harry demonstrated a perfectboggart banishing spell. “Very good indeed! Well, Ithink that’s all, Potter ... unless ...”

He leaned forward a little.

“I heard, from my dear friend Tiberius Ogden, thatyou can produce a Patronus? For a bonus point ... ?”

Harry raised his wand, looked directly at Umbridge,and imagined her being sacked.

“Expecto Patronum).”

Page | 912Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The silver stag erupted from the end of his wand andcantered the length of the hall. All of the examinerslooked around to watch its progress and when itdissolved into silver mist, Professor Tofty clapped hisveined and knotted hands enthusiastically.

“Excellent!” he said. “Very well, Potter, you may go!”

As Harry passed Umbridge beside the door their eyesmet. There was a nasty smile playing around herwide, slack mouth, but he did not care. Unless he wasvery much mistaken (and he was not planning onsaying it to anybody, in case he was), he had justachieved an “Outstanding” O.W.L.

On Friday, Harry and Ron had a day off whileHermione sat her Ancient Runes exam, and as theyhad the whole weekend in front of them, theypermitted themselves a break from studying. Theystretched and yawned beside the open window,through which warm summer air wafted over them asthey played a desultory game of wizard chess. Harrycould see Hagrid in the distance, teaching a class onthe edge of the forest. He was trying to guess whatcreatures they were examining — he thought it mustbe unicorns, because the boys seemed to be standingback a little — when the portrait hole opened andHermione clambered in, looking thoroughly badtempered.

“How were the runes?” said Ron, yawning andstretching.

“I mistranslated ‘ehwaz,’ ” said Hermione furiously. “Itmeans ‘partnership,’ not ‘defense,’ I mixed it up with‘eihwaz.’ ”

“Ah well,” said Ron lazily, “that’s only one mistake,isn’t it, you’ll still get —”

Page | 913Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh shut up,” said Hermione angrily, “it could be theone mistake that makes the difference between a passand a fail. And what’s more, someone’s put anotherniffler in Umbridge’s office, I don’t know how they gotit through that new door, but I just walked past thereand Umbridge is shrieking her head off — by thesound of it, it tried to take a chunk out of her leg —”

“Good,” said Harry and Ron together.

“It is not good!” said Hermione hotly. “She thinks it’sHagrid doing it, remember? And we do not wantHagrid chucked out!”

“He’s teaching at the moment, she can’t blame him,”said Harry, gesturing out of the window.

“Oh, you’re so naive sometimes, Harry, you reallythink Umbridge will wait for proof?” said Hermione,who seemed determined to be in a towering temper,and she swept off toward the girls’ dormitories,banging the door behind her.

“Such a lovely, sweet-tempered girl,” said Ron, veryquietly, prodding his queen forward so that she couldbegin beating up one of Harry’s knights.

Hermione’s bad mood persisted for most of theweekend, though Harry and Ron found it quite easyto ignore as they spent most of Saturday and Sundaystudying for Potions on Monday, the exam to whichHarry was looking forward least and which he wassure would be the one that would be the downfall ofhis ambitions to become an Auror. Sure enough, hefound the written exam difficult, though he thoughthe might have got full marks on the question aboutPolyjuice Potion: He could describe its effectsextremely accurately, having taken it illegally in hissecond year.

Page | 914Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The afternoon practical was not as dreadful as he hadexpected it to be. With Snape absent from theproceedings he found that he was much more relaxedthan he usually was while making potions. Neville,who was sitting very near Harry, also looked happierthan Harry had ever seen him during a Potions class.When Professor Marchbanks said, “Step away fromyour cauldrons, please, the examination is over,”Harry corked his sample flask feeling that he mightnot have achieved a good grade but that he had, withluck, avoided a fail.

“Only four exams left,” said Parvati Patil wearily asthey headed back to Gryffindor common room.

“Only!” said Hermione snappishly. “I’ve gotArithmancy and it’s probably the toughest subjectthere is!”

Nobody was foolish enough to snap back, so she wasunable to vent her spleen on any of them and wasreduced to telling off some first years for giggling tooloudly in the common room.

Harry was determined to perform well in Tuesday’sCare of Magical Creatures exam so as not to letHagrid down. The practical examination took place inthe afternoon on the lawn on the edge of theForbidden Forest, where students were required tocorrectly identify the knarl hidden among a dozenhedgehogs (the trick was to offer them all milk inturn: knarls, highly suspicious creatures whose quillshad many magical properties, generally went berserkat what they saw as an attempt to poison them); thendemonstrate correct handling of a bowtruckle, feedand clean a fire-crab without sustaining seriousburns, and choose, from a wide selection of food, thediet they would give a sick unicorn.

Page | 915Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry could see Hagrid watching anxiously out of hiscabin window. When Harry’s examiner, a plump littlewitch this time, smiled at him and told him he couldleave, Harry gave Hagrid a fleeting thumbs-up beforeheading back up to the castle.

The Astronomy theory exam on Wednesday morningwent well enough; Harry was not convinced he hadgot the names of all of Jupiter’s moons right, but wasat least confident that none of them was inhabited bymice. They had to wait until evening for their practicalAstronomy; the afternoon was devoted instead toDivination.

Even by Harry’s low standards in Divination, theexam went very badly. He might as well have tried tosee moving pictures in the desktop as in thestubbornly blank crystal ball; he lost his headcompletely during tea-leaf reading, saying it looked tohim as though Professor Marchbanks would shortlybe meeting a round, dark, soggy stranger, androunded off the whole fiasco by mixing up the life andhead lines on her palm and informing her that sheought to have died the previous Tuesday.

“Well, we were always going to fail that one,” said Rongloomily as they ascended the marble staircase. Hehad just made Harry feel rather better by telling himhow he told the examiner in detail about the uglyman with a wart on his nose in his crystal ball, onlyto look up and realize he had been describing hisexaminer’s reflection.

“We shouldn’t have taken the stupid subject in thefirst place,” said Harry.

“Still, at least we can give it up now.”

Page | 916Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah,” said Harry. “No more pretending we care whathappens when Jupiter and Uranus get too friendly ...”

“And from now on, I don’t care if my tea leaves spelldie, Ron, die — I’m just chucking them in the binwhere they belong.”

Harry laughed just as Hermione came running upbehind them. He stopped laughing at once, in case itannoyed her.

“Well, I think I’ve done all right in Arithmancy,” shesaid, and Harry and Ron both sighed with relief. “Justtime for a quick look over our star charts beforedinner, then ...”

When they reached the top of the Astronomy Tower ateleven o’clock they found a perfect night forstargazing, cloudless and still. The grounds werebathed in silvery moonlight, and there was a slightchill in the air. Each of them set up his or hertelescope and, when Professor Marchbanks gave theword, proceeded to fill in the blank star chart he orshe had been given.

Professors Marchbanks and Tofty strolled amongthem, watching as they entered the precise positionsof the stars and planets they were observing. All wasquiet except for the rustle of parchment, theoccasional creak of a telescope as it was adjusted onits stand, and the scribbling of many quills. Half anhour passed, then an hour; the little squares ofreflected gold light flickering on the ground belowstarted to vanish as lights in the castle windows wereextinguished.

As Harry completed the constellation Orion on hischart, however, the front doors of the castle openeddirectly below the parapet where he was standing, so

Page | 917Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

that light spilled down the stone steps a little wayacross the lawn. Harry glanced down as he made aslight adjustment to the position of his telescope andsaw five or six elongated shadows moving over thebrightly lit grass before the doors swung shut and thelawn became a sea of darkness once more.

Harry put his eye back to his telescope and refocusedit, now examining Venus. He looked down at his chartto enter the planet there, but something distractedhim. Pausing with his quill suspended over theparchment, he squinted down into the shadowygrounds and saw half a dozen figures walking overthe lawn. If they had not been moving, and themoonlight had not been gilding the tops of theirheads, they would have been indistinguishable fromthe dark ground on which they stood. Even at thisdistance, Harry had a funny feeling that herecognized the walk of the squattest among them,who seemed to be leading the group.

He could not think why Umbridge would be taking astroll outside past midnight, much less accompaniedby five others. Then somebody coughed behind him,and he remembered that he was halfway through anexam. He had quite forgotten Venus’s position —jamming his eye to his telescope, he found it againand was again on the point of entering it on his chartwhen, alert for any odd sound, he heard a distantknock that echoed through the deserted grounds,followed immediately by the muffled barking of a largedog.

He looked up, his heart hammering. There were lightson in Hagrid’s windows and the people he hadobserved crossing the lawn were now silhouettedagainst them. The door opened and he distinctly sawsix tiny but sharply defined figures walk over the

Page | 918Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

threshold. The door closed again and there wassilence.

Harry felt very uneasy. He glanced around to seewhether Ron or Hermione had noticed what he had,but Professor Marchbanks came walking behind himat that moment, and not wanting to appear as thoughhe was sneaking looks at anyone else’s work, hehastily bent over his star chart and pretended to beadding notes to it while really peering over the top ofthe parapet toward Hagrid’s cabin. Figures were nowmoving across the cabin windows, temporarilyblocking the light.

He could feel Professor Marchbanks’s eyes on theback of his neck and pressed his eye again to histelescope, staring up at the moon though he hadmarked its position an hour ago, but as ProfessorMarchbanks moved on he heard a roar from thedistant cabin that echoed through the darkness rightto the top of the Astronomy Tower. Several of thepeople around Harry ducked out from behind theirtelescopes and peered instead in the direction ofHagrid’s cabin.

Professor Tofty gave another dry little cough.

“Try and concentrate, now, boys and girls,” he saidsoftly.

Most people returned to their telescopes. Harry lookedto his left. Hermione was gazing transfixed atHagrid’s.

“Ahem — twenty minutes to go,” said Professor Tofty.

Hermione jumped and returned at once to her starchart; Harry looked down at his own and noticed that

Page | 919Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

he had mislabelled Venus as Mars. He bent to correctit.

There was a loud BANG from the grounds. Severalpeople said “Ouch!” as they poked themselves in theface with the ends of their telescopes, hastening tosee what was going on below.

Hagrid’s door had burst open and by the light floodingout of the cabin they saw him quite clearly, a massivefigure roaring and brandishing his fists, surroundedby six people, all of whom, judging by the tiny threadsof red light they were casting in his direction, seemedto be attempting to Stun him.

“No!” cried Hermione.

“My dear!” said Professor Tofty in a scandalized voice.“This is an examination!”

But nobody was paying the slightest attention to theirstar charts anymore: Jets of red light were still flyingbeside Hagrid’s cabin, yet somehow they seemed to bebouncing off him. He was still upright and still, as faras Harry could see, fighting. Cries and yells echoedacross the grounds; a man yelled, “Be reasonable,Hagrid!” and Hagrid roared, “Reasonable be damned,yeh won’ take me like this, Dawlish!”

Harry could see the tiny outline of Fang, attemptingto defend Hagrid, leaping at the wizards surroundinghim until a Stunning Spell caught him and he fell tothe ground. Hagrid gave a howl of fury, lifted theculprit bodily from the ground, and threw him: Theman flew what looked like ten feet and did not get upagain. Hermione gasped, both hands over her mouth;Harry looked around at Ron and saw that he too waslooking scared. None of them had ever seen Hagrid ina real temper before...

Page | 920Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Look!” squealed Parvati, who was leaning over theparapet and pointing to the foot of the castle wherethe front doors seemed to have opened again; morelight had spilled out onto the dark lawn and a singlelong black shadow was now rippling across the lawn.

“Now, really!” said Professor Tofty anxiously. “Onlysixteen minutes left, you know!”

But nobody paid him the slightest attention: Theywere watching the person now sprinting toward thebattle beside Hagrid’s cabin.

“How dare you!” the figure shouted as she ran. “Howdare you!”

“It’s McGonagall!” whispered Hermione.

“Leave him alone! Alone, I say!” said ProfessorMcGonagall’s voice through the darkness. “On whatgrounds are you attacking him? He has done nothing,nothing to warrant such —”

Hermione, Parvati, and Lavender all screamed. Nofewer than four Stunners had shot from the figuresaround the cabin toward Professor McGonagall.Halfway between cabin and castle the red beamscollided with her. For a moment she looked luminous,illuminated by an eerie red glow, then was lifted rightoff her feet, landed hard on her back, and moved nomore.

“Galloping gargoyles!” shouted Professor Tofty, whoseemed to have forgotten the exam completely. “Notso much as a warning! Outrageous behavior!”

“COWARDS!” bellowed Hagrid, his voice carryingclearly to the top of the tower, and several lights

Page | 921Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

flickered back on inside the castle. “RUDDYCOWARDS! HAVE SOME O’ THAT — AN’ THAT —”

“Oh my —” gasped Hermione.

Hagrid took two massive swipes at his closestattackers; judging by their immediate collapse, theyhad been knocked cold. Harry saw him double overand thought for a moment that he had finally beenovercome by a spell, but on the contrary, nextmoment Hagrid was standing again with whatappeared to be a sack on his back — then Harryrealized that Fang’s limp body was draped around hisshoulders.

“Get him, get him!” screamed Umbridge, but herremaining helper seemed highly reluctant to go withinreach of Hagrid’s fists. Indeed, he was backing awayso fast he tripped over one of his unconsciouscolleagues and fell over. Hagrid had turned andbegun to run with Fang still hung around his neck;Umbridge sent one last Stunning Spell after him butit missed, and Hagrid, running full-pelt toward thedistant gates, disappeared into the darkness.

There was a long minute’s quivering silence,everybody gazing openmouthed into the grounds.Then Professor Tofty’s voice said feebly, “Um ... fiveminutes to go, everybody ...”

Though he had only filled in two-thirds of his chart,Harry was desperate for the end of the exam. When itcame at last he, Ron, and Hermione forced theirtelescopes haphazardly back into their holders anddashed back down the spiral staircase. None of thestudents were going to bed — they were all talkingloudly and excitedly at the foot of the stairs aboutwhat they had witnessed.

Page | 922Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“That evil woman!” gasped Hermione, who seemed tobe having difficulty talking due to rage. “Trying tosneak up on Hagrid in the dead of night!”

“She clearly wanted to avoid another scene likeTrelawney’s,” said Ernie Macmillan sagely, squeezingover to join them.

“Hagrid did well, didn’t he?” said Ron, who lookedmore alarmed than impressed. “How come all thespells bounced off him?”

“It’ll be his giant blood,” said Hermione shakily. “It’svery hard to Stun a giant, they’re like trolls, reallytough... But poor Professor McGonagall... FourStunners straight in the chest, and she’s not exactlyyoung, is she?”

“Dreadful, dreadful,” said Ernie, shaking his headpompously. “Well, I’m off to bed... ’Night, all ...”

People around them were drifting away, still talkingexcitedly about what they had just seen.

“At least they didn’t get to take Hagrid off toAzkaban,” said Ron. “I ’spect he’s gone to joinDumbledore, hasn’t he?”

“I suppose so,” said Hermione, who looked tearful.“Oh, this is awful, I really thought Dumbledore wouldbe back before long, but now we’ve lost Hagrid too...”

They traipsed back to the Gryffindor common room tofind it full. The commotion out in the grounds hadwoken several people, who had hastened to rousetheir friends. Seamus and Dean, who had arrivedahead of Harry, Ron, and Hermione, were now tellingeveryone what they had heard from the top of theAstronomy Tower.

Page | 923Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But why sack Hagrid now?” asked Angelina Johnson,shaking her head. “It’s not like Trelawney, he’s beenteaching much better than usual this year!”

“Umbridge hates part-humans,” said Hermionebitterly, flopping down into an armchair. “She wasalways going to try and get Hagrid out.”

“And she thought Hagrid was putting nifflers in heroffice,” piped up Katie Bell.

“Oh blimey,” said Lee Jordan, covering his mouth.

“It’s me’s been putting the nifflers in her office, Fredand George left me a couple, I’ve been levitating themin through her window...”

“She’d have sacked him anyway,” said Dean. “He wastoo close to Dumbledore.”

“That’s true,” said Harry, sinking into an armchairbeside Hermione’s.

“I just hope Professor McGonagall’s all right,” saidLavender tearfully.

“They carried her back up to the castle, we watchedthrough the dormitory window,” said Colin Creevey.“She didn’t look very well...”

“Madam Pomfrey will sort her out,” said AliciaSpinnet firmly. “She’s never failed yet.”

It was nearly four in the morning before the commonroom cleared. Harry felt wide awake — the image ofHagrid sprinting away into the dark was hauntinghim. He was so angry with Umbridge he could notthink of a punishment bad enough for her, thoughRon’s suggestion of having her fed to a box of starvingBlast-Ended Skrewts had its merits. He fell asleepPage | 924Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

contemplating hideous revenges and arose from bedthree hours later feeling distinctly unrested.

Their final exam, History of Magic, was not to takeplace until that afternoon. Harry would very muchhave liked to go back to bed after breakfast, but hehad been counting on the morning for a spot of last-minute studying, so instead he sat with his head inhis hands by the common room window, trying hardnot to doze off as he read through some of the notesstacked three-and-a-half feet high that Hermione hadlent him.

The fifth years entered the Great Hall at two o’clockand took their places in front of their overturnedexamination papers. Harry felt exhausted. He justwanted this to be over so that he could go and sleep.Then tomorrow, he and Ron were going to go down tothe Quidditch pitch — he was going to have a fly onRon’s broom and savor their freedom from studying...

“Turn over your papers,” said Professor Marchbanksfrom the front of the Hall, flicking over the gianthourglass. “You may begin...”

Harry stared fixedly at the first question. It wasseveral seconds before it occurred to him that he hadnot taken in a word of it; there was a wasp buzzingdistractingly against one of the high windows. Slowly,tortuously, he began to write an answer.

He was finding it very difficult to remember namesand kept confusing dates. He simply skipped questionfour: In your opinion, did wand legislation contributeto, or lead to better control of, goblin riots of theeighteenth century? thinking that he would go back toit if he had time at the end. He had a stab at questionfive: How was the Statute of Secrecy breached in 1749and what measures were introduced to prevent aPage | 925Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

recurrence? but had a nagging suspicion that he hadmissed several important points. He had a feelingvampires had come into the story somewhere...

He looked ahead for a question he could definitelyanswer and his eyes alighted upon number ten.

Describe the circumstances that led to the Formationof the International Confederation of Wizards andexplain why the warlocks of Liechtenstein refused tojoin.

I know this, Harry thought, though his brain felttorpid and slack. He could visualize a heading, inHermione’s handwriting: The Formation of theInternational Confederation of Wizards... He had readthese notes only this morning...

He began to write, looking up now and again to checkthe large hourglass on the desk beside ProfessorMarchbanks. He was sitting right behind ParvatiPatil, whose long dark hair fell below the back of herchair. Once or twice he found himself staring at thetiny golden lights that glistened in it when she movedher head very slightly and had to give his own head alittle shake to clear it.

... the first Supreme Mugwump of the InternationalConfederation of Wizards was Pierre Bonaccord, buthis appointment was contested by the Wizardingcommunity of Liechtenstein, because —

All around Harry quills were scratching on parchmentlike scurrying, burrowing rats. The sun was very hoton the back of his head. What was it that Bonaccordhad done to offend the wizards of Liechtenstein?

Harry had a feeling it had something to do withtrolls... He gazed blankly at the back of Parvati’s headagain. If he could only perform Legilimency and openPage | 926Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

a window in the back of her head and see what it wasabout trolls that had caused the breach betweenPierre Bonaccord and Liechtenstein...

Harry closed his eyes and buried his face in hishands, so that the glowing red of his eyelids grewdark and cool. Bonaccord had wanted to stop troll-hunting and give the trolls rights ... but Liechtensteinwas having problems with a tribe of particularlyvicious mountain trolls... That was it...

He opened his eyes; they stung and watered at thesight of the blazing-white parchment. Slowly he wrotetwo lines about the trolls then read through what hehad done so far. It did not seem very informative ordetailed, yet he was sure Hermione’s notes on theconfederation had gone on for pages and pages...

He closed his eyes again, trying to see them, trying toremember... The confederation had met for the firsttime in France, yes, he had written that already...

Goblins had tried to attend and been ousted... He hadwritten that too...

And nobody from Liechtenstein had wanted to come

Think, he told himself, his face in his hands, while allaround him quills scratched out never-endinganswers and the sand trickled through the hourglassat the front...

He was walking along the cool, dark corridor to theDepartment of Mysteries again, walking with a firmand purposeful tread, breaking occasionally into arun, determined to reach his destination at last... Theblack door swung open for him as usual, and here hewas in the circular room with its many doors...

Page | 927Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Straight across the stone floor and through thesecond door ... patches of dancing light on the wallsand floor and that odd mechanical clicking, but notime to explore, he must hurry...

He jogged the last few feet to the third door, whichswung open just like the others...

Once again he was in the cathedral-sized room full ofshelves and glass spheres... His heart was beatingvery fast now... He was going to get there this time...When he reached number ninety-seven he turned leftand hurried along the aisle between two rows...

But there was a shape on the floor at the very end, ablack shape moving upon the floor like a woundedanimal... Harry’s stomach contracted with fear ... withexcitement...

A voice issued from his own mouth, a high, cold voiceempty of any human kindness, “Take it for me... Lift itdown, now... I cannot touch it ... but you can...”

The black shape upon the floor shifted a little. Harrysaw a long-fingered white hand clutching a wand riseon the end of his own arm ... heard the high, coldvoice say, “Cruciol”

The man on the floor let out a scream of pain,attempted to stand but fell back, writhing. Harry waslaughing. He raised his wand, the curse lifted, andthe figure groaned and became motionless.

“Lord Voldemort is waiting...”

Very slowly, his arms trembling, the man on theground raised his shoulders a few inches and liftedhis head. His face was bloodstained and gaunt,twisted in pain yet rigid with defiance...

Page | 928Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You’ll have to kill me,” whispered Sirius.

“Undoubtedly I shall in the end,” said the cold voice.“But you will fetch it for me first, Black... You thinkyou have felt pain thus far? Think again... We havehours ahead of us and nobody to hear you scream...”

But somebody screamed as Voldemort lowered hiswand again; somebody yelled and fell sideways off ahot desk onto the cold stone floor. Harry hit theground and awoke, still yelling, his scar on fire, as theGreat Hall erupted all around him.

Page | 929Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





OUT OF THE FIRE

“I’m not going... I don’t need the hospital wing... Idon’t want ...”

He was gibbering, trying to pull away from ProfessorTofty, who was looking at him with much concern,and who had just helped Harry out into the entrancehall while the students all around them stared.

“I’m — I’m fine, sir,” Harry stammered, wiping thesweat from his face. “Really ... I just fell asleep... Hada nightmare ...”

“Pressure of examinations!” said the old wizardsympathetically, patting Harry shakily on theshoulder. “It happens, young man, it happens! Now, acooling drink of water, and perhaps you will be readyto return to the Great Hall? The examination is nearlyover, but you may be able to round off your lastanswer nicely?”

“Yes,” said Harry wildly. “I mean ... no ... I’ve done —done as much as I can, I think...”

Page | 930Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Very well, very well,” said the old wizard gently. “Ishall go and collect your examination paper, and Isuggest that you go and have a nice lie down...”

“I’ll do that,” said Harry, nodding vigorously. “Thanksvery much.”

He waited for the second when the old man’s heelsdisappeared over the threshold into the Great Hall,then ran up the marble staircase and then morestaircases toward the hospital wing, hurtling alongthe corridors so fast that the portraits he passedmuttered reproaches, and burst through the doubledoors like a hurricane, causing Madam Pomfrey, whohad been spooning some bright blue liquid intoMontague’s open mouth, to shriek in alarm.

“Potter, what do you think you’re doing?”

“I need to see Professor McGonagall,” gasped Harry,the breath tearing his lungs. “Now ... It’s urgent...”

“She’s not here, Potter,” said Madam Pomfrey sadly.“She was transferred to St. Mungo’s this morning.Four Stunning Spells straight to the chest at her age?It’s a wonder they didn’t kill her.”

“She’s ... gone?” said Harry, stunned.

The bell rang just outside the dormitory, and heheard the usual distant rumbling of students startingto flood out into the corridors above and below him.He remained quite still, looking at Madam Pomfrey.Terror was rising inside him.

There was nobody left to tell. Dumbledore had gone,Hagrid had gone, but he had always expectedProfessor McGonagall to be there, irascible and

Page | 931Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

inflexible, perhaps, but always dependably, solidlypresent...

“I don’t wonder you’re shocked, Potter,” said MadamPomfrey with a kind of fierce approval in her face. “Asif one of them could have Stunned MinervaMcGonagall face on by daylight! Cowardice, that’swhat it was... Despicable cowardice ... If I wasn’tworried what would happen to you students withoutme, I’d resign in protest...”

“Yes,” said Harry blankly.

He strode blindly from the hospital wing into theteeming corridor where he stood, buffeted by thecrowd, the panic expanding inside him like poison gasso that his head swam and he could not think what todo...

Ron and Hermione, said a voice in his head.

He was running again, pushing students out of theway, oblivious to their angry protests and shouts. Hesprinted back down two floors and was at the top ofthe marble staircase when he saw them hurryingtoward him.

“Harry!” said Hermione at once, looking veryfrightened. “What happened? Are you all right? Areyou ill?”

“Where have you been?” demanded Ron.

“Come with me,” Harry said quickly. “Come on, I’vegot to tell you something...”

He led them along the first-floor corridor, peeringthrough doorways, and at last found an emptyclassroom into which he dived, closing the door

Page | 932Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

behind Ron and Hermione the moment they wereinside and leaning against it, facing them.

“Voldemort’s got Sirius.”

“What?”

“How d’you — ?”

“Saw it. Just now. When I fell asleep in the exam.”

“But — but where? How?” said Hermione, whose facewas white.

“I dunno how,” said Harry. “But I know exactly where.There’s a room in the Department of Mysteries full ofshelves covered in these little glass balls, and they’reat the end of row ninety-seven ... He’s trying to useSirius to get whatever it is he wants from in there...He’s torturing him... Says he’ll end by killing him ...”

Harry found his voice was shaking, as were his knees.He moved over to a desk and sat down on it, trying tomaster himself.

“How’re we going to get there?” he asked them.

There was a moment’s silence. Then Ron said, “G-getthere?”

“Get to the Department of Mysteries, so we can rescueSirius!” Harry said loudly.

“But — Harry ...” said Ron weakly.

“What? What?” said Harry.

Page | 933Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He could not understand why they were both gapingat him as though he was asking them somethingunreasonable.

“Harry,” said Hermione in a rather frightened voice,

“er ... how ... how did Voldemort get into the Ministryof Magic without anybody realizing he was there?”

“How do I know?” bellowed Harry. “The question ishow we’re going to get in there!”

“But ... Harry, think about this,” said Hermione,taking a step toward him, “it’s five o’clock in theafternoon... The Ministry of Magic must be full ofworkers... How would Voldemort and Sirius have gotin without being seen? Harry ... they’re probably thetwo most wanted wizards in the world... You thinkthey could get into a building full of Aurorsundetected?”

“I dunno, Voldemort used an Invisibility Cloak orsomething!” Harry shouted. “Anyway, the Departmentof Mysteries has always been completely emptywhenever I’ve been —”

“You’ve never been there, Harry,” said Hermionequietly. “You’ve dreamed about the place, that’s all.”

“They’re not normal dreams!” Harry shouted in herface, standing up and taking a step closer to her inturn. He wanted to shake her. “How d’you explainRon’s dad then, what was all that about, how come Iknew what had happened to him?”

“He’s got a point,” said Ron quietly, looking atHermione.

“But this is just —just so unlikely\” said Hermionedesperately. “Harry, how on earth could Voldemort

Page | 934Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

have got hold of Sirius when he’s been in GrimmauldPlace all the time?”

“Sirius might’ve cracked and just wanted some freshair,” said Ron, sounding worried. “He’s beendesperate to get out of that house for ages —”

“But why,” Hermione persisted, “why on earth wouldVoldemort want to use Sirius to get the weapon, orwhatever the thing is?”

“I dunno, there could be loads of reasons!” Harryyelled at her. “Maybe Sirius is just someoneVoldemort doesn’t care about seeing hurt —”

“You know what, I’ve just thought of something,” saidRon in a hushed voice. “Sirius’s brother was a DeathEater, wasn’t he? Maybe he told Sirius the secret ofhow to get the weapon!”

“Yeah — and that’s why Dumbledore’s been so keento keep Sirius locked up all the time!” said Harry.

“Look, I’m sorry,” cried Hermione, “but neither of youare making sense, and we’ve got no proof for any ofthis, no proof Voldemort and Sirius are even there —”

“Hermione, Harry’s seen them!” said Ron, roundingon her.

“Okay,” she said, looking frightened yet determined,“I’ve just got to say this...”

“What?”

“You ... This isn’t a criticism, Harry! But you do ...sort of ... I mean — don’t you think you’ve got a bit ofa — a — saving-people-thing?” she said.

Page | 935Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He glared at her. “And what’s that supposed to mean,a ‘saving-people-thing’?”

“Well ... you ...” She looked more apprehensive thanever. “I mean ... last year, for instance ... in the lake... during the Tournament ... you shouldn’t have ... Imean, you didn’t need to save that little Delacourgirl... You got a bit ... carried away ...”

A wave of hot, prickly anger swept Harry’s body —how could she remind him of that blunder now?

"... I mean, it was really great of you and everything,”said Hermione quickly, looking positively petrified atthe look on Harry’s face. “Everyone thought it was awonderful thing to do —”

“That’s funny,” said Harry in a trembling voice,“because I definitely remember Ron saying I’d wastedtime acting the hero... Is that what you think this is?You reckon I want to act the hero again?”

“No, no, no!” said Hermione, looking aghast. “That’snot what I mean at all!”

“Well, spit out what you’ve got to say, because we’rewasting time here!” Harry shouted.

“I’m trying to say — Voldemort knows you, Harry! Hetook Ginny down into the Chamber of Secrets to lureyou there, it’s the kind of thing he does, he knowsyou’re the — the sort of person who’d go to Sirius’said! What if he’s just trying to get you into theDepartment of Myst — ?”

“Hermione, it doesn’t matter if he’s done it to get methere or not — they’ve taken McGonagall to St.Mungo’s, there isn’t anyone left from the Order at

Page | 936Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hogwarts who we can tell, and if we don’t go, Sirius isdead!”

“But Harry — what if your dream was — was justthat, a dream?”

Harry let out a roar of frustration. Hermione actuallystepped back from him, looking alarmed.

“You don’t get it!” Harry shouted at her. “I’m nothaving nightmares, I’m not just dreaming! What d’youthink all the Occlumency was for, why d’you thinkDumbledore wanted me prevented from seeing thesethings? Because they’re REAL, Hermione — Sirius istrapped — I’ve seen him — Voldemort’s got him, andno one else knows, and that means we’re the onlyones who can save him, and if you don’t want to do it,fine, but I’m going, understand? And if I rememberrightly, you didn’t have a problem with my saving-people-thing when it was you I was saving from thedementors, or” — he rounded on Ron — “when it wasyour sister I was saving from the basilisk —”

“I never said I had a problem!” said Ron heatedly.

“But Harry, you’ve just said it,” said Hermionefiercely. “Dumbledore wanted you to learn to shutthese things out of your mind, if you’d doneOcclumency properly you’d never have seen this —”

“IF YOU THINK I’M JUST GOING TO ACT LIKE IHAVENT SEEN —”

“Sirius told you there was nothing more importantthan you learning to close your mind!”

“WELL, I EXPECT HE’D SAY SOMETHINGDIFFERENT IF HE KNEW WHAT I’D JUST —”

Page | 937Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The classroom door opened. Harry, Ron, andHermione whipped around. Ginny walked in, lookingcurious, followed by Luna, who as usual looked asthough she had drifted in accidentally.

“Hi,” said Ginny uncertainly. “We recognized Harry’svoice — what are you yelling about?”

“Never you mind,” said Harry roughly.

Ginny raised her eyebrows.

“There’s no need to take that tone with me,” she saidcoolly. “I was only wondering whether I could help.”

“Well, you can’t,” said Harry shortly.

“You’re being rather rude, you know,” said Lunaserenely.

Harry swore and turned away. The very last thing hewanted now was a conversation with Luna Lovegood.

“Wait,” said Hermione suddenly. “Wait ... Harry, theycan help.”

Harry and Ron looked at her.

“Listen,” she said urgently, “Harry, we need toestablish whether Sirius really has left headquarters

“I’ve told you, I saw —”

“Harry, I’m begging you, please!” said Hermionedesperately. “Please let’s just check that Sirius isn’t athome before we go charging off to London — if we findout he’s not there then I swear I won’t try and stop

Page | 938Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

you, I’ll come, I’ll d-do whatever it takes to try andsave him —”

“Sirius is being tortured NOW!” shouted Harry. “Wehaven’t got time to waste —”

“But if this is a trick of V-Voldemort’s — Harry, we’vegot to check, we’ve got to —”

“How?” Harry demanded. “How’re we going to check?”

“We’ll have to use Umbridge’s fire and see if we cancontact him,” said Hermione, who looked positivelyterrified at the thought. “Well draw Umbridge awayagain, but we’ll need lookouts, and that’s where wecan use Ginny and Luna.”

Though clearly struggling to understand what wasgoing on, Ginny said immediately, “Yeah, well do it,”and Luna said, “When you say ‘Sirius,’ are youtalking about Stubby Boardman?”

Nobody answered her.

“Okay,” Harry said aggressively to Hermione, “Okay, ifyou can think of a way of doing this quickly, I’m withyou, otherwise I’m going to the Department ofMysteries right now —”

“The Department of Mysteries?” said Luna, lookingmildly surprised. “But how are you going to getthere?”

Again, Harry ignored her.

“Right,” said Hermione, twisting her hands togetherand pacing up and down between the desks. “Right ...well ... One of us has to go and find Umbridge and —and send her off in the wrong direction, keep her

Page | 939Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

away from her office. They could tell her — I don’tknow — that Peeves is up to something awful asusual...”

“I’ll do it,” said Ron at once. “I’ll tell her Peeves issmashing up the Transfiguration department orsomething, it’s miles away from her office. Come tothink of it, I could probably persuade Peeves to do it ifI met him on the way...”

It was a mark of the seriousness of the situation thatHermione made no objection to the smashing up ofthe Transfiguration department.

“Okay,” she said, her brow furrowed as she continuedto pace. “Now, we need to keep students away fromher office while we force entry, or some Slytherin’sbound to go and tip her off...”

“Luna and I can stand at either end of the corridor,”said Ginny promptly, “and warn people not to godown there because someone’s let off a load ofGarroting Gas.” Hermione looked surprised at thereadiness with which Ginny had come up with thislie. Ginny shrugged and said, “Fred and George wereplanning to do it before they left.”

“Okay,” said Hermione, “well then, Harry, you and Iwill be under the Invisibility Cloak, and we’ll sneakinto the office and you can talk to Sirius —”

“He’s not there, Hermione!”

“I mean, you can — can check whether Sirius is athome or not while I keep watch, I don’t think youshould be in there alone, Lee’s already proved thewindow’s a weak spot, sending those nifflers throughit.”

Page | 940Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Even through his anger and impatience Harryrecognized Hermione’s offer to accompany him intoUmbridge’s office as a sign of solidarity and loyalty.

“I ... okay, thanks,” he muttered.

“Right, well, even if we do all of that, I don’t thinkwe’re going to be able to bank on more than fiveminutes,” said Hermione, looking relieved that Harryseemed to have accepted the plan, “not with Filch andthe wretched Inquisitorial Squad floating around.”

“Five minutes’ll be enough,” said Harry. “C’mon, let’sgo

“Now?” said Hermione, looking shocked.

“Of course now!” said Harry angrily. “What did youthink, we’re going to wait until after dinner orsomething? Hermione, Sirius is being tortured rightnow\”

“I — oh all right,” she said desperately. “You go andget the Invisibility Cloak and we’ll meet you at the endof Umbridge’s corridor, okay?”

Harry did not answer, but flung himself out of theroom and began to fight his way through the millingcrowds outside. Two floors up he met Seamus andDean, who hailed him jovially and told him they wereplanning a dusk-till-dawn end-of-exams celebrationin the common room. Harry barely heard them. Hescrambled through the portrait hole while they werestill arguing about how many black-marketbutterbeers they would need and was climbing backout of it, the Invisibility Cloak and Sirius’s knifesecure in his bag, before they noticed he had leftthem.

Page | 941Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, d’you want to chip in a couple of Galleons?Harold Dingle reckons he could sell us somefirewhisky...”

But Harry was already tearing away back along thecorridor, and a couple of minutes later was jumpingthe last few stairs to join Ron, Hermione, Ginny, andLuna, who were huddled together at the end ofUmbridge’s corridor.

“Got it,” he panted. “Ready to go, then?”

“All right,” whispered Hermione as a gang of loudsixth years passed them. “So Ron — you go and headUmbridge off... Ginny, Luna, if you can start movingpeople out of the corridor... Harry and I will get thecloak on and wait until the coast is clear...”

Ron strode away, his bright red hair visible right tothe end of the passage. Meanwhile, Ginny’s equallyvivid head bobbed between the jostling studentssurrounding them in the other direction, trailed byLuna’s blonde one.

“Get over here,” muttered Hermione, tugging atHarry’s wrist and pulling him back into a recesswhere the ugly stone head of a medieval wizard stoodmuttering to itself on a column. “Are — are you sureyou’re okay, Harry? You’re still very pale...”

“I’m fine,” he said shortly, tugging the InvisibilityCloak from out of his bag. In truth, his scar wasaching, but not so badly that he thought Voldemorthad yet dealt Sirius a fatal blow. It had hurt muchworse than this when Voldemort had been punishingAvery...

Page | 942Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Here,” he said. He threw the Invisibility Cloak overboth of them and they stood listening carefully overthe Latin mumblings of the bust in front of them.

“You can’t come down here!” Ginny was calling to thecrowd. “No, sorry, you’re going to have to go round bythe swiveling staircase, someone’s let off GarrotingGas just along here —”

They could hear people complaining; one surly voicesaid, “I can’t see no gas ...”

“That’s because it’s colorless,” said Ginny in aconvincingly exasperated voice, “but if you want towalk through it, carry on, then we’ll have your bodyas proof for the next idiot who didn’t believe us...”

Slowly the crowd thinned. The news about theGarroting Gas seemed to have spread — people werenot coming this way anymore. When at last thesurrounding area was quite clear, Hermione saidquietly, “I think that’s as good as we’re going to get,Harry — come on, let’s do it.”

Together they moved forward, covered by the cloak.Luna was standing with her back to them at the farend of the corridor. As they passed Ginny, Hermionewhispered, “Good one ... don’t forget the signal ...”

“What’s the signal?” muttered Harry, as theyapproached Umbridge’s door.

“A loud chorus of Weasley Is Our King’ if they seeUmbridge coming,” replied Hermione, as Harryinserted the blade of Sirius’s knife in the crackbetween door and wall. The lock clicked open, andthey entered the office.

Page | 943Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The garish kittens were basking in the late afternoonsunshine warming their plates, but otherwise theoffice was as still and empty as last time. Hermionebreathed a sigh of relief.

“I thought she might have added extra security afterthe second niffler...”

They pulled off the cloak. Hermione hurried over tothe window and stood out of sight, peering down intothe grounds with her wand out. Harry dashed over tothe fireplace, seized the pot of Floo powder, and threwa pinch into the grate, causing emerald flames toburst into life there. He knelt down quickly, thrust hishead into the dancing fire, and cried, “Number twelve,Grimmauld Place!”

His head began to spin as though he had just got off afairground ride though his knees remained firmlyplanted upon the cold office floor. He kept his eyesscrewed up against the whirling ash, and when thespinning stopped, he opened them to find himselflooking out upon the long, cold kitchen of GrimmauldPlace.

There was nobody there. He had expected this, yetwas not prepared for the molten wave of dread andpanic that seemed to burst through his stomach floorat the sight of the deserted room.

“Sirius?” he shouted. “Sirius, are you there?”

His voice echoed around the room, but there was noanswer except a tiny scuffing sound to the right of thefire.

“Who’s there?” he called, wondering whether it wasjust a mouse.

Page | 944Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Kreacher the house-elf came creeping into view. Helooked highly delighted about something, though heseemed to have recently sustained a nasty injury toboth hands, which were heavily bandaged.

“It’s the Potter boy’s head in the fire,” Kreacherinformed the empty kitchen, stealing furtive, oddlytriumphant glances at Harry. “What has he come for,Kreacher wonders?”

“Where’s Sirius, Kreacher?” Harry demanded.

The house-elf gave a wheezy chuckle. “Master hasgone out, Harry Potter.”

“Where’s he gone? Where’s he gone, Kreacher?”Kreacher merely cackled.

“I’m warning you!” said Harry, fully aware that hisscope for inflicting punishment upon Kreacher wasalmost nonexistent in this position. “What aboutLupin? Mad-Eye? Any of them, are any of them here?”

“Nobody here but Kreacher!” said the elf gleefully, andturning away from Harry he began to walk slowlytoward the door at the end of the kitchen. “Kreacherthinks he will have a little chat with his Mistress now,yes, he hasn’t had a chance in a long time, Kreacher’sMaster has been keeping him away from her —”

“Where has Sirius gone?” Harry yelled after the elf.“Kreacher, has he gone to the Department ofMysteries?”

Kreacher stopped in his tracks. Harry could justmake out the back of his bald head through the forestof chair legs before him.

Page | 945Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Master does not tell poor Kreacher where he isgoing,” said the elf quietly.

“But you know!” shouted Harry. “Don’t you? Youknow where he is!”

There was a moment’s silence, then the elf let out hisloudest cackle yet. “Master will not come back fromthe Department of Mysteries!” he said gleefully.“Kreacher and his Mistress are alone again!”

And he scurried forward and disappeared through thedoor to the hall.

“You — !”

But before he could utter a single curse or insult,Harry felt a great pain at the top of his head. Heinhaled a lot of ash and, choking, found himself beingdragged backward through the flames until, with ahorrible abruptness, he was staring up into the wide,pallid face of Professor Umbridge, who had draggedhim backward out of the fire by the hair and was nowbending his neck back as far as it would go as thoughshe was going to slit his throat.

“You think,” she whispered, bending Harry’s neckback even farther, so that he was looking up at theceiling above him, “that after two nifflers I was goingto let one more foul, scavenging little creature entermy office without my knowledge? I had StealthSensoring Spells placed all around my doorway afterthe last one got in, you foolish boy. Take his wand,”she barked at someone he could not see, and he felt ahand grope inside the chest pocket of his robes andremove the wand. “Hers too ...”

Page | 946Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry heard a scuffle over by the door and knew thatHermione had just had her wand wrested from her aswell.

“I want to know why you are in my office,” saidUmbridge, shaking the fist clutching his hair so thathe staggered.

“I was — trying to get my Firebolt!” Harry croaked.

“Liar.” She shook his head again. “Your Firebolt isunder strict guard in the dungeons, as you very wellknow, Potter. You had your head in my fire. Withwhom have you been communicating?”

“No one —” said Harry, trying to pull away from her.He felt several hairs part company with his scalp.

“LiaA” shouted Umbridge. She threw him from her,and he slammed into the desk. Now he could seeHermione pinioned against the wall by MillicentBulstrode. Malfoy was leaning on the windowsill,smirking as he threw Harry’s wand into the air one-handed and then caught it again.

There was a commotion outside and several largeSlytherins entered, each gripping Ron, Ginny, Luna,and — to Harry’s bewilderment — Neville, who wastrapped in a stranglehold by Crabbe and looked inimminent danger of suffocation. All four of them hadbeen gagged.

“Got ’em all,” said Warrington, shoving Ron roughlyforward into the room. “That one.” he poked a thickfinger at Neville, “tried to stop me taking her,” hepointed at Ginny, who was trying to kick the shins ofthe large Slytherin girl holding her, “so I brought himalong too.”

Page | 947Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Good, good,” said Umbridge, watching Ginny’sstruggles. “Well, it looks as though Hogwarts willshortly be a Weasley-free zone, doesn’t it?”

Malfoy laughed loudly and sycophantically. Umbridgegave her wide, complacent smile and settled herselfinto a chintz-covered armchair, blinking up at hercaptives like a toad in a flowerbed.

“So, Potter,” she said. “You stationed lookouts aroundmy office and you sent this buffoon,” she nodded atRon, and Malfoy laughed even louder, “to tell me thepoltergeist was wreaking havoc in the Transfigurationdepartment when I knew perfectly well that he wasbusy smearing ink on the eyepieces of all the schooltelescopes, Mr. Filch having just informed me so.

“Clearly, it was very important for you to talk tosomebody. Was it Albus Dumbledore? Or the half-breed, Hagrid? I doubt it was Minerva McGonagall, Ihear she is still too ill to talk to anyone...”

Malfoy and a few of the other members of theInquisitorial Squad laughed some more at that. Harryfound he was so full of rage and hatred he wasshaking.

“It’s none of your business who I talk to,” he snarled.

Umbridge’s slack face seemed to tighten.

“Very well,” she said in her most dangerous andfalsely sweet voice. “Very well, Mr. Potter ... I offeredyou the chance to tell me freely. You refused. I haveno alternative but to force you. Draco — fetchProfessor Snape.”

Malfoy stowed Harry’s wand inside his robes and leftthe room smirking, but Harry hardly noticed. He had

Page | 948Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

just realized something; he could not believe he hadbeen so stupid as to forget it. He had thought that allthe members of the Order, all those who could helphim save Sirius, were gone — but he had been wrong.There was still a member of the Order of the Phoenixat Hogwarts — Snape.

There was silence in the office except for thefidgetings and scufflings resultant from theSlytherins’ efforts to keep Ron and the others undercontrol. Ron’s lip was bleeding onto Umbridge’s carpetas he struggled against Warrington’s half nelson.Ginny was still trying to stamp on the feet of thesixth-year girl who had both her upper arms in a tightgrip. Neville was turning steadily more purple in theface while tugging at Crabbe’s arms, and Hermionewas attempting vainly to throw Millicent Bulstrode offher. Luna, however, stood limply by the side of hercaptor, gazing vaguely out of the window as thoughrather bored by the proceedings.

Harry looked back at Umbridge, who was watchinghim closely. He kept his face deliberately smooth andblank as footsteps were heard in the corridor outsideand Draco Malfoy came back into the room, holdingopen the door for Snape.

“You wanted to see me, Headmistress?” said Snape,looking around at all the pairs of struggling studentswith an expression of complete indifference.

“Ah, Professor Snape,” said Umbridge, smiling widelyand standing up again. “Yes, I would like anotherbottle of Veritaserum, as quick as you can, please.”

“You took my last bottle to interrogate Potter,” hesaid, observing her coolly through his greasy curtainsof black hair. “Surely you did not use it all? I told youthat three drops would be sufficient.”

Page | 949Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Umbridge flushed.

“You can make some more, can’t you?” she said, hervoice becoming more sweetly girlish as it always didwhen she was furious.

“Certainly,” said Snape, his lip curling. “It takes a fullmoon cycle to mature, so I should have it ready foryou in around a month.”

“A month?” squawked Umbridge, swelling toadishly.

“A month? But I need it this evening, Snape! I havejust found Potter using my fire to communicate with aperson or persons unknown!”

“Really?” said Snape, showing his first, faint sign ofinterest as he looked around at Harry. “Well, itdoesn’t surprise me. Potter has never shown muchinclination to follow school rules.”

His cold, dark eyes were boring into Harry’s, who methis gaze unflinchingly, concentrating hard on what hehad seen in his dream, willing Snape to read it in hismind, to understand ...

“I wish to interrogate him!” shouted Umbridge angrily,and Snape looked away from Harry back into herfuriously quivering face. “I wish you to provide mewith a potion that will force him to tell me the truth!”

“I have already told you,” said Snape smoothly, “that Ihave no further stocks of Veritaserum. Unless youwish to poison Potter — and I assure you I wouldhave the greatest sympathy with you if you did — Icannot help you. The only trouble is that mostvenoms act too fast to give the victim much time fortruth-telling...”

Page | 950Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Snape looked back at Harry, who stared at him,frantic to communicate without words.

Voldemort’s got Sirius in the Department of Mysteries,he thought desperately. Voldemort’s got Sirius —

“You are on probation!” shrieked Professor Umbridge,and Snape looked back at her, his eyebrows slightlyraised. “You are being deliberately unhelpful! Iexpected better, Lucius Malfoy always speaks mosthighly of you! Now get out of my office!”

Snape gave her an ironic bow and turned to leave.Harry knew his last chance of letting the Order knowwhat was going on was walking out of the door.

“He’s got Padfoot!” he shouted. “He’s got Padfoot atthe place where it’s hidden!”

Snape had stopped with his hand on Umbridge’s doorhandle.

“Padfoot?” cried Professor Umbridge, looking eagerlyfrom Harry to Snape. “What is Padfoot? Where what ishidden? What does he mean, Snape?”

Snape looked around at Harry. His face wasinscrutable. Harry could not tell whether he hadunderstood or not, but he did not dare speak moreplainly in front of Umbridge.

“I have no idea,” said Snape coldly. “Potter, when Iwant nonsense shouted at me I shall give you aBabbling Beverage. And Crabbe, loosen your hold alittle, if Longbottom suffocates it will mean a lot oftedious paperwork, and I am afraid I shall have tomention it on your reference if ever you apply for ajob.”

Page | 951Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He closed the door behind him with a snap, leavingHarry in a state of worse turmoil than before: Snapehad been his very last hope. He looked at Umbridge,who seemed to be feeling the same way; her chest washeaving with rage and frustration.

“Very well,” she said, and she pulled out her wand.“Very well ... I am left with no alternative... This ismore than a matter of school discipline... This is anissue of Ministry security... Yes ... yes ...”

She seemed to be talking herself into something. Shewas shifting her weight nervously from foot to foot,staring at Harry, beating her wand against her emptypalm and breathing heavily. Harry felt horriblypowerless without his own wand as he watched her.

“You are forcing me, Potter... I do not want to,” saidUmbridge, still moving restlessly on the spot, “butsometimes circumstances justify the use ... I am surethe Minister will understand that I had no choice...”

Malfoy was watching her with a hungry expression onhis face.

“The Cruciatus Curse ought to loosen your tongue,”said Umbridge quietly.

“No!” shrieked Hermione. “Professor Umbridge — it’sillegal” — but Umbridge took no notice. There was anasty, eager, excited look on her face that Harry hadnever seen before. She raised her wand.

“The Minister wouldn’t want you to break the law,Professor Umbridge!” cried Hermione.

“What Cornelius doesn’t know won’t hurt him,” saidUmbridge, who was now panting slightly as shepointed her wand at different parts of Harry’s body in

Page | 952Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

turn, apparently trying to decide what would hurt themost. “He never knew I ordered dementors afterPotter last summer, but he was delighted to be giventhe chance to expel him, all the same...”

“It was you?” gasped Harry. “ You sent the dementorsafter me?”

“Somebody had to act,” breathed Umbridge, as herwand came to rest pointing directly at Harry’sforehead. “They were all bleating about silencing yousomehow — discrediting you — but I was the one whoactually did something about it... Only you wriggledout of that one, didn’t you, Potter? Not today, though,not now ...”

And taking a deep breath, she cried, “Cruc—”

“NO!” shouted Hermione in a cracked voice frombehind Millicent Bulstrode. “No — Harry — Harry,well have to tell her!”

“No way!” yelled Harry, staring at the little ofHermione he could see.

“We’ll have to, Harry, shell force it out of you anyway,what’s ... what’s the point... ?”

And Hermione began to cry weakly into the back ofMillicent Bulstrode’s robes. Millicent stopped trying tosquash her against the wall immediately and dodgedout of her way looking disgusted.

“Well, well, well!” said Umbridge, looking triumphant.“Little Miss Question-All is going to give us someanswers! Come on then, girl, come on!”

“Er — my — nee — no!” shouted Ron through his gag.

Page | 953Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Ginny was staring at Hermione as though she hadnever seen her before; Neville, still choking for breath,was gazing at her too. But Harry had just noticedsomething. Though Hermione was sobbingdesperately into her hands, there was no trace of atear...

“I’m — I’m sorry everyone,” said Hermione. “But — Ican’t stand it —■”

“That’s right, that’s right, girl!” said Umbridge, seizingHermione by the shoulders, thrusting her into theabandoned chintz chair and leaning over her. “Nowthen ... with whom was Potter communicating justnow?”

“Well,” gulped Hermione into her hands, “well, he wastrying to speak to Professor Dumbledore...”

Ron froze, his eyes wide; Ginny stopped trying tostamp on her Slytherin captor’s toes; even Lunalooked mildly surprised. Fortunately, the attention ofUmbridge and her minions was focused tooexclusively upon Hermione to notice these suspicioussigns.

“Dumbledore?” said Umbridge eagerly. “You knowwhere Dumbledore is, then?”

“Well ... no!” sobbed Hermione. “We’ve tried the LeakyCauldron in Diagon Alley and the Three Broomsticksand even the Hog’s Head —”

“Idiot girl, Dumbledore won’t be sitting in a pub whenthe whole Ministry’s looking for him!” shoutedUmbridge, disappointment etched in every saggingline of her face.

Page | 954Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But — but we needed to tell him somethingimportant!” wailed Hermione, holding her hands moretightly over her face, not, Harry knew, out of anguish,but to disguise the continued absence of tears.

“Yes?” said Umbridge with a sudden resurgence ofexcitement. “What was it you wanted to tell him?”

“We ... we wanted to tell him it’s r-ready!” chokedHermione.

“What’s ready?” demanded Umbridge, and now shegrabbed Hermione’s shoulders again and shook herslightly. “What’s ready, girl?”

“The ... the weapon,” said Hermione.

“Weapon? Weapon?” said Umbridge, and her eyesseemed to pop with excitement. “You have beendeveloping some method of resistance? A weapon youcould use against the Ministry? On ProfessorDumbledore’s orders, of course?”

“Y-y-yes,” gasped Hermione. “But he had to leavebefore it was finished and n-n-now we’ve finished itfor him, and we c-c-can’t find him t-t-to tell him!”

“What kind of weapon is it?” said Umbridge harshly,her stubby hands still tight on Hermione’s shoulders.

“We don’t r-r-really understand it,” said Hermione,sniffing loudly. “We j-j-just did what P-P-ProfessorDumbledore told us t-t-to do ...”

Umbridge straightened up, looking exultant.

“Lead me to the weapon,” she said.

Page | 955Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm not showing ... them,” said Hermione shrilly,looking around at the Slytherins through her fingers.

“It is not for you to set conditions,” said ProfessorUmbridge harshly.

“Fine,” said Hermione, now sobbing into her handsagain, “fine ... let them see it, I hope they use it onyou! In fact, I wish you’d invite loads and loads ofpeople to come and see! Th-that would serve you right— oh, I’d love it if the wh-whole school knew where itwas, and how to u-use it, and then if you annoy anyof them they’ll be able to s-sort you out!”

These words had a powerful impact on Umbridge. Sheglanced swiftly and suspiciously around at herInquisitorial Squad, her bulging eyes resting for amoment on Malfoy, who was too slow to disguise thelook of eagerness and greed that had appeared on hisface.

Umbridge contemplated Hermione for another longmoment and then spoke in what she clearly thoughtwas a motherly voice. “All right, dear, let’s make itjust you and me ... and we’ll take Potter too, shall we?Get up, now —”

“Professor,” said Malfoy eagerly, “Professor Umbridge,

I think some of the squad should come with you tolook after —”

“I am a fully qualified Ministry official, Malfoy, do youreally think I cannot manage two wandless teenagersalone?” asked Umbridge sharply. “In any case, it doesnot sound as though this weapon is something thatschoolchildren should see. You will remain here untilI return and make sure none of these” — she gesturedaround at Ron, Ginny, Neville, and Luna — “escape.”

Page | 956Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“All right,” said Malfoy, looking sulky anddisappointed.

“And you two can go ahead of me and show me theway,” said Umbridge, pointing at Harry and Hermionewith her wand. “Lead on...”

Page | 957Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





FIGHT AND FLIGHT

Harry had no idea what Hermione was planning, oreven whether she had a plan. He walked half a pacebehind her as they headed down the corridor outsideUmbridge’s office, knowing it would look verysuspicious if he appeared not to know where theywere going. He did not dare attempt to talk to her;Umbridge was walking so closely behind them that hecould hear her ragged breathing.

Hermione led the way down the stairs into theentrance hall. The din of loud voices and the clatter ofcutlery on plates echoed from out of the double doorsto the Great Hall. It seemed incredible to Harry thattwenty feet away were people who were enjoyingdinner, celebrating the end of exams, not a care in theworld...

Hermione walked straight out of the oak front doorsand down the stone steps into the balmy evening air.The sun was falling toward the tops of the trees in theForbidden Forest now as Hermione marchedpurposefully across the grass, Umbridge jogging toPage | 958Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

keep up. Their long dark shadows rippled over thegrass behind them like cloaks.

“It’s hidden in Hagrid’s hut, is it?” said Umbridgeeagerly in Harry’s ear.

“Of course not,” said Hermione scathingly. “Hagridmight have set it off accidentally.”

“Yes,” said Umbridge, whose excitement seemed to bemounting. “Yes, he would have done, of course, thegreat half-breed oaf...”

She laughed. Harry felt a strong urge to swing aroundand seize her by the throat, but resisted. His scar wasthrobbing in the soft evening air but it had not yetburned white-hot, as he knew it would if Voldemorthad moved in for the kill...

“Then ... where is it?” asked Umbridge, with a hint ofuncertainty in her voice as Hermione continued tostride toward the forest.

“In there, of course,” said Hermione, pointing into thedark trees. “It had to be somewhere that studentsweren’t going to find it accidentally, didn’t it?”

“Of course,” said Umbridge, though she sounded alittle apprehensive now. “Of course ... very well, then... you two stay ahead of me.”

“Can we have your wand, then, if we’re going first?”Harry asked her.

“No, I don’t think so, Mr. Potter,” said Umbridgesweetly, poking him in the back with it. “The Ministryplaces a rather higher value on my life than yours, I’mafraid.”

Page | 959Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

As they reached the cool shade of the first trees,

Harry tried to catch Hermione’s eye; walking into theforest without wands seemed to him to be morefoolhardy than anything they had done so far thisevening. She, however, merely gave Umbridge acontemptuous glance and plunged straight into thetrees, moving at such a pace that Umbridge, with hershorter legs, had difficulty in keeping up.

“Is it very far in?” Umbridge asked, as her robe rippedon a bramble.

“Oh yes,” said Hermione. “Yes, it’s well hidden.”

Harry’s misgivings increased. Hermione was nottaking the path they had followed to visit Grawp, butthe one he had followed three years ago to the lair ofthe monster Aragog. Hermione had not been with himon that occasion; he doubted she had any idea whatdanger lay at the end of it.

“Er — are you sure this is the right way?” he askedher pointedly.

“Oh yes,” she said in a steely voice, crashing throughthe undergrowth with what he thought was a whollyunnecessary amount of noise. Behind them,

Umbridge tripped over a fallen sapling. Neither ofthem paused to help her up again; Hermione merelystrode on, calling loudly over her shoulder, “It’s a bitfurther in!”

“Hermione, keep your voice down,” Harry muttered,hurrying to catch up with her. “Anything could belistening in here —”

“I want us heard,” she answered quietly, as Umbridgejogged noisily after them. “You’ll see...”

Page | 960Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

They walked on for what seemed a long time, untilthey were once again so deep into the forest that thedense tree canopy blocked out all light. Harry had thefeeling he had had before in the forest, one of beingwatched by unseen eyes...

“How much further?” demanded Umbridge angrilyfrom behind him.

“Not far now!” shouted Hermione, as they emergedinto a dim, dank clearing. “Just a little bit —”

An arrow flew through the air and landed with amenacing thud in the tree just over her head. The airwas suddenly full of the sound of hooves. Harry couldfeel the forest floor trembling; Umbridge gave a littlescream and pushed him in front of her like a shield —

He wrenched himself free of her and turned. Aroundfifty centaurs were emerging on every side, their bowsraised and loaded, pointing at Harry, Hermione, andUmbridge, who backed slowly into the center of theclearing, Umbridge uttering odd little whimpers ofterror. Harry looked sideways at Hermione. She waswearing a triumphant smile.

“Who are you?” said a voice.

Harry looked left. The chestnut-bodied centaur calledMagorian was walking toward them out of the circle;his bow, like the others’, was raised. On Harry’s right,Umbridge was still whimpering, her wand tremblingviolently as she pointed it at the advancing centaur.

“I asked you who are you, human,” said Magorianroughly.

“I am Dolores Umbridge!” said Umbridge in a high-pitched, terrified voice. “Senior Undersecretary to the

Page | 961Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Minister of Magic and Headmistress and HighInquisitor of Hogwarts!”

“You are from the Ministry of Magic?” said Magorian,as many of the centaurs in the surrounding circleshifted restlessly.

“That’s right!” said Umbridge in an even higher voice.“So be very careful! By the laws laid down by theDepartment for the Regulation and Control of MagicalCreatures, any attack by half-breeds such asyourselves on a human —”

“ What did you call us?” shouted a wild-looking blackcentaur, whom Harry recognized as Bane. There wasa great deal of angry muttering and tightening ofbowstrings around them.

“Don’t call them that!” Hermione said furiously, butUmbridge did not appear to have heard her. Stillpointing her shaking wand at Magorian, shecontinued, “Law Fifteen B states clearly that ‘Anyattack by a magical creature who is deemed to havenear-human intelligence, and therefore consideredresponsible for its actions —’ ”

“ ‘Near-human intelligence’?” repeated Magorian, asBane and several others roared with rage and pawedthe ground. “We consider that a great insult, human!Our intelligence, thankfully, far outstrips your own —

“What are you doing in our forest?” bellowed thehard-faced gray centaur whom Harry and Hermionehad seen on their last trip into the forest. “Why areyou here?”

“Your forest?” said Umbridge, shaking now not onlywith fright but also, it seemed, with indignation. “I

Page | 962Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

would remind you that you live here only because theMinistry of Magic permits you certain areas of land —

An arrow flew so close to her head that it caught ather mousy hair in passing. She let out an earsplittingscream and threw her hands over her head whilesome of the centaurs bellowed their approval andothers laughed raucously. The sound of their wild,neighing laughter echoing around the dimly litclearing and the sight of their pawing hooves wasextremely unnerving.

“Whose forest is it now, human?” bellowed Bane.

“Filthy half-breeds!” she screamed, her hands stilltight over her head. “Beasts! Uncontrolled animals!”

“Be quiet!” shouted Hermione, but it was too late —Umbridge pointed her wand at Magorian andscreamed, “Incarcerousl”

Ropes flew out of midair like thick snakes, wrappingthemselves tightly around the centaur’s torso andtrapping his arms. He gave a cry of rage and rearedonto his hind legs, attempting to free himself, whilethe other centaurs charged.

Harry grabbed Hermione and pulled her to theground. Facedown on the forest floor he knew amoment of terror as hooves thundered around him,but the centaurs leapt over and around them,bellowing and screaming with rage.

“Nooooo!” he heard Umbridge shriek. “Noooooo ... Iam Senior Undersecretary ... you cannot ... unhandme, you animals ... nooooo!”

Page | 963Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He saw a flash of red light and knew that she hadattempted to Stun one of them — then she screamedvery loudly. Lifting his head a few inches, Harry sawthat Umbridge had been seized from behind by Baneand lifted high into the air, wriggling and yelling withfright. Her wand fell from her hand to the ground andHarry’s heart leapt, if he could just reach it —

But as he stretched out a hand toward it, a centaur’shoof descended upon the wand and it broke cleanly inhalf.

“Now!” roared a voice in Harry’s ear and a thick hairyarm descended from thin air and dragged himupright; Hermione too had been pulled to her feet.Over the plunging, many-colored backs and heads ofthe centaurs Harry saw Umbridge being borne awaythrough the trees by Bane, still screaming nonstop;her voice grew fainter and fainter until they could nolonger hear it over the trampling of hoovessurrounding them.

“And these?” said the hard-faced, gray centaurholding Hermione.

“They are young,” said a slow, doleful voice frombehind Harry. “We do not attack foals.”

“They brought her here, Ronan,” replied the centaurwho had such a firm grip on Harry. “And they are notso young... He is nearing manhood, this one...”

He shook Harry by the neck of his robes.

“Please,” said Hermione breathlessly, “please, don’tattack us, we don’t think like her, we aren’t Ministryof Magic employees! We only came in here because wehoped you’d drive her off for us —”

Page | 964Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry knew at once from the look on the face of thegray centaur holding Hermione that she had made aterrible mistake in saying this. The gray centaurthrew back his head, his back legs stampingfuriously, and bellowed, “You see, Ronan? Theyalready have the arrogance of their kind! So we wereto do your dirty work, were we, human girl? We wereto act as your servants, drive away your enemies likeobedient hounds?”

“No!” said Hermione in a horrorstruck squeak. “Please— I didn’t mean that! I just hoped you’d be able to —to help us —”

But she seemed to be going from bad to worse.

“We do not help humans!” snarled the centaurholding Harry, tightening his grip and rearing a littleat the same time, so that Harry’s feet left the groundmomentarily. “We are a race apart and proud to beso... We will not permit you to walk from here,boasting that we did your bidding!”

“We’re not going to say anything like that!” Harryshouted. “We know you didn’t do anything becausewe wanted you to —”

But nobody seemed to be listening to him. A beardedcentaur toward the back of the crowd shouted, “Theycame here unasked, they must pay theconsequences!”

A roar of approval met these words and a dun-coloredcentaur shouted, “They can join the woman!”

“You said you didn’t hurt the innocent!” shoutedHermione, real tears sliding down her face now. “Wehaven’t done anything to hurt you, we haven’t used

Page | 965Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

wands or threats, we just want to go back to school,please let us go back —”

“We are not all like the traitor Firenze, human girl!”shouted the gray centaur, to more neighing roars ofapproval from his fellows. “Perhaps you thought uspretty talking horses? We are an ancient people whowill not stand wizard invasions and insults! We do notrecognize your laws, we do not acknowledge yoursuperiority, we are —”

But they did not hear what else centaurs were, for atthat moment there came a crashing noise on the edgeof the clearing so loud that all of them — Harry,Hermione, and the fifty or so centaurs filling theclearing — looked around. Harry’s centaur let him fallto the ground again as his hands flew to his bow andquiver of arrows; Hermione had been dropped too,and Harry hurried toward her as two thick treetrunks parted ominously and the monstrous form ofGrawp the giant appeared in the gap.

The centaurs nearest him backed into those behind.The clearing was now a forest of bows and arrowswaiting to be fired, all pointing upward at theenormous grayish face now looming over them fromjust beneath the thick canopy of branches. Grawp’slopsided mouth was gaping stupidly. They could seehis bricklike yellow teeth glimmering in the half-light,his dull sludge-colored eyes narrowed as he squinteddown at the creatures at his feet. Broken ropes trailedfrom both ankles.

He opened his mouth even wider.

“Hagger.”

Harry did not know what “hagger” meant, or whatlanguage it was from, nor did he much care — he was

Page | 966Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

watching Grawp’s feet, which were almost as long asHarry’s whole body. Hermione gripped his arm tightly;the centaurs were quite silent, staring up at the giant,whose huge, round head moved from side to side ashe continued to peer amongst them as though lookingfor something he had dropped.

“Haggeii” he said again, more insistently.

“Get away from here, giant!” called Magorian. “Youare not welcome among us!”

These words seemed to make no impressionwhatsoever on Grawp. He stooped a little (thecentaurs’ arms tensed on their bows) and thenbellowed, “HAGGER!”

A few of the centaurs looked worried now. Hermione,however, gave a gasp.

“Harry!” she whispered. “I think he’s trying to say‘Hagrid’!”

At this precise moment Grawp caught sight of them,the only two humans in a sea of centaurs. He loweredhis head another foot or so, staring intently at them.Harry could feel Hermione shaking as Grawp openedhis mouth wide again and said, in a deep, rumblingvoice, “Hermy.”

“Goodness,” said Hermione, gripping Harry’s arm sotightly it was growing numb and looking as thoughshe was about to faint, “he — he remembered!”

“HERMY!” roared Grawp. “WHERE HAGGER?”

“I don’t know!” squealed Hermione, terrified. “I’msorry, Grawp, I don’t know!”

Page | 967Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“GRAWP WANT HAGGER!”

One of the giant’s massive hands swooped down uponthem — Hermione let out a real scream, ran a fewsteps backward and fell over. Wandless, Harry bracedhimself to punch, kick, bite, or whatever else it tookas the hand flew toward him and knocked a snow-white centaur off his legs.

It was what the centaurs had been waiting for —Grawp’s outstretched fingers were a foot from Harrywhen fifty arrows went soaring through the air at thegiant, peppering his enormous face, causing him tohowl with pain and rage and straighten up again,rubbing his face with his enormous hands, breakingoff the arrow shafts but forcing the heads in stilldeeper.

He yelled and stamped his enormous feet and thecentaurs scattered out of the way. Pebble-sizeddroplets of Grawp’s blood showered Harry as hepulled Hermione to her feet and the pair of them ranas fast as they could for the shelter of the trees. Oncethere they looked back — Grawp was snatchingblindly at the centaurs as blood ran all down his face;they were retreating in disorder, galloping awaythrough the trees on the other side of the clearing. AsHarry and Hermione watched, Grawp gave anotherroar of fury and plunged after them, smashing moretrees aside as he went.

“Oh no,” said Hermione, quaking so badly that herknees gave way. “Oh, that was horrible. And he mightkill them all...”

“I’m not that fussed, to be honest,” said Harrybitterly.

Page | 968Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The sounds of the galloping centaurs and theblundering giant were growing fainter and fainter. AsHarry listened to them his scar gave another greatthrob and a wave of terror swept over him.

They had wasted so much time — they were evenfurther from rescuing Sirius than they had been whenhe had had the vision. Not only had Harry managedto lose his wand but they were stuck in the middle ofthe Forbidden Forest with no means of transportwhatsoever.

“Smart plan,” he spat at Hermione, keen to releasesome of his fury. “Really smart plan. Where do we gofrom here?”

“We need to get back up to the castle,” said Hermionefaintly.

“By the time we’ve done that, Sirius 11 probably bedead!” said Harry, kicking a nearby tree in temper;there was a high-pitched chattering overhead and helooked up to see an angry bowtruckle flexing its longtwiglike fingers at him.

“Well, we can’t do anything without wands,” saidHermione hopelessly, dragging herself up again.“Anyway, Harry, how exactly were you planning to getall the way to London?”

“Yeah, we were just wondering that,” said a familiarvoice from behind her.

Harry and Hermione moved instinctively together,peering through the trees, as Ron came into sight,with Ginny, Neville, and Luna hurrying along behindhim. All of them looked a little the worse for wear —there were several long scratches running the lengthof Ginny’s cheek, a large purple lump was swellingPage | 969Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

above Neville’s right eye, Ron’s lip was bleeding worsethan ever — but all were looking rather pleased withthemselves.

“So,” said Ron, pushing aside a low-hanging branchand holding out Harry’s wand, “had any ideas?”

“How did you get away?” asked Harry in amazement,taking his wand from Ron.

“Couple of Stunners, a Disarming Charm, Nevillebrought off a really nice little Impediment Jinx,” saidRon airily, now handing back Hermione’s wand too.“But Ginny was best, she got Malfoy — Bat-Bogey Hex— it was superb, his whole face was covered in thegreat flapping things. Anyway, we saw you headinginto the forest out of the window and followed.

What’ve you done with Umbridge?”

“She got carried away,” said Harry. “By a herd ofcentaurs.”

“And they left you behind?” asked Ginny, lookingastonished.

“No, they got chased off by Grawp,” said Harry.

“Who’s Grawp?” Luna asked interestedly.

“Hagrid’s little brother,” said Ron promptly. “Anyway,never mind that now. Harry, what did you find out inthe fire? Has You-Know-Who got Sirius or — ?”

“Yes,” said Harry, as his scar gave another painfulprickle, “and I’m sure Sirius is still alive, but I can’tsee how we’re going to get there to help him.”

They all fell silent, looking rather scared. The problemfacing them seemed insurmountable.

Page | 970Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Well, we’ll have to fly, won’t we?” said Luna in theclosest thing to a matter-of-fact voice Harry had everheard her use.

“Okay,” said Harry irritably, rounding on her, “first ofall, “we’ aren’t doing anything if you’re includingyourself in that, and second of all, Ron’s the only onewith a broomstick that isn’t being guarded by asecurity troll, so —”

“I’ve got a broom!” said Ginny.

“Yeah, but you’re not coming,” said Ron angrily.

“Excuse me, but I care what happens to Sirius asmuch as you do!” said Ginny, her jaw set so that herresemblance to Fred and George was suddenlystriking.

“You’re too —” Harry began.

“I’m three years older than you were when you foughtYou-Know-Who over the Sorcerer’s Stone,” she saidfiercely, “and it’s because of me Malfoy’s stuck backin Umbridge’s office with giant flying bogeys attackinghim —”

“Yeah, but —”

“We were all in the D.A. together,” said Neville quietly.“It was all supposed to be about fighting You-Know-Who, wasn’t it? And this is the first chance we’ve hadto do something real — or was that all just a game orsomething?”

“No — of course it wasn’t —” said Harry impatiently.

“Then we should come too,” said Neville simply. “Wewant to help.”

Page | 971Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“That’s right,” said Luna, smiling happily.

Harry’s eyes met Ron’s. He knew that Ron wasthinking exactly what he was: If he could have chosenany members of the D.A. in addition to himself, Ron,and Hermione to join him in the attempt to rescueSirius, he would not have picked Ginny, Neville, orLuna.

“Well, it doesn’t matter anyway,” said Harryfrustratedly, “because we still don’t know how to getthere —”

“I thought we’d settled that?” said Luna maddeningly.“We’re flying!”

“Look,” said Ron, barely containing his anger, “youmight be able to fly without a broomstick but the restof us can’t sprout wings whenever we —”

“There are other ways of flying than withbroomsticks,” said Luna serenely.

“I s’pose we’re going to ride on the back of the KackySnorgle or whatever it is?” Ron demanded.

“The Crumple-Horned Snorkack can’t fly,” said Lunain a dignified voice, “but they can, and Hagrid saysthey’re very good at finding places their riders arelooking for.”

Harry whirled around. Standing between two trees,their white eyes gleaming eerily, were two thestrals,watching the whispered conversation as though theyunderstood every word.

“Yes!” he whispered, moving toward them. Theytossed their reptilian heads, throwing back long blackmanes, and Harry stretched out his hand eagerly and

Page | 972Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

patted the nearest one’s shining neck. How could heever have thought them ugly?

“Is it those mad horse things?” said Ron uncertainly,staring at a point slightly to the left of the thestralHarry was patting. “Those ones you can’t see unlessyou’ve watched someone snuff it?”

“Yeah,” said Harry.

“How many?”

“Just two.”

“Well, we need three,” said Hermione, who was stilllooking a little shaken, but determined just the same.

“Four, Hermione,” said Ginny, scowling.

“I think there are six of us, actually,” said Lunacalmly, counting.

“Don’t be stupid, we can’t all go!” said Harry angrily.“Look, you three” — he pointed at Neville, Ginny, andLuna — “you’re not involved in this, you’re not —”

They burst into more protests. His scar gave another,more painful, twinge. Every moment they delayed wasprecious; he did not have time to argue.

“Okay, fine, it’s your choice,” he said curtly. “Butunless we can find more thestrals you’re not going tobe able —”

“Oh, more of them will come,” said Ginny confidently,who like Ron was squinting in quite the wrongdirection, apparently under the impression that shewas looking at the horses.

Page | 973Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What makes you think that?”

“Because in case you hadn’t noticed, you andHermione are both covered in blood,” she said coolly,“and we know Hagrid lures thestrals with raw meat,so that’s probably why these two turned up in thefirst place...”

Harry felt a soft tug on his robes at that moment andlooked down to see the closest thestral licking hissleeve, which was damp with Grawp’s blood.

“Okay, then,” he said, a bright idea occurring. “Ronand I will take these two and go ahead, and Hermionecan stay here with you three and she’ll attract morethestrals —”

“I’m not staying behind!” said Hermione furiously.

“There’s no need,” said Luna, smiling. “Look, herecome more now... You two must really smell...”

Harry turned. No fewer than six or seven thestralswere picking their way through the trees now, theirgreat leathery wings folded tight to their bodies, theireyes gleaming through the darkness. He had noexcuse now...

“All right,” he said angrily, “pick one and get on,then.”

Page | 974Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



THE DEPARTMENT OF MYSTERIES

Harry wound his hand tightly into the mane of thenearest thestral, placed a foot on a stump nearby,and scrambled clumsily onto the horse’s silken back.It did not object, but twisted its head around, fangsbared, and attempted to continue its eager licking ofhis robes.

He found there was a way of lodging his knees behindthe wing joints that made him feel more secure andlooked around at the others. Neville had heavedhimself over the back of the next thestral and wasnow attempting to swing one short leg over thecreature’s back. Luna was already in place, sittingsidesaddle and adjusting her robes as though she didthis every day. Ron, Hermione, and Ginny, however,were still standing motionless on the spot,openmouthed and staring.

“What?” he said.

“How’re we supposed to get on?” said Ron faintly.“When we can’t see the things?”

Page | 975Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Oh it’s easy,” said Luna, sliding obligingly from herthestral and marching over to him, Hermione, andGinny. “Come here...”

She pulled them over to the other thestrals standingaround and one by one managed to help them ontothe backs of their mounts. All three looked extremelynervous as she wound their hands into the horses’manes and told them to grip tightly before gettingback onto her own steed.

“This is mad,” Ron said faintly, moving his free handgingerly up and down his horse’s neck. “Mad ... if Icould just see it —”

“You’d better hope it stays invisible,” said Harrydarkly. “We all ready, then?”

They all nodded and he saw five pairs of knees tightenbeneath their robes.

“Okay ...”

He looked down at the back of his thestral’s glossyblack head and swallowed. “Ministry of Magic,visitors’ entrance, London, then,” he said uncertainly.“Er ... if you know ... where to go ...”

For a moment his thestral did nothing at all. Then,with a sweeping movement that nearly unseated him,the wings on either side extended, the horse crouchedslowly and then rocketed upward so fast and sosteeply that Harry had to clench his arms and legstightly around the horse to avoid sliding backwardover its bony rump. He closed his eyes and put hisface down into the horse’s silky mane as they burstthrough the topmost branches of the trees and soaredout into a bloodred sunset.

Page | 976Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry did not think he had ever moved so fast: Thethestral streaked over the castle, its wide wingshardly beating. The cooling air was slapping Harry’sface; eyes screwed up against the rushing wind, helooked around and saw his five fellows soaring alongbehind him, each of them bent as low as possible intothe neck of their thestral to protect themselves fromits slipstream.

They were over the Hogwarts grounds, they hadpassed Hogsmeade. Harry could see mountains andgullies below them. In the falling darkness Harry sawsmall collections of lights as they passed over morevillages, then a winding road on which a single carwas beetling its way home through the hills...

“This is bizarre!” Harry heard Ron yell fromsomewhere behind him, and he imagined how it mustfeel to be speeding along at this height with no visiblemeans of support...

Twilight fell: The sky turned to a light, dusky purplelittered with tiny silver stars, and soon it was only thelights of Muggle towns that gave them any clue of howfar from the ground they were or how very fast theywere traveling. Harry’s arms were wrapped tightlyaround his horse’s neck as he willed it to go evenfaster. How much time had elapsed since he had seenSirius lying on the Department of Mysteries floor?

How much longer would he be able to resistVoldemort? All Harry knew for sure was that Siriushad neither done as Voldemort wanted, nor died, forhe was convinced that either outcome would causehim to feel Voldemort’s jubilation or fury coursethrough his own body, making his scar sear aspainfully as it had on the night Mr. Weasley wasattacked...

Page | 977Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

On they flew through the gathering darkness; Harry’sface felt stiff and cold, his legs numb from grippingthe thestral’s sides so tightly, but he did not dareshift positions lest he slip... He was deaf from thethundering in his ears and his mouth was dry andfrozen from the rush of cold night air. He had lost allsense of how far they had come; all his faith was inthe beast below him, still streaking purposefullythrough the night, barely flapping its wings as it spedever onward...

If they were too late ...

He’s still alive, he’s still fighting, I can feel it...

If Voldemort decided Sirius was not going to crack ...I’d know...

Harry’s stomach gave a jolt. The thestral’s head wassuddenly pointing toward the ground and he hadactually slid forward a few inches along its neck. Theywere descending at last... He heard one of the girlsshriek behind him and twisted around dangerouslybut could see no sign of a falling body... Presumablythey had received a shock from the change ofposition, just as he had...

And now bright orange lights were growing larger androunder on all sides. They could see the tops ofbuildings, streams of headlights like luminous insecteyes, squares of pale yellow that were windows. Quitesuddenly, it seemed, they were hurtling toward thepavement. Harry gripped the thestral with every lastounce of his strength, braced for a sudden impact,but the horse touched the dark ground as lightly as ashadow and Harry slid from his back, looking aroundat the street where the overflowing dumpster stillstood a short way from the vandalized telephone box,Page | 978Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

both drained of color in the flat orange glare of thestreetlights.

Ron landed a short way away and toppledimmediately off his thestral onto the pavement.

“Never again,” he said, struggling to his feet. He madeas though to stride away from his thestral, but,unable to see it, collided with its hindquarters andalmost fell over again. “Never, ever again ... that wasthe worst —”

Hermione and Ginny touched down on either side ofhim. Both slid off their mounts a little more gracefullythan Ron, though with similar expressions of relief atbeing back on firm ground. Neville jumped down,shaking, but Luna dismounted smoothly.

“Where do we go from here, then?” she asked Harry ina politely interested voice, as though this was all arather interesting day-trip.

“Over here,” he said. He gave his thestral a quick,grateful pat, then led the way quickly to the batteredtelephone box and opened the door. “Come on\” heurged the others as they hesitated.

Ron and Ginny marched in obediently; Hermione,Neville, and Luna squashed themselves in after them;Harry took one glance back at the thestrals, nowforaging for scraps of rotten food inside the dumpster,then forced himself into the box after Luna.

“Whoever’s nearest the receiver, dial six two four fourtwo!” he said.

Ron did it, his arm bent bizarrely to reach the dial. Asit whirred back into place the cool female voice

Page | 979Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

sounded inside the box, “Welcome to the Ministry ofMagic. Please state your name and business.”

“Harry Potter, Ron Weasley, Hermione Granger,”

Harry said very quickly, “Ginny Weasley, NevilleLongbottom, Luna Lovegood ... We’re here to savesomeone, unless your Ministry can do it first!”

“Thank you,” said the cool female voice. “Visitors,please take the badges and attach them to the front ofyour robes.”

Half a dozen badges slid out of the metal chute wherereturned coins usually appeared. Hermione scoopedthem up and handed them mutely to Harry overGinny’s head; he glanced at the topmost one.

HARRY POTTERRESCUE MISSION

“Visitor to the Ministry, you are required to submit toa search and present your wand for registration at thesecurity desk, which is located at the far end of theAtrium.”

“Fine!” Harry said loudly, as his scar gave anotherthrob. “Now can we move?”

The floor of the telephone box shuddered and thepavement rose up past the glass windows of thetelephone box. The scavenging thestrals were slidingout of sight, blackness closed over their heads, andwith a dull grinding noise they sank down into thedepths of the Ministry of Magic.

A chink of soft golden light hit their feet and,widening, rose up their bodies. Harry bent his knees

Page | 980Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

and held his wand as ready as he could in suchcramped conditions, peering through the glass to seewhether anybody was waiting for them in the Atrium,but it seemed to be completely empty. The light wasdimmer than it had been by day. There were no firesburning under the mantelpieces set into the walls,but he saw as the lift slid smoothly to a halt thatgolden symbols continued to twist sinuously in thedark blue ceiling.

“The Ministry of Magic wishes you a pleasantevening,” said the woman’s voice.

The door of the telephone box burst open; Harrytoppled out of it, followed by Neville and Luna. Theonly sound in the Atrium was the steady rush ofwater from the golden fountain, where jets from thewands of the witch and wizard, the point of thecentaur’s arrow, the tip of the goblin’s hat, and thehouse-elf’s ears continued to gush into thesurrounding pool.

“Come on,” said Harry quietly and the six of themsprinted off down the hall, Harry in the lead, past thefountain, toward the desk where the security manwho had weighed Harry’s wand had sat and whichwas now deserted.

Harry felt sure that there ought to be a securityperson there, sure that their absence was an ominoussign, and his feeling of foreboding increased as theypassed through the golden gates to the lifts. Hepressed the nearest down button and a lift clatteredinto sight almost immediately, the golden grilles slidapart with a great, echoing clanking, and they dashedinside. Harry stabbed the number nine button, thegrilles closed with a bang, and the lift began todescend, jangling and rattling. Harry had not realizedhow noisy the lifts were on the day that he had comePage | 981Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

with Mr. Weasley — he was sure that the din wouldraise every security person within the building, yetwhen the lift halted, the cool female voice said,“Department of Mysteries,” and the grilles slid openagain, they stepped out into the corridor wherenothing was moving but the nearest torches,flickering in the rush of air from the lift.

Harry turned toward the plain black door. Aftermonths and months of dreaming about it, he washere at last...

“Let’s go,” he whispered, and he led the way down thecorridor, Luna right behind him, gazing around withher mouth slightly open.

“Okay, listen,” said Harry, stopping again within sixfeet of the door. “Maybe ... maybe a couple of peopleshould stay here as a — as a lookout, and —”

“And how’re we going to let you know something’scoming?” asked Ginny, her eyebrows raised. “Youcould be miles away.”

“We’re coming with you, Harry,” said Neville.

“Let’s get on with it,” said Ron firmly.

Harry still did not want to take them all with him, butit seemed he had no choice. He turned to face thedoor and walked forward. Just as it had in his dream,it swung open and he marched forward, leading theothers over the threshold.

They were standing in a large, circular room.Everything in here was black including the floor andceiling — identical, unmarked, handle-less blackdoors were set at intervals all around the black walls,interspersed with branches of candles whose flamesPage | 982Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

burned blue, their cool, shimmering light reflected inthe shining marble floor so that it looked as thoughthere was dark water underfoot.

“Someone shut the door,” Harry muttered.

He regretted giving this order the moment Neville hadobeyed it. Without the long chink of light from thetorch-lit corridor behind them, the place became sodark that for a moment the only things they could seewere the bunches of shivering blue flames on thewalls and their ghostly reflections in the floor below.

In his dream, Harry had always walked purposefullyacross this room to the door immediately opposite theentrance and walked on. But there were around adozen doors here. Just as he was gazing ahead at thedoors opposite him, trying to decide which was theright one, there was a great rumbling noise and thecandles began to move sideways. The circular wallwas rotating.

Hermione grabbed Harry’s arm as though frightenedthe floor might move too, but it did not. For a fewseconds the blue flames around them were blurred toresemble neon lines as the wall sped around andthen, quite as suddenly as it had started, therumbling stopped and everything became stationaryonce again.

Harry’s eyes had blue streaks burned into them; itwas all he could see.

“What was that about?” whispered Ron fearfully.

“I think it was to stop us knowing which door wecame in from,” said Ginny in a hushed voice.

Page | 983Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry realized at once that she was right: He could nosooner have picked the exit from the other doors thanlocated an ant upon the jet-black floor. Meanwhile,the door through which they needed to proceed couldbe any of the dozen surrounding them.

“How’re we going to get back out?” said Nevilleuncomfortably.

“Well, that doesn’t matter now,” said Harry forcefully,blinking to try and erase the blue lines from hisvision, and clutching his wand tighter than ever. “Wewon’t need to get out till we’ve found Sirius —”

“Don’t go calling for him, though!” Hermione saidurgently, but Harry had never needed her advice less;his instinct was to keep as quiet as possible for thetime being.

“Where do we go, then, Harry?” Ron asked.

“I don’t —” Harry began. He swallowed. “In thedreams I went through the door at the end of thecorridor from the lifts into a dark room — that’s thisone — and then I went through another door into aroom that kind of ... glitters. We should try a fewdoors,” he said hastily. “I’ll know the right way when Isee it. C’mon.”

He marched straight at the door now facing him, theothers following close behind him, set his left handagainst its cool, shining surface, raised his wand,ready to strike the moment it opened, and pushed. Itswung open easily.

After the darkness of the first room, the lampshanging low on golden chains from this ceiling gavethe impression that this long rectangular room wasmuch brighter, though there were no glittering,

Page | 984Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

shimmering lights such as Harry had seen in hisdreams. The place was quite empty except for a fewdesks and, in the very middle of the room, anenormous glass tank of deep-green water, big enoughfor all of them to swim in, which contained a numberof pearly white objects that were drifting around lazilyin the liquid.

“What’re those things?” whispered Ron.

“Dunno,” said Harry.

“Are they fish?” breathed Ginny.

“Aquavirius maggots!” said Luna excitedly. “Dad saidthe Ministry were breeding —”

“No,” said Hermione. She sounded odd. She movedforward to look through the side of the tank. “They’rebrains.”

“Brains?”

“Yes ... I wonder what they’re doing with them?”

Harry joined her at the tank. Sure enough, therecould be no mistake now that he saw them at closequarters. Glimmering eerily they drifted in and out ofsight in the depths of the green water, lookingsomething like slimy cauliflowers.

“Let’s get out of here,” said Harry. “This isn’t right, weneed to try another door —”

“There are doors here too,” said Ron, pointing aroundthe walls. Harry’s heart sank; how big was this place?

Page | 985Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“In my dream I went through that dark room into thesecond one,” he said. “I think we should go back andtry from there.”

So they hurried back into the dark, circular room; theghostly shapes of the brains were now swimmingbefore Harry’s eyes instead of the blue candle flames.

“Wait!” said Hermione sharply, as Luna made to closethe door of the brain room behind them. “FlagrateV’

She drew with her wand in midair and a fiery Xappeared on the door. No sooner had the door clickedshut behind them than there was a great rumbling,and once again the wall began to revolve very fast, butnow there was a great red-gold blur in amongst thefaint blue, and when all became still again, the fierycross still burned, showing the door they had alreadytried.

“Good thinking,” said Harry. “Okay, let’s try this one

Again he strode directly at the door facing him andpushed it open, his wand still raised, the others at hisheels.

This room was larger than the last, dimly lit andrectangular, and the center of it was sunken, forminga great stone pit some twenty feet below them. Theywere standing on the topmost tier of what seemed tobe stone benches running all around the room anddescending in steep steps like an amphitheater, or thecourtroom in which Harry had been tried by theWizengamot. Instead of a chained chair, however,there was a raised stone dais in the center of thelowered floor, and upon this dais stood a stonearchway that looked so ancient, cracked, andcrumbling that Harry was amazed the thing was stillPage | 986Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

standing. Unsupported by any surrounding wall, thearchway was hung with a tattered black curtain orveil which, despite the complete stillness of the coldsurrounding air, was fluttering very slightly as thoughit had just been touched.

“Who’s there?” said Harry, jumping down onto thebench below. There was no answering voice, but theveil continued to flutter and sway.

“Careful!” whispered Hermione.

Harry scrambled down the benches one by one untilhe reached the stone bottom of the sunken pit. Hisfootsteps echoed loudly as he walked slowly towardthe dais. The pointed archway looked much tallerfrom where he stood now than when he had beenlooking down on it from above. Still the veil swayedgently, as though somebody had just passed throughit.

“Sirius?” Harry spoke again, but much more quietlynow that he was nearer.

He had the strangest feeling that there was someonestanding right behind the veil on the other side of thearchway. Gripping his wand very tightly, he edgedaround the dais, but there was nobody there. All thatcould be seen was the other side of the tattered blackveil.

“Let’s go,” called Hermione from halfway up the stonesteps. “This isn’t right, Harry, come on, let’s go...”

She sounded scared, much more scared than she hadin the room where the brains swam, yet Harrythought the archway had a kind of beauty about it,old though it was. The gently rippling veil intrigued

Page | 987Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

him; he felt a very strong inclination to climb up onthe dais and walk through it.

“Harry, let’s go, okay?” said Hermione more forcefully.

“Okay,” he said, but he did not move. He had justheard something. There were faint whispering,murmuring noises coming from the other side of theveil.

“What are you saying?” he said very loudly, so thatthe words echoed all around the surrounding stonebenches.

“Nobody’s talking, Harry!” said Hermione, now movingover to him.

“Someone’s whispering behind there,” he said, movingout of her reach and continuing to frown at the veil.

“Is that you, Ron?”

“I’m here, mate,” said Ron, appearing around the sideof the archway.

“Can’t anyone else hear it?” Harry demanded, for thewhispering and murmuring was becoming louder;without really meaning to put it there, he found hisfoot was on the dais.

“I can hear them too,” breathed Luna, joining themaround the side of the archway and gazing at theswaying veil. “There are people in there\”

“What do you mean, ‘in there’?” demanded Hermione,jumping down from the bottom step and soundingmuch angrier than the occasion warranted. “Thereisn’t any ‘in there,’ it’s just an archway, there’s noroom for anybody to be there — Harry, stop it, comeaway —”

Page | 988Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She grabbed his arm and pulled, but he resisted.

“Harry, we are supposed to be here for Sirius!” shesaid in a high-pitched, strained voice.

“Sirius,” Harry repeated, still gazing, mesmerized, atthe continuously swaying veil. “Yeah ...”

And then something slid back into place in his brain:Sirius, captured, bound, and tortured, and he wasstaring at this archway...

He took several paces back from the dais andwrenched his eyes from the veil.

“Let’s go,” he said.

“That’s what I’ve been trying to — well, come on,then!” said Hermione, and she led the way backaround the dais. On the other side, Ginny and Nevillewere staring, apparently entranced, at the veil too.Without speaking, Hermione took hold of Ginny’sarm, Ron Neville’s, and they marched them firmlyback to the lowest stone bench and clambered all theway back up to the door.

“What d’you reckon that arch was?” Harry askedHermione as they regained the dark circular room.

“I don’t know, but whatever it was, it was dangerous,”she said firmly, again inscribing a fiery cross uponthe door.

Once more the wall spun and became still again.Harry approached a door at random and pushed. Itdid not move.

“What’s wrong?” said Hermione.

Page | 989Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It’s ... locked ...” said Harry, throwing his weight atthe door, but it did not budge.

“This is it, then, isn’t it?” said Ron excitedly, joiningHarry in the attempt to force the door open. “Boundto be!”

“Get out of the way!” said Hermione sharply. Shepointed her wand at the place where a lock wouldhave been on an ordinary door and said, “Alohomora\”

Nothing happened.

“Sirius’s knife!” said Harry, and he pulled it out frominside his robes and slid it into the crack between thedoor and the wall. The others all watched eagerly ashe ran it from top to bottom, withdrew it, and thenflung his shoulder again at the door. It remained asfirmly shut as ever. What was more, when Harrylooked down at the knife, he saw that the blade hadmelted.

“Right, we’re leaving that room,” said Hermionedecisively.

“But what if that’s the one?” said Ron, staring at itwith a mixture of apprehension and longing.

“It can’t be, Harry could get through all the doors inhis dream,” said Hermione, marking the door withanother fiery cross as Harry replaced the now-uselesshandle of Sirius’s knife in his pocket.

“You know what could be in there?” said Lunaeagerly, as the wall started to spin yet again.

“Something blibbering, no doubt,” said Hermioneunder her breath, and Neville gave a nervous littlelaugh.

Page | 990Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The wall slid back to a halt and Harry, with a feelingof increasing desperation, pushed the next door open.

“This is it!”

He knew it at once by the beautiful, dancing,diamond-sparkling light. As Harry’s eyes becamemore accustomed to the brilliant glare he saw clocksgleaming from every surface, large and small,grandfather and carriage, hanging in spaces betweenthe bookcases or standing on desks ranging thelength of the room, so that a busy, relentless tickingfilled the place like thousands of minuscule,marching footsteps. The source of the dancing,diamond-bright light was a towering crystal bell jarthat stood at the far end of the room.

“This way!”

Harry’s heart was pumping frantically now that heknew they were on the right track. He led the wayforward down the narrow space between the lines ofthe desks, heading, as he had done in his dream, forthe source of the light, the crystal bell jar quite as tallas he was that stood on a desk and appeared to befull of a billowing, glittering wind.

“Oh look).” said Ginny, as they drew nearer, pointingat the very heart of the bell jar.

Drifting along in the sparkling current inside was atiny, jewel-bright egg. As it rose in the jar it crackedopen and a hummingbird emerged, which was carriedto the very top of the jar, but as it fell on the draft, itsfeathers became bedraggled and damp again, and bythe time it had been borne back to the bottom of thejar it had been enclosed once more in its egg.

Page | 991Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Keep going!” said Harry sharply, because Ginnyshowed signs of wanting to stop and watch the egg’sprogress back into a bird.

“You dawdled enough by that old arch!” she saidcrossly, but followed him past the bell jar to the onlydoor behind it.

“This is it,” Harry said again, and his heart was nowpumping so hard and fast he felt it must interferewith his speech. “It’s through here —”

He glanced around at them all. They had their wandsout and looked suddenly serious and anxious. Helooked back at the door and pushed. It swung open.

They were there, they had found the place: high as achurch and full of nothing but towering shelvescovered in small, dusty, glass orbs. They glimmereddully in the light issuing from more candle bracketsset at intervals along the shelves. Like those in thecircular room behind them, their flames were burningblue. The room was very cold.

Harry edged forward and peered down one of theshadowy aisles between two rows of shelves. He couldnot hear anything nor see the slightest sign ofmovement.

“You said it was row ninety-seven,” whisperedHermione.

“Yeah,” breathed Harry, looking up at the end of theclosest row. Beneath the branch of blue-glowingcandles protruding from it glimmered the silver figure53.

“We need to go right, I think,” whispered Hermione,squinting to the next row. “Yes ... that’s fifty-four...”

Page | 992Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Keep your wands out,” Harry said softly.

They crept forward, staring behind them as they wenton down the long alleys of shelves, the farther ends ofwhich were in near total darkness. Tiny, yellowinglabels had been stuck beneath each glass orb on theshelf. Some of them had a weird, liquid glow; otherswere as dull and dark within as blown lightbulbs.

They passed row eighty-four ... eighty-five ... Harrywas listening hard for the slightest sound ofmovement, but Sirius might be gagged now, or elseunconscious ... or, said an unbidden voice inside hishead, he might already be dead...

I’d have felt it, he told himself, his heart nowhammering against his Adam’s apple. I’d alreadyknow...

“Ninety-seven!” whispered Hermione.

They stood grouped around the end of the row, gazingdown the alley beside it. There was nobody there.

“He’s right down at the end,” said Harry, whosemouth had become slightly dry. “You can’t seeproperly from here...”

And he led them forward, between the towering rowsof glass balls, some of which glowed softly as theypassed...

“He should be near here,” whispered Harry, convincedthat every step was going to bring the ragged form ofSirius into view upon the darkened floor. “Anywherehere ... really close ...”

“Harry?” said Hermione tentatively, but he did notwant to respond. His mouth was very dry now.

Page | 993Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Somewhere about ... here ...” he said.

They had reached the end of the row and emergedinto more dim candlelight. There was nobody there atall. All was echoing, dusty silence.

“He might be ...” Harry whispered hoarsely, peeringdown the alley next door. “Or maybe ...” He hurried tolook down the one beyond that.

“Harry?” said Hermione again.

“What?” he snarled.

“I ... I don’t think Sirius is here.”

Nobody spoke. Harry did not want to look at any ofthem. He felt sick. He did not understand why Siriuswas not here. He had to be here. This was where he,Harry, had seen him...

He ran up the space at the end of the rows, staringdown them. Empty aisle after empty aisle flickeredpast. He ran the other way, back past his staringcompanions. There was no sign of Sirius anywhere,nor any hint of a struggle.

“Harry?” Ron called.

“What?”

He did not want to hear what Ron had to say, did notwant to hear Ron tell him he had been stupid, orsuggest that they ought to go back to Hogwarts. Butthe heat was rising in his face and he felt as thoughhe would like to skulk down here in the darkness fora long while before facing the brightness of the Atriumabove and the others’ accusing stares...

Page | 994Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Have you seen this?” said Ron.

“What?” said Harry, but eagerly this time — it had tobe a sign that Sirius had been there, a clue — hestrode back to where they were all standing, a littleway down row ninety-seven, but found nothing exceptRon staring at one of the dusty glass spheres on theshelves.

“What?” Harry repeated glumly.

“It’s — it’s got your name on,” said Ron.

Harry moved a little closer. Ron was pointing at one ofthe small glass spheres that glowed with a dull innerlight, though it was very dusty and appeared not tohave been touched for many years.

“My name?” said Harry blankly.

He stepped forward. Not as tall as Ron, he had tocrane his neck to read the yellowish label affixed tothe shelf right beneath the dusty glass ball. In spiderywriting was written a date of some sixteen yearspreviously, and below that:

S.P.T. to A.P.W.B.D.

Dark Lord

and (?) Harry Potter

Harry stared at it.

“What is it?” Ron asked, sounding unnerved. “What’syour name doing down here?”

He glanced along at the other labels on that stretch ofshelf.

Page | 995Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm not here,” he said, sounding perplexed. “None ofthe rest of us are here...”

“Harry, I don’t think you should touch it,” saidHermione sharply, as he stretched out his hand.

“Why not?” he said. “It’s something to do with me,isn’t it?”

“Don’t, Harry,” said Neville suddenly. Harry lookedaround at him. Neville’s round face was shiningslightly with sweat. He looked as though he could nottake much more suspense.

“It’s got my name on,” said Harry.

And feeling slightly reckless, he closed his fingersaround the dusty ball’s surface. He had expected it tofeel cold, but it did not. On the contrary, it felt asthough it had been lying in the sun for hours, asthough the glow of light within was warming it.Expecting, even hoping, that something dramatic wasgoing to happen, something exciting that might maketheir long and dangerous journey worthwhile after all,he lifted the glass ball down from its shelf and staredat it.

Nothing whatsoever happened. The others moved incloser around Harry, gazing at the orb as he brushedit free of the clogging dust.

And then, from right behind them, a drawling voicesaid, “Very good, Potter. Now turn around, nice andslowly, and give that to me.”

Page | 996Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling



BEYOND THE VEIL

Black shapes were emerging out of thin air all aroundthem, blocking their way left and right; eyes glintedthrough slits in hoods, a dozen lit wand tips werepointing directly at their hearts. Ginny gave a gasp ofhorror.

“To me, Potter,” repeated the drawling voice of LuciusMalfoy as he held out his hand, palm up.

Harry’s insides plummeted sickeningly. They weretrapped and outnumbered two to one.

“To me,” said Malfoy yet again.

“Where’s Sirius?” Harry said.

Several of the Death Eaters laughed. A harsh femalevoice from the midst of the shadowy figures to Harry’sleft said triumphantly, “The Dark Lord alwaysknows!”

Page | 997Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Always,” echoed Malfoy softly. “Now, give me theprophecy, Potter.”

“I want to know where Sirius is!”

“I want to know where Sirius is!” mimicked the womanto his left.

She and her fellow Death Eaters had closed in so thatthey were mere feet away from Harry and the others,the light from their wands dazzling Harry’s eyes.

“You’ve got him,” said Harry, ignoring the rising panicin his chest, the dread he had been fighting sincethey had first entered the ninety-seventh row. “He’shere. I know he is.”

“The little baby woke up fwightened and fort what itdweamed was twoo,” said the woman in a horrible,mock-baby voice. Harry felt Ron stir beside him.

“Don’t do anything,” he muttered. “Not yet —”

The woman who had mimicked him let out a raucousscream of laughter.

“You hear him? You hear him? Giving instructions tothe other children as though he thinks of fighting us!”

“Oh, you don’t know Potter as I do, Bellatrix,” saidMalfoy softly. “He has a great weakness for heroics;the Dark Lord understands this about him. Now giveme the prophecy, Potter.”

“I know Sirius is here,” said Harry, though panic wascausing his chest to constrict and he felt as thoughhe could not breathe properly. “I know you’ve gothim!”

Page | 998Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

More of the Death Eaters laughed, though the womanstill laughed loudest of all.

“It’s time you learned the difference between life anddreams, Potter,” said Malfoy. “Now give me theprophecy, or we start using wands.”

“Go on, then,” said Harry, raising his own wand tochest height. As he did so, the five wands of Ron,Hermione, Neville, Ginny, and Luna rose on eitherside of him. The knot in Harry’s stomach tightened. IfSirius really was not here, he had led his friends totheir deaths for no reason at all...

But the Death Eaters did not strike.

“Hand over the prophecy and no one need get hurt,”said Malfoy coolly.

It was Harry’s turn to laugh.

“Yeah, right!” he said. “I give you this — prophecy, isit? And you’ll just let us skip off home, will you?”

The words were hardly out of his mouth when thefemale Death Eater shrieked, “Accio Proph —”

Harry was just ready for her. He shouted “Protego\”before she had finished her spell, and though theglass sphere slipped to the tips of his fingers hemanaged to cling on to it.

“Oh, he knows how to play, little bitty baby Potter,”she said, her mad eyes staring through the slits inher hood. “Very well, then —”

“I TOLD YOU, NO!” Lucius Malfoy roared at thewoman. “If you smash it — !”

Page | 999Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s mind was racing. The Death Eaters wantedthis dusty spun-glass sphere. He had no interest in it.He just wanted to get them all out of this alive, makesure that none of his friends paid a terrible price forhis stupidity ...

The woman stepped forward, away from her fellows,and pulled off her hood. Azkaban had hollowedBellatrix Lestrange’s face, making it gaunt and skull-like, but it was alive with a feverish, fanatical glow.

“You need more persuasion?” she said, her chestrising and falling rapidly. “Very well — take thesmallest one,” she ordered the Death Eaters besideher. “Let him watch while we torture the little girl. I’lldo it.”

Harry felt the others close in around Ginny. Hestepped sideways so that he was right in front of her,the prophecy held up to his chest.

“You’ll have to smash this if you want to attack any ofus,” he told Bellatrix. “I don’t think your boss will betoo pleased if you come back without it, will he?”

She did not move; she merely stared at him, the tip ofher tongue moistening her thin mouth.

“So,” said Harry, “what kind of prophecy are wetalking about anyway?”

He could not think what to do but to keep talking.Neville’s arm was pressed against his, and he couldfeel him shaking. He could feel one of the other’squickened breath on the back of his head. He washoping they were all thinking hard about ways to getout of this, because his mind was blank.

Page | lOOOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What kind of prophecy?” repeated Bellatrix, the grinfading from her face. “You jest, Harry Potter.”

“Nope, not jesting,” said Harry, his eyes flicking fromDeath Eater to Death Eater, looking for a weak link, aspace through which they could escape. “How comeVoldemort wants it?”

Several of the Death Eaters let out low hisses.

“You dare speak his name?” whispered Bellatrix.

“Yeah,” said Harry, maintaining his tight grip on theglass ball, expecting another attempt to bewitch itfrom him. “Yeah, IVe got no problem saying Vol —”

“Shut your mouth!” Bellatrix shrieked. “You darespeak his name with your unworthy lips, you darebesmirch it with your half-blood’s tongue, you dare —

“Did you know he’s a half-blood too?” said Harryrecklessly. Hermione gave a little moan in his ear.“Voldemort? Yeah, his mother was a witch but hisdad was a Muggle — or has he been telling you lothe’s pureblood?”

“STUPEF—”

“iVO!”

A jet of red light had shot from the end of BellatrixLestrange’s wand, but Malfoy had deflected it. Hisspell caused hers to hit the shelf a foot to the left ofHarry and several of the glass orbs there shattered.

Two figures, pearly white as ghosts, fluid as smoke,unfurled themselves from the fragments of brokenglass upon the floor and each began to speak. Their

Page | lOOlHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

voices vied with each other, so that only fragments ofwhat they were saying could be heard over Malfoy andBellatrix’s shouts.

"... at the Solstice will come a new ...” said the figureof an old, bearded man.

“DO NOT ATTACK! WE NEED THE PROPHECY!”

“He dared — he dares —” shrieked Bellatrixincoherently. “— He stands there — filthy half-blood

“WAIT UNTIL WEVE GOT THE PROPHECY!” bawledMalfoy.

"... and none will come after ...” said the figure of ayoung woman.

The two figures that had burst from the shatteredspheres had melted into thin air. Nothing remained ofthem or their erstwhile homes but fragments of glassupon the floor. They had, however, given Harry anidea. The problem was going to be conveying it to theothers.

“You haven’t told me what’s so special about thisprophecy I’m supposed to be handing over,” he said,playing for time. He moved his foot slowly sideways,feeling around for someone else’s.

“Do not play games with us, Potter,” said Malfoy.

“I’m not playing games,” said Harry, half his mind onthe conversation, half on his wandering foot. Andthen he found someone’s toes and pressed down uponthem. A sharp intake of breath behind him told himthey were Hermione’s.

Page | 1002Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“What?” she whispered.

“Dumbledore never told you that the reason you bearthat scar was hidden in the bowels of the Departmentof Mysteries?” said Malfoy sneeringly.

“I — what?” said Harry, and for a moment he quiteforgot his plan. “What about my scar?”

“ What?” whispered Hermione more urgently behindhim.

“Can this be?” said Malfoy, sounding maliciouslydelighted; some of the Death Eaters were laughingagain, and under cover of their laughter, Harry hissedto Hermione, moving his lips as little as possible,“Smash shelves —”

“Dumbledore never told you?” Malfoy repeated. “Well,this explains why you didn’t come earlier, Potter, theDark Lord wondered why —”

“— when I say go —”

“— you didn’t come running when he showed you theplace where it was hidden in your dreams. Hethought natural curiosity would make you want tohear the exact wording...”

“Did he?” said Harry. Behind him he felt rather thanheard Hermione passing his message to the othersand he sought to keep talking, to distract the DeathEaters. “So he wanted me to come and get it, did he?Why?”

“Why?” Malfoy sounded incredulously delighted.“Because the only people who are permitted toretrieve a prophecy from the Department of Mysteries,Potter, are those about whom it was made, as the

Page | 1003Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Dark Lord discovered when he attempted to useothers to steal it for him.”

“And why did he want to steal a prophecy about me?”

“About both of you, Potter, about both of you ...Haven’t you ever wondered why the Dark Lord tried tokill you as a baby?”

Harry stared into the slitted eyeholes through whichMalfoy’s gray eyes were gleaming. Was this prophecythe reason Harry’s parents had died, the reason hecarried his lightning-bolt scar? Was the answer to allof this clutched in his hand?

“Someone made a prophecy about Voldemort andme?” he said quietly, gazing at Lucius Malfoy, hisfingers tightening over the warm glass sphere in hishand. It was hardly larger than a Snitch and stillgritty with dust. “And he’s made me come and get itfor him? Why couldn’t he come and get it himself?”

“Get it himself?” shrieked Bellatrix on a cackle of madlaughter. “The Dark Lord, walk into the Ministry ofMagic, when they are so sweetly ignoring his return?The Dark Lord, reveal himself to the Aurors, when atthe moment they are wasting their time on my dearcousin?”

“So he’s got you doing his dirty work for him, hashe?” said Harry. “Like he tried to get Sturgis to steal it— and Bode?”

“Very good, Potter, very good ...” said Malfoy slowly.“But the Dark Lord knows you are not unintell —”

“NOW!” yelled Harry.

Page | 1004Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Five different voices behind him bellowed “REDUCTOl”Five curses flew in five different directions and theshelves opposite them exploded as they hit. Thetowering structure swayed as a hundred glassspheres burst apart, pearly-white figures unfurledinto the air and floated there, their voices echoingfrom who knew what long-dead past amid the torrentof crashing glass and splintered wood now rainingdown upon the floor —

“RUN!” Harry yelled, and as the shelves swayedprecariously and more glass spheres began to pourfrom above, he seized a handful of Hermione’s robesand dragged her forward, one arm over his head aschunks of shelf and shards of glass thundered downupon them. A Death Eater lunged forward throughthe cloud of dust and Harry elbowed him hard in themasked face. They were all yelling, there were cries ofpain, thunderous crashes as the shelves collapsedupon themselves, weirdly echoing fragments of theSeers unleashed from their spheres —

Harry found the way ahead clear and saw Ron,

Ginny, and Luna sprint past him, their arms overtheir heads. Something heavy struck him on the sideof the face but he merely ducked his head andsprinted onward; a hand caught him by the shoulder;he heard Hermione shout “Stupefy\” and the handreleased him at once.

They were at the end of row ninety-seven; Harryturned right and began to sprint in earnest. He couldhear footsteps right behind him and Hermione’s voiceurging Neville on. The door through which they hadcome was ajar straight ahead, Harry could see theglittering light of the bell jar, he pelted through it, theprophecy still clutched tight and safe in his hand,waited for the others to hurtle over the thresholdbefore slamming the door behind them —

Page | 1005Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Colloportus\” gasped Hermione and the door sealeditself with an odd squelching noise.

“Where — where are the others?” gasped Harry.

He had thought that Ron, Luna, and Ginny had beenahead of them, that they would be waiting in thisroom, but there was nobody there.

“They must have gone the wrong way!” whisperedHermione, terror in her face.

“Listen!” whispered Neville.

Footsteps and shouts echoed from behind the doorthey had just sealed. Harry put his ear close to thedoor to listen and heard Lucius Malfoy roar: “LeaveNott, leave him, I say, the Dark Lord will not care forNott’s injuries as much as losing that prophecy —Jugson, come back here, we need to organize! Wellsplit into pairs and search, and don’t forget, be gentlewith Potter until we’ve got the prophecy, you can killthe others if necessary — Bellatrix, Rodolphus, youtake the left, Crabbe, Rabastan, go right — Jugson,Dolohov, the door straight ahead — Macnair andAvery, through here — Rookwood, over there —Mulciber, come with me!”

“What do we do?” Hermione asked Harry, tremblingfrom head to foot.

“Well, we don’t stand here waiting for them to find us,for a start,” said Harry. “Let’s get away from thisdoor...”

They ran, quietly as they could, past the shimmeringbell jar where the tiny egg was hatching andunhatching, toward the exit into the circular hallwayat the far end of the room. They were almost there

Page | 1006Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

when Harry heard something large and heavy collidewith the door Hermione had charmed shut.

“Stand aside!” said a rough voice. “Alohomora\”

As the door flew open, Harry, Hermione, and Nevilledived under desks. They could see the bottom of thetwo Death Eaters’ robes drawing nearer, their feetmoving rapidly.

“They might’ve run straight through to the hall,” saidthe rough voice.

“Check under the desks,” said another.

Harry saw the knees of the Death Eaters bend. Pokinghis wand out from under the desk he shouted,“STUPEFY]”

A jet of red light hit the nearest Death Eater; he fellbackward into a grandfather clock and knocked itover. The second Death Eater, however, had leaptaside to avoid Harry’s spell and now pointed his ownwand at Hermione, who had crawled out from underthe desk to get a better aim.

“Avada —”

Harry launched himself across the floor and grabbedthe Death Eater around the knees, causing him totopple and his aim to go awry. Neville overturned hisdesk in his anxiety to help; pointing his wand wildlyat the struggling pair he cried, “EXPELLIARMUS\”

Both Harry’s and the Death Eater’s wands flew out oftheir hands and soared back toward the entrance tothe Hall of Prophecy; both scrambled to their feet andcharged after them, the Death Eater in front and

Page | 1007Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry hot on his heels, Neville bringing up the rear,plainly horrors truck at what he had done.

“Get out of the way, Harry!” yelled Neville, clearlydetermined to repair the damage.

Harry flung himself sideways as Neville took aimagain and shouted, “STUPEFY!”

The jet of red light flew right over the Death Eater’sshoulder and hit a glass-fronted cabinet on the wallfull of variously shaped hourglasses. The cabinet fellto the floor and burst apart, glass flying everywhere,then sprang back up onto the wall, fully mended,then fell down again, and shattered —

The Death Eater had snatched up his wand, whichlay on the floor beside the glittering bell jar. Harryducked down behind another desk as the man turned— his mask had slipped so that he could not see, heripped it off with his free hand and shouted, “STUP —

“STUPEFY]” screamed Hermione, who had just caughtup with them. The jet of red light hit the Death Eaterin the middle of his chest; he froze, his arm stillraised, his wand fell to the floor with a clatter and hecollapsed backward toward the bell jar. Harryexpected to hear a clunk, for the man to hit solid glassand slide off the jar onto the floor, but instead, hishead sank through the surface of the bell jar asthough it was nothing but a soap bubble and he cameto rest, sprawled on his back on the table, with hishead lying inside the jar full of glittering wind.

“Accio Wand\” cried Hermione. Harry’s wand flew froma dark corner into her hand and she threw it to him.

“Thanks,” he said, “right, let’s get out of—”

Page | 1008Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Look out!” said Neville, horrified, staring at the DeathEater’s head in the bell jar.

All three of them raised their wands again, but noneof them struck. They were all gazing, openmouthed,appalled, at what was happening to the man’s head.

It was shrinking very fast, growing balder and balder,the black hair and stubble retracting into his skull,his cheeks smooth, his skull round and covered witha peachlike fuzz...

A baby’s head now sat grotesquely on top of the thick,muscled neck of the Death Eater as he struggled toget up again. But even as they watched, their mouthsopen, the head began to swell to its previousproportions again, thick black hair was sproutingfrom the pate and chin...

“It’s time,” said Hermione in an awestruck voice.

“Time ...”

The Death Eater shook his ugly head again, trying toclear it, but before he could pull himself togetheragain, it began to shrink back to babyhood oncemore...

There was a shout from a room nearby, then a crashand a scream.

“RON?” Harry yelled, turning quickly from themonstrous transformation taking place before them.“GINNY? LUNA?”

“Harry!” Hermione screamed.

The Death Eater had pulled his head out of the belljar. His appearance was utterly bizarre, his tinybaby’s head bawling loudly while his thick arms

Page | 1009Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

flailed dangerously in all directions, narrowly missingHarry, who ducked. Harry raised his wand but to hisamazement Hermione seized his arm.

“You can’t hurt a baby!”

There was no time to argue the point. Harry couldhear more footsteps growing louder from the Hall ofProphecy they had just left and knew, too late, thathe ought not to have shouted and given away theirposition.

“Come on!” he said again, and leaving the ugly baby-headed Death Eater staggering behind them, theytook off for the door that stood ajar at the other end ofthe room, leading back into the black hallway.

They had run halfway toward it when Harry sawthrough the open door two more Death Eatersrunning across the black room toward them. Veeringleft he burst instead into a small, dark, clutteredoffice and slammed the door behind them.

“Collo —” began Hermione, but before she couldcomplete the spell the door had burst open again andthe two Death Eaters had come hurtling inside. Witha cry of triumph, both yelled, “IMPEDIMENTA\”

Harry, Hermione, and Neville were all knockedbackward off their feet. Neville was thrown over thedesk and disappeared from view, Hermione smashedinto a bookcase and was promptly deluged in acascade of heavy books; the back of Harry’s headslammed into the stone wall behind him, tiny lightsburst in front of his eyes, and for a moment he wastoo dizzy and bewildered to react.

“WEVE GOT HIM!” yelled the Death Eater nearestHarry, “IN AN OFFICE OFF —”

Page | lOlOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Silenciol” cried Hermione, and the man’s voice wasextinguished. He continued to mouth through thehole in his mask, but no sound came out; he wasthrust aside by his fellow.

“Petrificus Totalusl” shouted Harry, as the secondDeath Eater raised his wand. His arms and legssnapped together and he fell forward, facedown ontothe rug at Harry’s feet, stiff as a board and unable tomove at all.

“Well done, Ha —”

But the Death Eater Hermione had just struck dumbmade a sudden slashing movement with his wandfrom which flew a streak of what looked like purpleflame. It passed right across Hermione’s chest; shegave a tiny “oh!” as though of surprise and thencrumpled onto the floor where she lay motionless.

“HERMIONE!”

Harry fell to his knees beside her as Neville crawledrapidly toward her from under the desk, his wandheld up in front of him. The Death Eater kicked outhard at Neville’s head as he emerged — his foot brokeNeville’s wand in two and connected with his face —Neville gave a howl of pain and recoiled, clutching hismouth and nose. Harry twisted around, his own wandheld high, and saw that the Death Eater had rippedoff his mask and was pointing his wand directly atHarry, who recognized the long, pale, twisted facefrom the Daily Prophet: Antonin Dolohov, the wizardwho had murdered the Prewetts.

Dolohov grinned. With his free hand, he pointed fromthe prophecy still clutched in Harry’s hand, tohimself, then at Hermione. Though he could no longer

Page | lOUHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

speak his meaning could not have been clearer: Giveme the prophecy, or you get the same as her...

“Like you won’t kill us all the moment I hand it overanyway!” said Harry.

A whine of panic inside his head was preventing himthinking properly. He had one hand on Hermione’sshoulder, which was still warm, yet did not dare lookat her properly. Don’t let her be dead, don’t let her bedead, it’s my fault if she’s dead...

“Whaddever you do, Harry,” said Neville fiercely fromunder the desk, lowering his hands to show a clearlybroken nose and blood pouring down his mouth andchin, “don’d gib it to him!”

Then there was a crash outside the door, and Dolohovlooked over his shoulder — the baby-headed DeathEater had appeared in the doorway, his head bawling,his great fists still flailing uncontrollably at everythingaround him.

Harry seized his chance: “PETRIFICUS TOT ALUS\”

The spell hit Dolohov before he could block it, and hetoppled forward across his comrade, both of themrigid as boards and unable to move an inch.

“Hermione,” Harry said at once, shaking her as thebaby-headed Death Eater blundered out of sightagain. “Hermione, wake up...”

“Whaddid he do to her?” said Neville, crawling outfrom under the desk again to kneel at her other side,blood streaming from his rapidly swelling nose. “Idunno...”

Neville groped for Hermione’s wrist.

Page | 1012Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Dat’s a pulse, Harry, I’b sure id is...”

Such a powerful wave of relief swept through Harrythat for a moment he felt light-headed.

“She’s alive?”

“Yeah, I dink so...”

There was a pause in which Harry listened hard forthe sounds of more footsteps, but all he could hearwere the whimpers and blunderings of the babyDeath Eater in the next room.

“Neville, we’re not far from the exit,” Harry whispered.“We’re right next to that circular room... If we can justget you across it and find the right door before anymore Death Eaters come, I’ll bet you can getHermione up the corridor and into the lift... Then youcould find someone... Raise the alarm ...”

“And whad are you going do do?” said Neville,mopping his bleeding nose with his sleeve andfrowning at Harry.

“I’ve got to find the others,” said Harry.

“Well, I’b going do find dem wid you,” said Nevillefirmly.

“But Hermione —”

“We’ll dake her wid us,” said Neville firmly. “I’ll carryher — you’re bedder at fighding dem dan I ab —”

He stood up and seized one of Hermione’s arms,glared at Harry, who hesitated, then grabbed theother and helped hoist Hermione’s limp form overNeville’s shoulders.

Page | 1013Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Wait,” said Harry, snatching up Hermione’s wandfrom the floor and shoving it into Nevilles hand,

“you’d better take this...”

Neville kicked aside the broken fragments of his ownwand as they walked slowly toward the door.

“My gran’s going do kill be,” said Neville thickly, bloodspattering from his nose as he spoke, “dat was bydad’s old wand...”

Harry stuck his head out of the door and lookedaround cautiously. The baby-headed Death Eater wasscreaming and banging into things, topplinggrandfather clocks and overturning desks, bawlingand confused, while the glass cabinet that Harry nowsuspected had contained Time-Turners continued tofall, shatter, and repair itself on the wall behind them.

“He’s never going to notice us,” he whispered. “C’mon... keep close behind me...”

They crept out of the office and back toward the doorinto the black hallway, which now seemed completelydeserted. They walked a few steps forward, Nevilletottering slightly due to Hermione’s weight. The doorof the Time Room swung shut behind them, and thewalls began to rotate once more. The recent blow onthe back of Harry’s head seemed to have unsteadiedhim; he narrowed his eyes, swaying slightly, until thewalls stopped moving again. With a sinking heartHarry saw that Hermione’s fiery crosses had fadedfrom the doors.

“So which way d’you reck — ?”

But before they could make a decision as to whichway to try, a door to their right sprang open and threepeople fell out of it.

Page | 1014Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Ron!” croaked Harry, dashing toward them. “Ginny— are you all — ?”

“Harry,” said Ron, giggling weakly, lurching forward,seizing the front of Harry’s robes and gazing at himwith unfocused eyes. “There you are... Ha ha ha ...You look funny, Harry... You’re all messed up...

Ron’s face was very white and something dark wastrickling from the corner of his mouth. Next momenthis knees had given way, but he still clutched thefront of Harry’s robes, so that Harry was pulled into akind of bow.

“Ginny?” Harry said fearfully. “What happened?”

But Ginny shook her head and slid down the wall intoa sitting position, panting and holding her ankle.

“I think her ankle’s broken, I heard something crack,”whispered Luna, who was bending over her and whoalone seemed to be unhurt. “Four of them chased usinto a dark room full of planets, it was a very oddplace, some of the time we were just floating in thedark —”

“Harry, we saw Uranus up close!” said Ron, stillgiggling feebly. “Get it, Harry? We saw Uranus — haha ha —”

A bubble of blood grew at the corner of Ron’s mouthand burst.

“Anyway, one of them grabbed Ginny’s foot, I used theReductor Curse and blew up Pluto in his face, but ...”

Luna gestured hopelessly at Ginny, who wasbreathing in a very shallow way, her eyes still closed.

Page | 1015Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“And what about Ron?” said Harry fearfully, as Roncontinued to giggle, still hanging off the front ofHarry’s robes.

“I don’t know what they hit him with,” said Lunasadly, “but he’s gone a bit funny, I could hardly gethim along at all...”

“Harry,” said Ron, pulling Harry’s ear down to hismouth and still giggling weakly, “you know who thisgirl is, Harry? She’s Loony ... Loony Lovegood ... haha ha...”

“We’ve got to get out of here,” said Harry firmly.

“Luna, can you help Ginny?”

“Yes,” said Luna, sticking her wand behind her ear forsafekeeping, putting an arm around Ginny’s waistand pulling her up.

“It’s only my ankle, I can do it myself!” said Ginnyimpatiently, but next moment she had collapsedsideways and grabbed Luna for support. Harry pulledRon’s arm over his shoulder just as, so many monthsago, he had pulled Dudley’s. He looked around: Theyhad a one-in-twelve chance of getting the exit rightthe first time —

He heaved Ron toward a door; they were within a fewfeet of it when another door across the hall burstopen and three Death Eaters sped into the hall, led byBellatrix Lestrange.

“There they are!” she shrieked.

Stunning Spells shot across the room: Harry smashedhis way through the door ahead, flung Ronunceremoniously from him, and ducked back to helpNeville in with Hermione. They were all over the

Page | 1016Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

threshold just in time to slam the door againstBellatrix.

“ Colloportus\” shouted Harry, and he heard threebodies slam into the door on the other side.

“It doesn’t matter!” said a man’s voice. “There areother ways in — WEVE GOT THEM, THEY’RE HERE!”

Harry spun around. They were back in the BrainRoom and, sure enough, there were doors all aroundthe walls. He could hear footsteps in the hall behindthem as more Death Eaters came running to join thefirst.

“Luna — Neville — help me!”

The three of them tore around the room, sealing thedoors as they went: Harry crashed into a table androlled over the top of it in his haste to reach the nextdoor.

“ Colloportusl”

There were footsteps running along behind the doors;

every now and then another heavy body would launch

itself against one, so it creaked and shuddered. Luna

and Neville were bewitching the doors along the

opposite wall — then, as Harry reached the very top of

the room, he heard Luna cry, “Collo — aaaaaaaaargh??

He turned in time to see her flying through the air.

Five Death Eaters were surging into the room throughthe door she had not reached in time; Luna hit adesk, slid over its surface and onto the floor on theother side where she lay sprawled, as still asHermione.

Page | 1017Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Get Potter!” shrieked Bellatrix, and she ran at him.He dodged her and sprinted back up the room; hewas safe as long as they thought they might hit theprophecy —

“Hey!” said Ron, who had staggered to his feet andwas now tottering drunkenly toward Harry, giggling.“Hey, Harry, there are brains in here, ha ha ha, isn’tthat weird, Harry?”

“Ron, get out of the way, get down —”

But Ron had already pointed his wand at the tank.

“Honest, Harry, they’re brains — look — Accio Brain\”

The scene seemed momentarily frozen. Harry, Ginny,and Neville and each of the Death Eaters turned inspite of themselves to watch the top of the tank as abrain burst from the green liquid like a leaping fish.For a moment it seemed suspended in midair, then itsoared toward Ron, spinning as it came, and whatlooked like ribbons of moving images flew from it,unraveling like rolls of film —

“Ha ha ha, Harry, look at it —” said Ron, watching itdisgorge its gaudy innards. “Harry, come and touchit, bet it’s weird —”

“RON, NO!”

Harry did not know what would happen if Rontouched the tentacles of thought now flying behindthe brain, but he was sure it would not be anythinggood. He darted forward but Ron had already caughtthe brain in his outstretched hands.

Page | 1018Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The moment they made contact with his skin, thetentacles began wrapping themselves around Ron’sarms like ropes.

“Harry, look what’s happen — no — no, I don’t like it— no, stop — stop —”

But the thin ribbons were spinning around Ron’schest now. He tugged and tore at them as the brainwas pulled tight against him like an octopus’s body.

“Diffindol” yelled Harry, trying to sever the feelerswrapping themselves tightly around Ron before hiseyes, but they would not break. Ron fell over, stillthrashing against his bonds.

“Harry, it’ll suffocate him!” screamed Ginny,immobilized by her broken ankle on the floor — thena jet of red light flew from one of the Death Eater’swands and hit her squarely in the face. She keeledover sideways and lay there unconscious.

“STUBEFYl” shouted Neville, wheeling around andwaving Hermione’s wand at the oncoming DeathEaters. “STUBEFY, STUBEFYl”

But nothing happened — one of the Death Eatersshot their own Stunning Spell at Neville; it missedhim by inches. Harry and Neville were now the onlytwo left fighting the five Death Eaters, two of whomsent streams of silver light like arrows past them thatleft craters in the wall behind them. Harry ran for itas Bellatrix Lestrange sprinted right at him. Holdingthe prophecy high above his head he sprinted backup the room; all he could think of doing was to drawthe Death Eaters away from the others.

It seemed to have worked. They streaked after him,knocking chairs and tables flying but not daring to

Page | 1019Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

bewitch him in case they hurt the prophecy, and hedashed through the only door still open, the onethrough which the Death Eaters themselves hadcome. Inwardly praying that Neville would stay withRon — find some way of releasing him — he ran a fewfeet into the new room and felt the floor vanish —

He was falling down steep stone step after steep stonestep, bouncing on every tier until at last, with a crashthat knocked all the breath out of his body, he landedflat on his back in the sunken pit where the stonearchway stood on its dais. The whole room wasringing with the Death Eaters’ laughter. He looked upand saw the five who had been in the Brain Roomdescending toward him, while as many more emergedthrough other doorways and began leaping frombench to bench toward him. Harry got to his feetthough his legs were trembling so badly they barelysupported him. The prophecy was still miraculouslyunbroken in his left hand, his wand clutched tightlyin his right. He backed away, looking around, tryingto keep all the Death Eaters within his sights. Theback of his legs hit something solid; he had reachedthe dais where the archway stood. He climbedbackward onto it.

The Death Eaters all halted, gazing at him. Some werepanting as hard as he was. One was bleeding badly;Dolohov, freed of the full Body-Bind, was leering, hiswand pointing straight at Harry’s face.

“Potter, your race is run,” drawled Lucius Malfoy,pulling off his mask. “Now hand me the prophecy likea good boy...”

“Let — let the others go, and I’ll give it to you!” saidHarry desperately.

A few of the Death Eaters laughed.

Page | 1020Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You are not in a position to bargain, Potter,” saidLucius Malfoy, his pale face flushed with pleasure.

“You see, there are ten of us and only one of you ... orhasn’t Dumbledore ever taught you how to count?”

“He’s dot alone!” shouted a voice from above them.

“He’s still god be!”

Harry’s heart sank. Neville was scrambling down thestone benches toward them, Hermione’s wand heldfast in his trembling hand.

“Neville — no — go back to Ron —”

“STUBEFYl” Neville shouted again, pointing his wandat each Death Eater in turn, “STUBEFYl. STUBE —”

One of the largest Death Eaters seized Neville frombehind, pinioning his arms to his sides. He struggledand kicked; several of the Death Eaters laughed.

“It’s Longbottom, isn’t it?” sneered Lucius Malfoy.

“Well, your grandmother is used to losing familymembers to our cause... Your death will not come asa great shock...”

“Longbottom?” repeated Bellatrix, and a truly evilsmile lit her gaunt face. “Why, I have had thepleasure of meeting your parents, boy...”

“I DOE YOU HAB!” roared Neville, and he fought sohard against his captor’s encircling grip that theDeath Eater shouted, “Someone Stun him!”

“No, no, no,” said Bellatrix. She looked transported,alive with excitement as she glanced at Harry, thenback at Neville. “No, let’s see how long Longbottomlasts before he cracks like his parents... Unless Potterwants to give us the prophecy —”

Page | 1021Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“DON’D GIB ID DO DEM!” roared Neville, who seemedbeside himself, kicking and writhing as Bellatrix drewnearer to him and his captor, her wand raised.

“DON’D GIB ID DO DEM, HARRY!”

Bellatrix raised her wand. “Cruciol”

Neville screamed, his legs drawn up to his chest sothat the Death Eater holding him was momentarilyholding him off the ground. The Death Eater droppedhim and he fell to the floor, twitching and screamingin agony.

“That was just a taster!” said Bellatrix, raising herwand so that Neville’s screams stopped and he laysobbing at her feet. She turned and gazed up atHarry. “Now, Potter, either give us the prophecy, orwatch your little friend die the hard way!”

Harry did not have to think; there was no choice. Theprophecy was hot with the heat from his clutchinghand as he held it out. Malfoy jumped forward to takeit.

Then, high above them, two more doors burst openand five more people sprinted into the room: Sirius,Lupin, Moody, Tonks, and Kingsley.

Malfoy turned and raised his wand, but Tonks hadalready sent a Stunning Spell right at him. Harry didnot wait to see whether it had made contact, butdived off the dais out of the way. The Death Eaterswere completely distracted by the appearance of themembers of the Order, who were now raining spellsdown upon them as they jumped from step to steptoward the sunken floor: Through the darting bodies,the flashes of light, Harry could see Neville crawlingalong. He dodged another jet of red light and flunghimself flat on the ground to reach Neville.

Page | 1022Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Are you okay?” he yelled, as another spell soaredinches over their heads.

“Yes,” said Neville, trying to pull himself up.

“And Ron?”

“I dink he’s all right — he was still fighding the brainwhen I left —”

The stone floor between them exploded as a spell hitit, leaving a crater right where Neville’s hand hadbeen seconds before. Both scrambled away from thespot, then a thick arm came out of nowhere, seizedHarry around the neck and pulled him upright, sothat his toes were barely touching the floor.

“Give it to me,” growled a voice in his ear, “give me theprophecy —”

The man was pressing so tightly on Harry’s windpipethat he could not breathe — through watering eyes hesaw Sirius dueling with a Death Eater some ten feetaway. Kingsley was fighting two at once; Tonks, stillhalfway up the tiered seats, was firing spells down atBellatrix — nobody seemed to realize that Harry wasdying... He turned his wand backward toward theman’s side, but had no breath to utter an incantation,and the man’s free hand was groping toward the handin which Harry was grasping the prophecy —

“AARGH!”

Neville had come lunging out of nowhere: Unable toarticulate a spell, he had jabbed Hermione’s wandhard into the eyehole of the Death Eater’s mask. Theman relinquished Harry at once with a howl of painand Harry whirled around to face him and gasped,“STUPEFY]”

Page | 1023Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The Death Eater keeled over backward and his maskslipped off. It was Macnair, Buckbeak’s would-bekiller, one of his eyes now swollen and bloodshot.

“Thanks!” Harry said to Neville, pulling him aside asSirius and his Death Eater lurched past, dueling sofiercely that their wands were blurs. Then Harry’s footmade contact with something round and hard and heslipped — for a moment he thought he had droppedthe prophecy, then saw Moody’s magic eye spinningaway across the floor.

Its owner was lying on his side, bleeding from thehead, and his attacker was now bearing down uponHarry and Neville: Dolohov, his long pale face twistedwith glee.

“Tarantallegrcd” he shouted, his wand pointing atNeville, whose legs went immediately into a kind offrenzied tap dance, unbalancing him and causing himto fall to the floor again. “Now, Potter —”

He made the same slashing movement with his wandthat he had used on Hermione just as Harry yelled,“Protego\”

Harry felt something streak across his face like ablunt knife but the force of it knocked him sideways,and he fell over Neville’s jerking legs, but the ShieldCharm had stopped the worst of the spell.

Dolohov raised his wand again. “Accio Proph —”

Sirius hurtled out of nowhere, rammed Dolohov withhis shoulder, and sent him flying out of the way. Theprophecy had again flown to the tips of Harry’s fingersbut he had managed to cling to it. Now Sirius andDolohov were dueling, their wands flashing likeswords, sparks flying from their wand tips —

Page | 1024Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Dolohov drew back his wand to make the sameslashing movement he had used on Harry andHermione. Springing up, Harry yelled, “PetrificusTotalusl” Once again, Dolohov’s arms and legssnapped together and he keeled over backward,landing with a crash on his back.

“Nice one!” shouted Sirius, forcing Harry’s head downas a pair of Stunning Spells flew toward them. “Now Iwant you to get out of —”

They both ducked again. A jet of green light hadnarrowly missed Sirius; across the room Harry sawTonks fall from halfway up the stone steps, her limpform toppling from stone seat to stone seat, andBellatrix, triumphant, running back toward the fray.

“Harry, take the prophecy, grab Neville, and run!”Sirius yelled, dashing to meet Bellatrix. Harry did notsee what happened next: Kingsley swayed across hisfield of vision, battling with the pockmarkedRookwood, now mask-less; another jet of green lightflew over Harry’s head as he launched himself towardNeville —

“Can you stand?” he bellowed in Neville’s ear, asNeville’s legs jerked and twitched uncontrollably. “Putyour arm round my neck —”

Neville did so — Harry heaved — Neville’s legs werestill flying in every direction, they would not supporthim and then, out of nowhere, a man lunged at them.Both fell backward, Neville’s legs waving wildly like anoverturned beetle’s, Harry with his left arm held up inthe air to try and save the small glass ball from beingsmashed.

Page | 1025Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“The prophecy, give me the prophecy, Potter!” snarledLucius Malfoy’s voice in his ear, and Harry felt the tipof Malfoy’s wand pressing hard between his ribs.

“No — get — off— me ... Neville — catch it!”

Harry flung the prophecy across the floor, Nevillespun himself around on his back and scooped theball to his chest. Malfoy pointed the wand instead atNeville, but Harry jabbed his own wand back over hisshoulder and yelled, “Impedimental”

Malfoy was blasted off his back. As Harry scrambledup again he looked around and saw Malfoy smashinto the dais on which Sirius and Bellatrix were nowdueling. Malfoy aimed his wand at Harry and Nevilleagain, but before he could draw breath to strike,Lupin had jumped between them.

“Harry, round up the others and GO!”

Harry seized Neville by the shoulder of his robes andlifted him bodily onto the first tier of stone steps.Neville’s legs twitched and jerked and would notsupport his weight. Harry heaved again with all thestrength he possessed and they climbed another step

A spell hit the stone bench at Harry’s heel. Itcrumbled away and he fell back to the step below:Neville sank to the ground, his legs still jerking andthrashing, and thrust the prophecy into his pocket.

“Come on!” said Harry desperately, hauling atNeville’s robes. “Just try and push with your legs —”

He gave another stupendous heave and Neville’s robestore all along the left seam — the small spun-glassball dropped from his pocket and before either of

Page | 1026Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

them could catch it, one of Neville’s floundering feetkicked it. It flew some ten feet to their right andsmashed on the step beneath them. As both of themstared at the place where it had broken, appalled atwhat had happened, a pearly-white figure with hugelymagnified eyes rose into the air, unnoticed by any butthem. Harry could see its mouth moving, but in allthe crashes and screams and yells surrounding them,not one word of the prophecy could he hear. Thefigure stopped speaking and dissolved intonothingness.

“Harry, I’b sorry!” cried Neville, his face anguished ashis legs continued to flounder, “I’b so sorry, Harry, Ididn’d bean do —■”

“It doesn’t matter!” Harry shouted. “Just try andstand, let’s get out of —”

“Dubbledorel” said Neville, his sweaty face suddenlytransported, staring over Harry’s shoulder.

“What?”

“DUBBLEDORE!”

Harry turned to look where Neville was staring.

Directly above them, framed in the doorway from theBrain Room, stood Albus Dumbledore, his wand aloft,his face white and furious. Harry felt a kind of electriccharge surge through every particle of his body —they were saved.

Dumbledore sped down the steps past Neville andHarry, who had no more thought of leaving.Dumbledore was already at the foot of the steps whenthe Death Eaters nearest realized he was there. Therewere yells; one of the Death Eaters ran for it,scrabbling like a monkey up the stone steps opposite.Page | 1027Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore’s spell pulled him back as easily andeffortlessly as though he had hooked him with aninvisible line —

Only one couple were still battling, apparentlyunaware of the new arrival. Harry saw Sirius duckBellatrix’s jet of red light: He was laughing at her.“Come on, you can do better than that!” he yelled, hisvoice echoing around the cavernous room.

The second jet of light hit him squarely on the chest.

The laughter had not quite died from his face, but hiseyes widened in shock.

Harry released Neville, though he was unaware ofdoing so. He was jumping down the steps again,pulling out his wand, as Dumbledore turned to thedais too.

It seemed to take Sirius an age to fall. His bodycurved in a graceful arc as he sank backward throughthe ragged veil hanging from the arch...

And Harry saw the look of mingled fear and surpriseon his godfather’s wasted, once-handsome face as hefell through the ancient doorway and disappearedbehind the veil, which fluttered for a moment asthough in a high wind and then fell back into place.

Harry heard Bellatrix Lestrange’s triumphant scream,but knew it meant nothing — Sirius had only justfallen through the archway, he would reappear fromthe other side any second...

But Sirius did not reappear.

“SIRIUS!” Harry yelled, “SIRIUS!”

Page | 1028Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He had reached the floor, his breath coming insearing gasps. Sirius must be just behind the curtain,he, Harry, would pull him back out again...

But as he reached the ground and sprinted towardthe dais, Lupin grabbed Harry around the chest,holding him back.

“There’s nothing you can do, Harry —”

“Get him, save him, he’s only just gone through!”

“It’s too late, Harry —”

“We can still reach him —”

Harry struggled hard and viciously, but Lupin wouldnot let go...

“There’s nothing you can do, Harry ... nothing... He’sgone.”

Page | 1029Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE ONLY ONE HE EVER FEARED

“He hasn’t gone!” Harry yelled.

He did not believe it, he would not believe it; still hefought Lupin with every bit of strength he had: Lupindid not understand, people hid behind that curtain,he had heard them whispering the first time he hadentered the room — Sirius was hiding, simply lurkingout of sight —

“SIRIUS!” he bellowed, “SIRIUS!”

“He can’t come back, Harry,” said Lupin, his voicebreaking as he struggled to contain Harry. “He can’tcome back, because he’s d —”

“HE — IS — NOT — DEAD!” roared Harry. “SIRIUS!”

There was movement going on around them, pointlessbustling, the flashes of more spells. To Harry it wasmeaningless noise, the deflected curses flying pastthem did not matter, nothing mattered except thatLupin stop pretending that Sirius, who was standingPage | 1030Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

feet from them behind that old curtain, was not goingto emerge at any moment, shaking back his dark hairand eager to reenter the battle —

Lupin dragged Harry away from the dais, Harry stillstaring at the archway, angry at Sirius now forkeeping him waiting —

But some part of him realized, even as he fought tobreak free from Lupin, that Sirius had never kept himwaiting before... Sirius had risked everything, always,to see Harry, to help him... If Sirius was notreappearing out of that archway when Harry wasyelling for him as though his life depended on it, theonly possible explanation was that he could not comeback... That he really was ...

Dumbledore had most of the remaining Death Eatersgrouped in the middle of the room, seeminglyimmobilized by invisible ropes. Mad-Eye Moody hadcrawled across the room to where Tonks lay and wasattempting to revive her. Behind the dais there werestill flashes of light, grunts, and cries — Kingsley hadrun forward to continue Sirius’s duel with Bellatrix.

“Harry?”

Neville had slid down the stone benches one by one tothe place where Harry stood. Harry was no longerstruggling against Lupin, who maintained aprecautionary grip on his arm nevertheless.

“Harry ... I’b really sorry...” said Neville. His legs werestill dancing uncontrollably. “Was dat man — wasSirius Black a — a friend of yours?”

Harry nodded.

Page | 1031Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Here,” said Lupin quietly, and pointing his wand atNeville’s legs he said, “Finite.” The spell was lifted.Neville’s legs fell back onto the floor and remainedstill. Lupin’s face was pale. “Let’s — let’s find theothers. Where are they all, Neville?”

Lupin turned away from the archway as he spoke. Itsounded as though every word was causing him pain.

“Dey’re all back dere,” said Neville. “A brain addackedRon bud I dink he’s all righd — and Herbione’sunconscious, bud we could feel a bulse —”

There was a loud bang and a yell from behind thedais. Harry saw Kingsley, yelling in pain, hit theground. Bellatrix Lestrange turned tail and ran asDumbledore whipped around. He aimed a spell at herbut she deflected it. She was halfway up the stepsnow —

“Harry — no!” cried Lupin, but Harry had alreadyripped his arm from Lupin’s slackened grip.

“SHE KILLED SIRIUS!” bellowed Harry. “SHE KILLEDHIM — I’LL KILL HER!”

And he was off, scrambling up the stone benches.People were shouting behind him but he did not care.The hem of Bellatrix’s robes whipped out of sightahead and they were back in the room where thebrains were swimming...

She aimed a curse over her shoulder. The tank roseinto the air and tipped. Harry was deluged in the foul-smelling potion within. The brains slipped and slidover him and began spinning their long, coloredtentacles, but he shouted, “Wingardium Levioscd” andthey flew into the air away from him. Slipping andsliding he ran on toward the door. He leapt over Luna,Page | 1032Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

who was groaning on the floor, past Ginny, who said,“Harry — what — ?” past Ron, who giggled feebly, andHermione, who was still unconscious. He wrenchedopen the door into the circular black hall and sawBellatrix disappearing through a door on the otherside of the room — beyond her was the corridorleading back to the lifts.

He ran, but she had slammed the door behind herand the walls had begun to rotate again. Once morehe was surrounded by streaks of blue light from thewhirling candelabra.

“Where’s the exit?” he shouted desperately, as thewall rumbled to a halt again. “Where’s the way out?”

The room seemed to have been waiting for him to ask.The door right behind him flew open, and the corridortoward the lifts stretched ahead of him, torch-lit andempty. He ran...

He could hear a lift clattering ahead of him. Hesprinted up the passageway, swung around thecorner, and slammed his fist onto the button to call asecond lift. It jangled and banged lower and lower; thegrilles slid open and Harry dashed inside, nowhammering the button marked Atrium. The doors slidshut and he was rising...

He forced his way out of the lift before the grilles werefully open and looked around. Bellatrix was almost atthe telephone lift at the other end of the hall, but shelooked back as he sprinted toward her, and aimedanother spell at him. He dodged behind the Fountainof Magical Brethren; the spell zoomed past him andhit the wrought gold gates at the other end of theAtrium so that they rang like bells. There were nomore footsteps. She had stopped running. Hecrouched behind the statues, listening.

Page | 1033Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Come out, come out, little HarryV’ she called in hermock-baby voice, which echoed off the polishedwooden floors. “What did you come after me for, then?

I thought you were here to avenge my dear cousin!”

“I am!” shouted Harry, and a score of ghostly Harry’sseemed to chorus I am\ I am\ I am\ all around theroom.

“Aaaaaah ... did you love him, little baby Potter?”

Hatred rose in Harry such as he had never knownbefore. He flung himself out from behind the fountainand bellowed “CrucioV’

Bellatrix screamed. The spell had knocked her off herfeet, but she did not writhe and shriek with pain asNeville had — she was already on her feet again,breathless, no longer laughing. Harry dodged behindthe golden fountain again — her counterspell hit thehead of the handsome wizard, which was blown offand landed twenty feet away, gouging long scratchesinto the wooden floor.

“Never used an Unforgivable Curse before, have you,boy?” she yelled. She had abandoned her baby voicenow. “You need to mean them, Potter! You need toreally want to cause pain — to enjoy it — righteousanger won’t hurt me for long — I’ll show you how it isdone, shall I? I’ll give you a lesson —”

Harry had been edging around the fountain on theother side. She screamed, “Cruciol” and he was forcedto duck down again as the centaur’s arm, holding itsbow, spun off and landed with a crash on the floor ashort distance from the golden wizard’s head.

“Potter, you cannot win against me!” she cried. Hecould hear her moving to the right, trying to get a

Page | 1034Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

clear shot of him. He backed around the statue awayfrom her, crouching behind the centaur’s legs, hishead level with the house-elf’s. “I was and am theDark Lord’s most loyal servant, I learned the DarkArts from him, and I know spells of such power thatyou, pathetic little boy, can never hope to compete —”

“Stupefy\” yelled Harry. He had edged right around towhere the goblin stood beaming up at the nowheadless wizard and taken aim at her back as shepeered around the fountain for him. She reacted sofast he barely had time to duck.

“Protegol”

The jet of red light, his own Stunning Spell, bouncedback at him. Harry scrambled back behind thefountain, and one of the goblin’s ears went flyingacross the room.

“Potter, I am going to give you one chance!” shoutedBellatrix. “Give me the prophecy — roll it out towardme now — and I may spare your life!”

“Well, you’re going to have to kill me, because it’sgone!” Harry roared — and as he shouted it, painseared across his forehead. His scar was on fireagain, and he felt a surge of fury that was quiteunconnected with his own rage. “And he knows!” saidHarry with a mad laugh to match Bellatrix’s own.

“Your dear old mate Voldemort knows it’s gone! He’snot going to be happy with you, is he?”

“What? What do you mean?” she cried, and for thefirst time there was fear in her voice.

“The prophecy smashed when I was trying to getNeville up the steps! What do you think Voldemort’llsay about that, then?”

Page | 1035Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

His scar seared and burned... The pain of it wasmaking his eyes stream...

“LIAR!” she shrieked, but he could hear the terrorbehind the anger now. “YOU’VE GOT IT, POTTER,AND YOU WILL GIVE IT TO ME — Accio Prophecy!ACCIO PROPHECY!”

Harry laughed again because he knew it wouldincense her, the pain building in his head so badly hethought his skull might burst. He waved his emptyhand from behind the one-eared goblin and withdrewit quickly as she sent another jet of green light flyingat him.

“Nothing there!” he shouted. “Nothing to summon! Itsmashed and nobody heard what it said, tell yourboss that —”

“No!” she screamed. “It isn’t true, you’re lying —MASTER, I TRIED, I TRIED — DO NOT PUNISH ME

“Don’t waste your breath!” yelled Harry, his eyesscrewed up against the pain in his scar, now moreterrible than ever. “He can’t hear you from here!”

“Can’t I, Potter?” said a high, cold voice.

Harry opened his eyes.

Tall, thin, and black-hooded, his terrible snakelikeface white and gaunt, his scarlet, slit-pupiled eyesstaring ... Lord Voldemort had appeared in the middleof the hall, his wand pointing at Harry who stoodfrozen, quite unable to move.

“So you smashed my prophecy?” said Voldemortsoftly, staring at Harry with those pitiless red eyes.

Page | 1036Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No, Bella, he is not lying... I see the truth looking atme from within his worthless mind... Months ofpreparation, months of effort ... and my Death Eatershave let Harry Potter thwart me again...”

“Master, I am sorry, I knew not, I was fighting theAnimagus Black!” sobbed Bellatrix, flinging herselfdown at Voldemort’s feet as he paced slowly nearer.“Master, you should know —”

“Be quiet, Bella,” said Voldemort dangerously. “I shalldeal with you in a moment. Do you think I haveentered the Ministry of Magic to hear your snivelingapologies?”

“But Master — he is here — he is below —”

Voldemort paid no attention.

“I have nothing more to say to you, Potter,” he saidquietly. “You have irked me too often, for too long.AVADA KEDAVRAl”

Harry had not even opened his mouth to resist. Hismind was blank, his wand pointing uselessly at thefloor.

But the headless golden statue of the wizard in thefountain had sprung alive, leaping from its plinth,and landed on the floor with a crash between Harryand Voldemort. The spell merely glanced off its chestas the statue flung out its arms, protecting Harry.

“What — ?” said Voldemort, staring around. And thenhe breathed, “Dumbledore!”

Harry looked behind him, his heart pounding.Dumbledore was standing in front of the golden gates.

Page | 1037Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort raised his wand and sent another jet ofgreen light at Dumbledore, who turned and was gonein a whirling of his cloak; next second he hadreappeared behind Voldemort and waved his wandtoward the remnants of the fountain; the otherstatues sprang to life too. The statue of the witch ranat Bellatrix, who screamed and sent spells streaminguselessly off its chest, before it dived at her, pinningher to the floor. Meanwhile, the goblin and the house-elf scuttled toward the fireplaces set along the wall,and the one-armed centaur galloped at Voldemort,who vanished and reappeared beside the pool. Theheadless statue thrust Harry backward, away fromthe fight, as Dumbledore advanced on Voldemort andthe golden centaur cantered around them both.

“It was foolish to come here tonight, Tom,” saidDumbledore calmly. “The Aurors are on their way —”

“By which time I shall be gone, and you dead!” spatVoldemort. He sent another Killing Curse atDumbledore but missed, instead hitting the securityguards desk, which burst into flame.

Dumbledore flicked his own wand. The force of thespell that emanated from it was such that Harry,though shielded by his stone guard, felt his hairstand on end as it passed, and this time Voldemortwas forced to conjure a shining silver shield out ofthin air to deflect it. The spell, whatever it was,caused no visible damage to the shield, though adeep, gonglike note reverberated from it, an oddlychilling sound...

“You do not seek to kill me, Dumbledore?” calledVoldemort, his scarlet eyes narrowed over the top ofthe shield. “Above such brutality, are you?”

Page | 1038Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“We both know that there are other ways ofdestroying a man, Tom,” Dumbledore said calmly,continuing to walk toward Voldemort as though hehad not a fear in the world, as though nothing hadhappened to interrupt his stroll up the hall. “Merelytaking your life would not satisfy me, I admit —”

“There is nothing worse than death, Dumbledore!”snarled Voldemort.

“You are quite wrong,” said Dumbledore, still closingin upon Voldemort and speaking as lightly as thoughthey were discussing the matter over drinks. Harryfelt scared to see him walking along, undefended,shieldless. He wanted to cry out a warning, but hisheadless guard kept shunting him backward towardthe wall, blocking his every attempt to get out frombehind it. “Indeed, your failure to understand thatthere are things much worse than death has alwaysbeen your greatest weakness —”

Another jet of green light flew from behind the silvershield. This time it was the one-armed centaur,galloping in front of Dumbledore, that took the blastand shattered into a hundred pieces, but before thefragments had even hit the floor, Dumbledore haddrawn back his wand and waved it as thoughbrandishing a whip. A long thin flame flew from thetip; it wrapped itself around Voldemort, shield and all.For a moment, it seemed Dumbledore had won, butthen the fiery rope became a serpent, whichrelinquished its hold upon Voldemort at once andturned, hissing furiously, to face Dumbledore.

Voldemort vanished. The snake reared from the floor,ready to strike —

There was a burst of flame in midair aboveDumbledore just as Voldemort reappeared, standing

Page | 1039Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

on the plinth in the middle of the pool where sorecently the five statues had stood.

“Look outi” Harry yelled.

But even as he shouted, one more jet of green lighthad flown at Dumbledore from Voldemort’s wand andthe snake had struck —

Fawkes swooped down in front of Dumbledore,opened his beak wide, and swallowed the jet of greenlight whole. He burst into flame and fell to the floor,small, wrinkled, and flightless. At the same moment,Dumbledore brandished his wand in one, long, fluidmovement — the snake, which had been an instantfrom sinking its fangs into him, flew high into the airand vanished in a wisp of dark smoke; the water inthe pool rose up and covered Voldemort like a cocoonof molten glass —

For a few seconds Voldemort was visible only as adark, rippling, faceless figure, shimmering andindistinct upon the plinth, clearly struggling to throwoff the suffocating mass —

Then he was gone, and the water fell with a crashback into its pool, slopping wildly over the sides,drenching the polished floor.

“MASTER!” screamed Bellatrix.

Sure it was over, sure Voldemort had decided to flee,Harry made to run out from behind his statue guard,but Dumbledore bellowed, “Stay where you are,

Harry!”

For the first time, Dumbledore sounded frightened.Harry could not see why. The hall was quite emptybut for themselves, the sobbing Bellatrix still trapped

Page | 1040Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

under her statue, and the tiny baby Fawkes croakingfeebly on the floor —

And then Harry’s scar burst open. He knew he wasdead: it was pain beyond imagining, pain pastendurance —

He was gone from the hall, he was locked in the coilsof a creature with red eyes, so tightly bound thatHarry did not know where his body ended and thecreature’s began. They were fused together, bound bypain, and there was no escape —

And when the creature spoke, it used Harry’s mouth,so that in his agony he felt his jaw move...

“Kill me now, Dumbledore...”

Blinded and dying, every part of him screaming forrelease, Harry felt the creature use him again...

“If death is nothing, Dumbledore, kill the boy...”

Let the pain stop, thought Harry. Let him kill us... Endit, Dumbledore... Death is nothing compared to this...

And I’ll see Sirius again...

And as Harry’s heart filled with emotion, thecreature’s coils loosened, the pain was gone, Harrywas lying facedown on the floor, his glasses gone,shivering as though he lay upon ice, not wood...

And there were voices echoing through the hall, morevoices than there should have been: Harry opened hiseyes, saw his glasses lying at the heel of the headlessstatue that had been guarding him, but which nowlay flat on its back, cracked and immobile. He put

Page | 1041Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

them on and raised his head an inch to findDumbledore’s crooked nose inches from his own.

“Are you all right, Harry?”

“Yes,” said Harry, shaking so violently he could nothold his head up properly. “Yeah, I’m — where’sVoldemort, where — who are all these — what’s —”

The Atrium was full of people. The floor was reflectingemerald-green flames that had burst into life in allthe fireplaces along one wall, and a stream of witchesand wizards was emerging from them. As Dumbledorepulled him back to his feet, Harry saw the tiny goldstatues of the house-elf and the goblin leading astunned-looking Cornelius Fudge forward.

“He was there!” shouted a scarlet-robed man with aponytail, who was pointing at a pile of golden rubbleon the other side of the hall, where Bellatrix had laintrapped moments before. “I saw him, Mr. Fudge, Iswear, it was You-Know-Who, he grabbed a womanand Disapparated!”

“I know, Williamson, I know, I saw him too!” gibberedFudge, who was wearing pajamas under hispinstriped cloak and was gasping as though he hadjust run miles. “Merlin’s beard — here — here! — inthe Ministry of Magic! — great heavens above — itdoesn’t seem possible — my word — how can thisbe?”

“If you proceed downstairs into the Department ofMysteries, Cornelius,” said Dumbledore, apparentlysatisfied that Harry was all right, and walking forwardso that the newcomers realized he was there for thefirst time (a few of them raised their wands, otherssimply looked amazed; the statues of the elf andgoblin applauded and Fudge jumped so much thatPage | 1042Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

his slipper-clad feet left the floor), “you will findseveral escaped Death Eaters contained in the DeathChamber, bound by an Anti-Disapparation Jinx andawaiting your decision as to what to do with them.”

“Dumbledore!” gasped Fudge, apparently besidehimself with amazement. “You — here — I — I —”

He looked wildly around at the Aurors he had broughtwith him, and it could not have been clearer that hewas in half a mind to cry, “Seize him!”

“Cornelius, I am ready to fight your men — and winagain!” said Dumbledore in a thunderous voice. “Buta few minutes ago you saw proof, with your own eyes,that I have been telling you the truth for a year. LordVoldemort has returned, you have been chasing thewrong men for twelve months, and it is time youlistened to sense!”

“I — don’t — well —” blustered Fudge, looking aroundas though hoping somebody was going to tell himwhat to do. When nobody did, he said, “Very well —Dawlish! Williamson! Go down to the Department ofMysteries and see ... Dumbledore, you — you willneed to tell me exactly — the Fountain of MagicalBrethren — what happened?” he added in a kind ofwhimper, staring around at the floor, where theremains of the statues of the witch, wizard, andcentaur now lay scattered.

“We can discuss that after I have sent Harry back toHogwarts,” said Dumbledore.

“Harry — Harry Potter?”

Fudge spun around and stared at Harry, who wasstill standing against the wall beside the fallen statue

Page | 1043Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

that had been guarding him during Dumbledore andVoldemort’s duel.

“He-here?” said Fudge. “Why — what’s all thisabout?”

“I shall explain everything,” repeated Dumbledore,“when Harry is back at school.”

He walked away from the pool to the place where thegolden wizard’s head lay on the floor. He pointed hiswand at it and muttered, “Portus.” The head glowedblue and trembled noisily against the wooden floor fora few seconds, then became still once more.

“Now see here, Dumbledore!” said Fudge, asDumbledore picked up the head and walked back toHarry carrying it. “You haven’t got authorization forthat Portkey! You can’t do things like that right infront of the Minister of Magic, you — you —”

His voice faltered as Dumbledore surveyed himmagisterially over his half-moon spectacles.

“You will give the order to remove Dolores Umbridgefrom Hogwarts,” said Dumbledore. “You will tell yourAurors to stop searching for my Care of MagicalCreatures teacher so that he can return to work. I willgive you ...” Dumbledore pulled a watch with twelvehands from his pocket and glanced at it, “half anhour of my time tonight, in which I think we shall bemore than able to cover the important points of whathas happened here. After that, I shall need to returnto my school. If you need more help from me you are,of course, more than welcome to contact me atHogwarts. Letters addressed to the headmaster willfind me.”

Page | 1044Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Fudge goggled worse than ever. His mouth was openand his round face grew pinker under his rumpledgray hair.

“I — you —”

Dumbledore turned his back on him.

“Take this Portkey, Harry.”

He held out the golden head of the statue, and Harryplaced his hand upon it, past caring what he did nextor where he went.

“I shall see you in half an hour,” said Dumbledorequietly. “One ... two ... three ...”

Harry felt the familiar sensation of a hook beingjerked behind his navel. The polished wooden floorwas gone from beneath his feet; the Atrium, Fudge,and Dumbledore had all disappeared, and he wasflying forward in a whirlwind of color and sound...

Page | 1045Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE LOST PROPHECY

Harry’s feet hit solid ground again; his knees buckleda little and the golden wizard’s head fell with aresounding clunk to the floor. He looked around andsaw that he had arrived in Dumbledore’s office.

Everything seemed to have repaired itself during theheadmaster’s absence. The delicate silver instrumentsstood again upon the spindle-legged tables, puffingand whirring serenely. The portraits of theheadmasters and headmistresses were snoozing intheir frames, heads lolling back in armchairs oragainst the edge of their pictures. Harry lookedthrough the window. There was a cool line of palegreen along the horizon: Dawn was approaching.

The silence and the stillness, broken only by theoccasional grunt or snuffle of a sleeping portrait, wasunbearable to him. If his surroundings could havereflected the feelings inside him, the pictures wouldhave been screaming in pain. He walked around thequiet, beautiful office, breathing quickly, trying not tothink. But he had to think... There was no escape...Page | 1046Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

It was his fault Sirius had died; it was all his fault. Ifhe, Harry, had not been stupid enough to fall forVoldemort’s trick, if he had not been so convincedthat what he had seen in his dream was real, if hehad only opened his mind to the possibility thatVoldemort was, as Hermione had said, banking onHarry’s love of playing the hero ...

It was unbearable, he would not think about it, hecould not stand it... There was a terrible hollow insidehim he did not want to feel or examine, a dark holewhere Sirius had been, where Sirius had vanished.

He did not want to have to be alone with that great,silent space, he could not stand it —

A picture behind him gave a particularly loudgrunting snore, and a cool voice said, “Ah ... HarryPotter ...”

Phineas Nigellus gave a long yawn, stretching hisarms as he watched Harry with shrewd, narrow eyes.

“And what brings you here in the early hours of themorning?” said Phineas. “This office is supposed to bebarred to all but the rightful headmaster. Or hasDumbledore sent you here? Oh, don’t tell me ...” Hegave another shuddering yawn. “Another message formy worthless great-great-grandson?”

Harry could not speak. Phineas Nigellus did not knowthat Sirius was dead, but Harry could not tell him. Tosay it aloud would be to make it final, absolute,irretrievable.

A few more of the portraits had stirred now. Terror ofbeing interrogated made Harry stride across the roomand seize the doorknob.

It would not turn. He was shut in.

Page | 1047Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I hope this means,” said the corpulent, red-nosedwizard who hung on the wall behind Dumbledore’sdesk, “that Dumbledore will soon be back with us?”

Harry turned. The wizard was eyeing him with greatinterest. Harry nodded. He tugged again on thedoorknob behind his back, but it remainedimmovable.

“Oh good,” said the wizard. “It has been very dullwithout him, very dull indeed.”

He settled himself on the thronelike chair on which hehad been painted and smiled benignly upon Harry.

“Dumbledore thinks very highly of you, as I am sureyou know,” he said comfortably. “Oh yes. Holds youin great esteem.”

The guilt filling the whole of Harry’s chest like somemonstrous, weighty parasite now writhed andsquirmed. Harry could not stand this, he could notstand being Harry anymore... He had never felt moretrapped inside his own head and body, never wishedso intensely that he could be somebody — anybody —else...

The empty fireplace burst into emerald-green flame,making Harry leap away from the door, staring at theman spinning inside the grate. As Dumbledore’s tallform unfolded itself from the fire, the wizards andwitches on the surrounding walls jerked awake. Manyof them gave cries of welcome.

“Thank you,” said Dumbledore softly.

He did not look at Harry at first, but walked over tothe perch beside the door and withdrew, from aninside pocket of his robes, the tiny, ugly, featherless

Page | 1048Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Fawkes, whom he placed gently on the tray of softashes beneath the golden post where the full-grownFawkes usually stood.

“Well, Harry,” said Dumbledore, finally turning awayfrom the baby bird, “you will be pleased to hear thatnone of your fellow students are going to sufferlasting damage from the night’s events.”

Harry tried to say “Good,” but no sound came out. Itseemed to him that Dumbledore was reminding himof the amount of damage he had caused by hisactions tonight, and although Dumbledore was foronce looking at him directly, and though hisexpression was kindly rather than accusatory, Harrycould not bear to meet his eyes.

“Madam Pomfrey is patching everybody up now,” saidDumbledore. “Nymphadora Tonks may need to spenda little time in St. Mungo’s, but it seems that she willmake a full recovery.”

Harry contented himself with nodding at the carpet,which was growing lighter as the sky outside grewpaler. He was sure that all the portraits around theroom were listening eagerly to every word Dumbledorespoke, wondering where Dumbledore and Harry hadbeen and why there had been injuries.

“I know how you are feeling, Harry,” said Dumbledorevery quietly.

“No, you don’t,” said Harry, and his voice wassuddenly loud and strong. White-hot anger leaptinside him. Dumbledore knew nothing about hisfeelings.

“You see, Dumbledore?” said Phineas Nigellus slyly.“Never try to understand the students. They hate it.

Page | 1049Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

They would much rather be tragically misunderstood,wallow in self-pity, stew in their own —”

“That’s enough, Phineas,” said Dumbledore.

Harry turned his back on Dumbledore and stareddeterminedly out of the opposite window. He couldsee the Quidditch stadium in the distance. Sirius hadappeared there once, disguised as the shaggy blackdog, so he could watch Harry play... He had probablycome to see whether Harry was as good as James hadbeen... Harry had never asked him...

“There is no shame in what you are feeling, Harry,”said Dumbledore’s voice. “On the contrary ... the factthat you can feel pain like this is your greateststrength.”

Harry felt the white-hot anger lick his insides, blazingin the terrible emptiness, filling him with the desire tohurt Dumbledore for his calmness and his emptywords.

“My greatest strength, is it?” said Harry, his voiceshaking as he stared out at the Quidditch stadium,no longer seeing it. “You haven’t got a clue... Youdon’t know ...”

“What don’t I know?” asked Dumbledore calmly.

It was too much. Harry turned around, shaking withrage.

“I don’t want to talk about how I feel, all right?”

“Harry, suffering like this proves you are still a man!This pain is part of being human —”

Page | 1050Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“THEN — I — DONT — WANT — TO-BE —HUMAN!” Harry roared, and he seized one of thedelicate silver instruments from the spindle-leggedtable beside him and flung it across the room. Itshattered into a hundred tiny pieces against the wall.Several of the pictures let out yells of anger andfright, and the portrait of Armando Dippet said,a Reallyl”

“I DONT CARE!” Harry yelled at them, snatching up alunascope and throwing it into the fireplace. “I’VEHAD ENOUGH, IVE SEEN ENOUGH, I WANT OUT, IWANT IT TO END, I DONT CARE ANYMORE —”

He seized the table on which the silver instrumenthad stood and threw that too. It broke apart on thefloor and the legs rolled in different directions.

“You do care,” said Dumbledore. He had not flinchedor made a single move to stop Harry demolishing hisoffice. His expression was calm, almost detached.

“You care so much you feel as though you will bleedto death with the pain of it.”

“I — DONT!” Harry screamed, so loudly that he felthis throat might tear, and for a second he wanted torush at Dumbledore and break him too; shatter thatcalm old face, shake him, hurt him, make him feelsome tiny part of the horror inside Harry.

“Oh yes, you do,” said Dumbledore, still more calmly.“You have now lost your mother, your father, and theclosest thing to a parent you have ever known. Ofcourse you care.”

“YOU DONT KNOW HOW I FEEL!” Harry roared.

“YOU — STANDING THERE — YOU —”

Page | 1051Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But words were no longer enough, smashing thingswas no more help. He wanted to run, he wanted tokeep running and never look back, he wanted to besomewhere he could not see the clear blue eyesstaring at him, that hatefully calm old face. He ran tothe door, seized the doorknob again, and wrenched atit.

But the door would not open.

Harry turned back to Dumbledore.

“Let me out,” he said. He was shaking from head tofoot.

“No,” said Dumbledore simply.

For a few seconds they stared at each other.

“Let me out,” Harry said again.

“No,” Dumbledore repeated.

“If you don’t — if you keep me in here — if you don’tlet me —”

“By all means continue destroying my possessions,”said Dumbledore serenely. “I daresay I have toomany.”

He walked around his desk and sat down behind it,watching Harry.

“Let me out,” Harry said yet again, in a voice that wascold and almost as calm as Dumbledore’s.

“Not until I have had my say,” said Dumbledore.

Page | 1052Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Do you — do you think I want to — do you think Igive a — I DONT CARE WHAT YOUVE GOT TO SAY!”Harry roared. “I don’t want to hear anything you’vegot to say!”

“You will,” said Dumbledore sadly. “Because you arenot nearly as angry with me as you ought to be. If youare to attack me, as I know you are close to doing, Iwould like to have thoroughly earned it.”

“What are you talking — ?”

“It is my fault that Sirius died,” said Dumbledoreclearly. “Or I should say almost entirely my fault — Iwill not be so arrogant as to claim responsibility forthe whole. Sirius was a brave, clever, and energeticman, and such men are not usually content to sit athome in hiding while they believe others to be indanger. Nevertheless, you should never have believedfor an instant that there was any necessity for you togo to the Department of Mysteries tonight. If I hadbeen open with you, Harry, as I should have been,you would have known a long time ago thatVoldemort might try and lure you to the Departmentof Mysteries, and you would never have been trickedinto going there tonight. And Sirius would not havehad to come after you. That blame lies with me, andwith me alone.”

Harry was still standing with his hand on thedoorknob but he was unaware of it. He was gazing atDumbledore, hardly breathing, listening yet barelyunderstanding what he was hearing.

“Please sit down,” said Dumbledore. It was not anorder, it was a request.

Page | 1053Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry hesitated, then walked slowly across the roomnow littered with silver cogs and fragments of woodand took the seat facing Dumbledore’s desk.

“Am I to understand,” said Phineas Nigellus slowlyfrom Harry’s left, “that my great-great-grandson —the last of the Blacks — is dead?”

“Yes, Phineas,” said Dumbledore.

“I don’t believe it,” said Phineas brusquely.

Harry turned his head in time to see Phineasmarching out of his portrait and knew that he hadgone to visit his other painting in Grimmauld Place.He would walk, perhaps, from portrait to portrait,calling for Sirius through the house...

“Harry, I owe you an explanation,” said Dumbledore.“An explanation of an old man’s mistakes. For I seenow that what I have done, and not done, with regardto you, bears all the hallmarks of the failings of age.Youth cannot know how age thinks and feels. But oldmen are guilty if they forget what it was to be young... and I seem to have forgotten lately...”

The sun was rising properly now. There was a rim ofdazzling orange visible over the mountains and thesky above it was colorless and bright. The light fellupon Dumbledore, upon the silver of his eyebrowsand beard, upon the lines gouged deeply into his face.

“I guessed, fifteen years ago,” said Dumbledore,

“when I saw the scar upon your forehead, what itmight mean. I guessed that it might be the sign of aconnection forged between you and Voldemort.”

Page | 1054Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You’ve told me this before, Professor,” said Harrybluntly. He did not care about being rude. He did notcare about anything very much anymore.

“Yes,” said Dumbledore apologetically. “Yes, but yousee — it is necessary to start with your scar. For itbecame apparent, shortly after you rejoined themagical world, that I was correct, and that your scarwas giving you warnings when Voldemort was close toyou, or else feeling powerful emotion.”

“I know,” said Harry wearily.

“And this ability of yours — to detect Voldemort’spresence, even when he is disguised, and to knowwhat he is feeling when his emotions are roused —has become more and more pronounced sinceVoldemort returned to his own body and his fullpowers.”

Harry did not bother to nod. He knew all of thisalready.

“More recently,” said Dumbledore, “I becameconcerned that Voldemort might realize that thisconnection between you exists. Sure enough, therecame a time when you entered so far into his mindand thoughts that he sensed your presence. I amspeaking, of course, of the night when you witnessedthe attack on Mr. Weasley.”

“Yeah, Snape told me,” Harry muttered.

“Professor Snape, Harry,” Dumbledore corrected himquietly. “But did you not wonder why it was not I whoexplained this to you? Why I did not teach youOcclumency? Why I had not so much as looked atyou for months?”

Page | 1055Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked up. He could see now that Dumbledorelooked sad and tired.

“Yeah,” Harry mumbled. “Yeah, I wondered.”

“You see,” continued Dumbledore heavily. “I believedit could not be long before Voldemort attempted toforce his way into your mind, to manipulate andmisdirect your thoughts, and I was not eager to givehim more incentives to do so. I was sure that if herealized that our relationship was — or had ever been— closer than that of headmaster and pupil, he wouldseize his chance to use you as a means to spy on me.

I feared the uses to which he would put you, thepossibility that he might try and possess you. Harry, Ibelieve I was right to think that Voldemort would havemade use of you in such a way. On those rareoccasions when we had close contact, I thought I sawa shadow of him stir behind your eyes... I was trying,in distancing myself from you, to protect you. An oldman’s mistake ...”

Harry remembered the feeling that a dormant snakehad risen in him, ready to strike, on those occasionswhen he and Dumbledore made eye contact.

“Voldemort’s aim in possessing you, as hedemonstrated tonight, would not have been mydestruction. It would have been yours. He hoped,when he possessed you briefly a short while ago, thatI would sacrifice you in the hope of killing him.”

He sighed deeply. Harry was letting the words washover him. He would have been so interested to knowall this a few months ago, and now it wasmeaningless compared to the gaping chasm insidehim that was the loss of Sirius, none of it mattered ...

Page | 1056Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Sirius told me that you felt Voldemort awake insideyou the very night that you had the vision of ArthurWeasley’s attack. I knew at once that my worst fearswere correct: Voldemort from that point had realizedhe could use you. In an attempt to arm you againstVoldemort’s assaults on your mind, I arrangedOcclumency lessons with Professor Snape.”

He paused. Harry watched the sunlight, which wassliding slowly across the polished surface ofDumbledore’s desk, illuminate a silver ink pot and ahandsome scarlet quill. Harry could tell that theportraits all around them were awake and listeningraptly to Dumbledore’s explanation. He could hearthe occasional rustle of robes, the slight clearing of athroat. Phineas Nigellus had still not returned...

“Professor Snape discovered,” Dumbledore resumed,“that you had been dreaming about the door to theDepartment of Mysteries for months. Voldemort, ofcourse, had been obsessed with the possibility ofhearing the prophecy ever since he regained his body,and as he dwelled on the door, so did you, thoughyou did not know what it meant.

“And then you saw Rookwood, who worked in theDepartment of Mysteries before his arrest, tellingVoldemort what we had known all along — that theprophecies held in the Ministry of Magic are heavilyprotected. Only the people to whom they refer can liftthem from the shelves without suffering madness. Inthis case, either Voldemort himself would have toenter the Ministry of Magic and risk revealing himselfat last — or else you would have to take it for him. Itbecame a matter of even greater urgency that youshould master Occlumency.”

“But I didn’t,” muttered Harry. He said it aloud to tryand ease the dead weight of guilt inside him; a

Page | 1057Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

confession must surely relieve some of the terriblepressure squeezing his heart. “I didn’t practice, Ididn’t bother, I could’ve stopped myself having thosedreams, Hermione kept telling me to do it, if I hadhe’d never have been able to show me where to go,and — Sirius wouldn’t — Sirius wouldn’t —”

Something was erupting inside Harry’s head: a needto justify himself, to explain —

“I tried to check if he’d really taken Sirius, I went toUmbridge’s office, I spoke to Kreacher in the fire, andhe said Sirius wasn’t there, he said he’d gone!”

“Kreacher lied,” said Dumbledore calmly. “You are nothis master, he could lie to you without even needingto punish himself. Kreacher intended you to go to theMinistry of Magic.”

“He — he sent me on purpose?”

“Oh yes. Kreacher, I am afraid, has been serving morethan one master for months.”

“How?” said Harry blankly. “He hasn’t been out ofGrimmauld Place for years.”

“Kreacher seized his opportunity shortly beforeChristmas,” said Dumbledore, “when Sirius,apparently, shouted at him to ‘get out.’ He took Siriusat his word and interpreted this as an order to leavethe house. He went to the only Black family memberfor whom he had any respect left... Black’s cousinNarcissa, sister of Bellatrix and wife of LuciusMalfoy.”

“How do you know all this?” Harry said. His heart wasbeating very fast. He felt sick. He rememberedworrying about Kreacher’s odd absence over

Page | 1058Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Christmas, remembered him turning up again in theattic...

“Kreacher told me last night,” said Dumbledore. “Yousee, when you gave Professor Snape that crypticwarning, he realized that you had had a vision ofSirius trapped in the bowels of the Department ofMysteries. He, like you, attempted to contact Sirius atonce. I should explain that members of the Order ofthe Phoenix have more reliable methods ofcommunicating than the fire in Dolores Umbridge’soffice. Professor Snape found that Sirius was aliveand safe in Grimmauld Place.

“When, however, you did not return from your tripinto the forest with Dolores Umbridge, ProfessorSnape grew worried that you still believed Sirius to bea captive of Lord Voldemort’s. He alerted certainOrder members at once.”

Dumbledore heaved a great sigh and then said,“Alastor Moody, Nymphadora Tonks, KingsleyShacklebolt, and Remus Lupin were at headquarterswhen he made contact. All agreed to go to your aid atonce. Professor Snape requested that Sirius remainbehind, as he needed somebody to remain atheadquarters to tell me what had happened, for I wasdue there at any moment. In the meantime he,Professor Snape, intended to search the forest foryou.

“But Sirius did not wish to remain behind while theothers went to search for you. He delegated toKreacher the task of telling me what had happened.And so it was that when I arrived in Grimmauld Placeshortly after they had all left for the Ministry, it wasthe elf who told me — laughing fit to burst — whereSirius had gone.”

Page | 1059Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“He was laughing?” said Harry in a hollow voice.

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore. “You see, Kreacher wasnot able to betray us totally. He is not Secret-Keeperfor the Order, he could not give the Malfoys ourwhereabouts or tell them any of the Order’sconfidential plans that he had been forbidden toreveal. He was bound by the enchantments of hiskind, which is to say that he could not disobey adirect order from his master, Sirius. But he gaveNarcissa information of the sort that is very valuableto Voldemort, yet must have seemed much too trivialfor Sirius to think of banning him from repeating it.”

“Like what?” said Harry.

“Like the fact that the person Sirius cared most aboutin the world was you,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Likethe fact that you were coming to regard Sirius as amixture of father and brother. Voldemort knewalready, of course, that Sirius was in the Order, thatyou knew where he was — but Kreacher’s informationmade him realize that the one person whom youwould go to any lengths to rescue was Sirius Black.”

Harry’s lips were cold and numb.

“So ... when I asked Kreacher if Sirius was there lastnight ...”

“The Malfoys — undoubtedly on Voldemort’sinstructions — had told him he must find a way ofkeeping Sirius out of the way once you had seen thevision of Sirius being tortured. Then, if you decided tocheck whether Sirius was at home or not, Kreacherwould be able to pretend he was not. Kreacherinjured Buckbeak the hippogriff yesterday, and at themoment when you made your appearance in the fire,Sirius was upstairs trying to tend to him.”

Page | 1060Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

There seemed to be very little air in Harry’s lungs, hisbreathing was quick and shallow.

“And Kreacher told you all this ... and laughed?” hecroaked.

“He did not wish to tell me,” said Dumbledore. “But Iam a sufficiently accomplished Legilimens myself toknow when I am being lied to and I — persuaded him

— to tell me the full story, before I left for theDepartment of Mysteries.”

“And,” whispered Harry, his hands curled in cold fistson his knees, “and Hermione kept telling us to be niceto him —”

“She was quite right, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Iwarned Sirius when we adopted twelve GrimmauldPlace as our headquarters that Kreacher must betreated with kindness and respect. I also told himthat Kreacher could be dangerous to us. I do notthink that Sirius took me very seriously, or that heever saw Kreacher as a being with feelings as acute asa humans —”

“Don’t you blame — don’t you — talk — about Siriuslike —” Harry’s breath was constricted, he could notget the words out properly. But the rage that hadsubsided so briefly had flared in him again; he wouldnot let Dumbledore criticize Sirius. “Kreacher’s a lying

— foul — he deserved —”

“Kreacher is what he has been made by wizards,Harry,” said Dumbledore. “Yes, he is to be pitied. Hisexistence has been as miserable as your friendDobby’s. He was forced to do Sirius’s bidding,because Sirius was the last of the family to which hewas enslaved, but he felt no true loyalty to him. And

Page | 1061Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

whatever Kreacher’s faults, it must be admitted thatSirius did nothing to make Kreacher’s lot easier —”

“DON’T TALK ABOUT SIRIUS LIKE THAT!” Harryyelled.

He was on his feet again, furious, ready to fly atDumbledore, who had plainly not understood Siriusat all, how brave he was, how much he had suffered

“What about Snape?” Harry spat. “You’re not talkingabout him, are you? When I told him Voldemort hadSirius he just sneered at me as usual —”

“Harry, you know that Professor Snape had no choicebut to pretend not to take you seriously in front ofDolores Umbridge,” said Dumbledore steadily, “but asI have explained, he informed the Order as soon aspossible about what you had said. It was he whodeduced where you had gone when you did not returnfrom the forest. It was he too who gave ProfessorUmbridge fake Veritaserum when she was attemptingto force you to tell of Sirius’s whereabouts...”

Harry disregarded this; he felt a savage pleasure inblaming Snape, it seemed to be easing his own senseof dreadful guilt, and he wanted to hear Dumbledoreagree with him.

“Snape — Snape g-goaded Sirius about staying in thehouse — he made out Sirius was a coward —”

“Sirius was much too old and clever to have allowedsuch feeble taunts to hurt him,” said Dumbledore.

“Snape stopped giving me Occlumency lessons!”

Harry snarled. “He threw me out of his office!”

Page | 1062Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“I am aware of it,” said Dumbledore heavily. “I havealready said that it was a mistake for me not to teachyou myself, though I was sure, at the time, thatnothing could have been more dangerous than toopen your mind even further to Voldemort while inmy presence —”

“Snape made it worse, my scar always hurt worseafter lessons with him —” Harry remembered Ron’sthoughts on the subject and plunged on. “How do youknow he wasn’t trying to soften me up for Voldemort,make it easier for him to get inside my —”

“I trust Severus Snape,” said Dumbledore simply.

“But I forgot — another old man’s mistake — thatsome wounds run too deep for the healing. I thoughtProfessor Snape could overcome his feelings aboutyour father — I was wrong.”

“But that’s okay, is it?” yelled Harry, ignoring thescandalized faces and disapproving mutterings of theportraits covering the walls. “It’s okay for Snape tohate my dad, but it’s not okay for Sirius to hateKreacher?”

“Sirius did not hate Kreacher,” said Dumbledore. “Heregarded him as a servant unworthy of much interestor notice. Indifference and neglect often do muchmore damage than outright dislike... The fountain wedestroyed tonight told a lie. We wizards havemistreated and abused our fellows for too long, andwe are now reaping our reward.”

“SO SIRIUS DESERVED WHAT HE GOT, DID HE?”Harry yelled.

“I did not say that, nor will you ever hear me say it,”Dumbledore replied quietly. “Sirius was not a cruelman, he was kind to house-elves in general. He had

Page | 1063Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

no love for Kreacher, because Kreacher was a livingreminder of the home Sirius had hated.”

“Yeah, he did hate it!” said Harry, his voice cracking,turning his back on Dumbledore and walking away.The sun was bright inside the room now, and the eyesof all the portraits followed him as he walked, withoutrealizing what he was doing, without seeing the officeat all. “You made him stay shut up in that house andhe hated it, that’s why he wanted to get out last night

“I was trying to keep Sirius alive,” said Dumbledorequietly.

“People don’t like being locked up!” Harry saidfuriously, rounding on him. “You did it to me all lastsummer —”

Dumbledore closed his eyes and buried his face in hislong-fingered hands. Harry watched him, but thisuncharacteristic sign of exhaustion, or sadness, orwhatever it was from Dumbledore, did not soften him.On the contrary, he felt even angrier that Dumbledorewas showing signs of weakness. He had no businessbeing weak when Harry wanted to rage and storm athim.

Dumbledore lowered his hands and surveyed Harrythrough his half-moon glasses.

“It is time,” he said, “for me to tell you what I shouldhave told you five years ago, Harry. Please sit down. Iam going to tell you everything. I ask only a littlepatience. You will have your chance to rage at me —to do whatever you like — when I have finished. I willnot stop you.”

Page | 1064Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry glared at him for a moment, then flung himselfback into the chair opposite Dumbledore and waited.Dumbledore stared for a moment at the sunlitgrounds outside the window, then looked back atHarry and said, “Five years ago you arrived atHogwarts, Harry, safe and whole, as I had plannedand intended. Well — not quite whole. You hadsuffered. I knew you would when I left you on youraunt and uncle’s doorstep. I knew I was condemningyou to ten dark and difficult years.”

He paused. Harry said nothing.

“You might ask — and with good reason — why it hadto be so. Why could some Wizarding family not havetaken you in? Many would have done so more thangladly, would have been honored and delighted toraise you as a son.

“My answer is that my priority was to keep you alive.You were in more danger than perhaps anyone butmyself realized. Voldemort had been vanquishedhours before, but his supporters — and many of themare almost as terrible as he — were still at large,angry, desperate, and violent. And I had to make mydecision too with regard to the years ahead. Did Ibelieve that Voldemort was gone forever? No. I knewnot whether it would be ten, twenty, or fifty yearsbefore he returned, but I was sure he would do so,and I was sure too, knowing him as I have done, thathe would not rest until he killed you.

“I knew that Voldemort’s knowledge of magic isperhaps more extensive than any wizard alive. I knewthat even my most complex and powerful protectivespells and charms were unlikely to be invincible if heever returned to full power.

Page | 1065Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But I knew too where Voldemort was weak. And so Imade my decision. You would be protected by anancient magic of which he knows, which he despises,and which he has always, therefore, underestimated— to his cost. I am speaking, of course, of the factthat your mother died to save you. She gave you alingering protection he never expected, a protectionthat flows in your veins to this day. I put my trust,therefore, in your mother’s blood. I delivered you toher sister, her only remaining relative.”

“She doesn’t love me,” said Harry at once. “Shedoesn’t give a damn —”

“But she took you,” Dumbledore cut across him. “Shemay have taken you grudgingly, furiously,unwillingly, bitterly, yet still she took you, and indoing so, she sealed the charm I placed upon you.

Your mother’s sacrifice made the bond of blood thestrongest shield I could give you.”

“I still don’t —”

“While you can still call home the place where yourmother’s blood dwells, there you cannot be touched orharmed by Voldemort. He shed her blood, but it liveson in you and her sister. Her blood became yourrefuge. You need return there only once a year, but aslong as you can still call it home, there he cannothurt you. Your aunt knows this. I explained what Ihad done in the letter I left, with you, on herdoorstep. She knows that allowing you houseroommay well have kept you alive for the past fifteenyears.”

“Wait,” said Harry. “Wait a moment.”

He sat up straighter in his chair, staring atDumbledore.

Page | 1066Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“You sent that Howler. You told her to remember — itwas your voice —”

“I thought,” said Dumbledore, inclining his headslightly, “that she might need reminding of the pactshe had sealed by taking you. I suspected thedementor attack might have awoken her to thedangers of having you as a surrogate son.”

“It did,” said Harry quietly. “Well — my uncle morethan her. He wanted to chuck me out, but after theHowler came she — she said I had to stay.” He staredat the floor for a moment, then said, “But what’s thisgot to do with ...”

He could not say Sirius’s name.

“Five years ago, then,” continued Dumbledore, asthough he had not paused in his story, “you arrivedat Hogwarts, neither as happy nor as well nourishedas I would have liked, perhaps, yet alive and healthy.You were not a pampered little prince, but as normala boy as I could have hoped under the circumstances.Thus far, my plan was working well.

“And then ... well, you will remember the events ofyour first year at Hogwarts quite as clearly as I do.

You rose magnificently to the challenge that facedyou, and sooner — much sooner — than I hadanticipated, you found yourself face-to-face withVoldemort. You survived again. You did more. Youdelayed his return to full power and strength. Youfought a man’s fight. I was ... prouder of you than Ican say.

“Yet there was a flaw in this wonderful plan of mine,”said Dumbledore. “An obvious flaw that I knew, eventhen, might be the undoing of it all. And yet, knowinghow important it was that my plan should succeed, I

Page | 1067Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

told myself that I would not permit this flaw to min it.

I alone could prevent this, so I alone must be strong.And here was my first test, as you lay in the hospitalwing, weak from your struggle with Voldemort.”

“I don’t understand what you’re saying,” said Harry.

“Don’t you remember asking me, as you lay in thehospital wing, why Voldemort had tried to kill youwhen you were a baby?”

Harry nodded.

“Ought I to have told you then?”

Harry stared into the blue eyes and said nothing, buthis heart was racing again.

“You do not see the flaw in the plan yet? No ...perhaps not. Well, as you know, I decided not toanswer you. Eleven, I told myself, was much tooyoung to know. I had never intended to tell you whenyou were eleven. The knowledge would be too much atsuch a young age.

“I should have recognized the danger signs then. Ishould have asked myself why I did not feel moredisturbed that you had already asked me the questionto which I knew, one day, I must give a terribleanswer. I should have recognized that I was too happyto think that I did not have to do it on that particularday... You were too young, much too young.

“And so we entered your second year at Hogwarts.

And once again you met challenges even grownwizards have never faced. Once again you acquittedyourself beyond my wildest dreams. You did not askme again, however, why Voldemort had left that markupon you. We discussed your scar, oh yes... We camePage | 1068Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

very, very close to the subject. Why did I not tell youeverything?

“Well, it seemed to me that twelve was, after all,hardly better than eleven to receive such information.

I allowed you to leave my presence, bloodstained,exhausted but exhilarated, and if I felt a twinge ofunease that I ought, perhaps, have told you then, itwas swiftly silenced. You were still so young, you see,and I could not find it in me to spoil that night oftriumph...

“Do you see, Harry? Do you see the flaw in mybrilliant plan now? I had fallen into the trap I hadforeseen, that I had told myself I could avoid, that Imust avoid.”

“I don’t —”

“I cared about you too much,” said Dumbledoresimply. “I cared more for your happiness than yourknowing the truth, more for your peace of mind thanmy plan, more for your life than the lives that mightbe lost if the plan failed. In other words, I actedexactly as Voldemort expects we fools who love to act.

“Is there a defense? I defy anyone who has watchedyou as I have — and I have watched you more closelythan you can have imagined — not to want to saveyou more pain than you had already suffered. Whatdid I care if numbers of nameless and faceless peopleand creatures were slaughtered in the vague future, ifin the here and now you were alive, and well, andhappy? I never dreamed that I would have such aperson on my hands.

“We entered your third year. I watched from afar asyou struggled to repel dementors, as you foundSirius, learned what he was and rescued him. Was I

Page | 1069Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

to tell you then, at the moment when you hadtriumphantly snatched your godfather from the jawsof the Ministry? But now, at the age of thirteen, myexcuses were running out. Young you might be, butyou had proved you were exceptional. My consciencewas uneasy, Harry. I knew the time must comesoon...

“But you came out of the maze last year, havingwatched Cedric Diggory die, having escaped death sonarrowly yourself ... and I did not tell you, though Iknew, now Voldemort had returned, I must do itsoon. And now, tonight, I know you have long beenready for the knowledge I have kept from you for solong, because you have proved that I should haveplaced the burden upon you before this. My onlydefense is this: I have watched you struggling undermore burdens than any student who has ever passedthrough this school, and I could not bring myself toadd another — the greatest one of all.”

Harry waited, but Dumbledore did not speak.

“I still don’t understand.”

“Voldemort tried to kill you when you were a childbecause of a prophecy made shortly before your birth.He knew the prophecy had been made, though he didnot know its full contents. He set out to kill you whenyou were still a baby, believing he was fulfilling theterms of the prophecy. He discovered, to his cost, thathe was mistaken, when the curse intended to kill youbackfired. And so, since his return to his body, andparticularly since your extraordinary escape from himlast year, he has been determined to hear thatprophecy in its entirety. This is the weapon he hasbeen seeking so assiduously since his return: theknowledge of how to destroy you.”

Page | 1070Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The sun had risen fully now. Dumbledore’s office wasbathed in it. The glass case in which the sword ofGodric Gryffindor resided gleamed white and opaque,the fragments of the instruments Harry had thrown tothe floor glistened like raindrops, and behind him, thebaby Fawkes made soft chirruping noises in his nestof ashes.

“The prophecy’s smashed,” Harry said blankly. “I waspulling Neville up those benches in the — the roomwhere the archway was, and I ripped his robes and itfell...”

“The thing that smashed was merely the record of theprophecy kept by the Department of Mysteries. Butthe prophecy was made to somebody, and that personhas the means of recalling it perfectly.”

“Who heard it?” asked Harry, though he thought heknew the answer already.

“I did,” said Dumbledore. “On a cold, wet nightsixteen years ago, in a room above the bar at theHog’s Head Inn. I had gone there to see an applicantfor the post of Divination teacher, though it wasagainst my inclination to allow the subject ofDivination to continue at all. The applicant, however,was the great-great-granddaughter of a very famous,very gifted Seer, and I thought it common politenessto meet her. I was disappointed. It seemed to me thatshe had not a trace of the gift herself. I told her,courteously I hope, that I did not think she would besuitable for the post. I turned to leave.”

Dumbledore got to his feet and walked past Harry tothe black cabinet that stood beside Fawkes’s perch.

He bent down, slid back a catch, and took from insideit the shallow stone basin, carved with runes aroundthe edges, in which Harry had seen his fatherPage | 1071Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

tormenting Snape. Dumbledore walked back to thedesk, placed the Pensieve upon it, and raised hiswand to his own temple. From it, he withdrew silvery,gossamer-fine strands of thought clinging to thewand, and deposited them in the basin. He sat backdown behind his desk and watched his thoughts swirland drift inside the Pensieve for a moment. Then,with a sigh, he raised his wand and prodded thesilvery substance with its tip.

A figure rose out of it, draped in shawls, her eyesmagnified to enormous size behind her glasses, andshe revolved slowly, her feet in the basin. But whenSibyll Trelawney spoke, it was not in her usualethereal, mystic voice, but in the harsh, hoarse tonesHarry had heard her use once before.

“The one with the power to vanquish the Dark Lordapproaches... Born to those who have thrice defiedhim, born as the seventh month dies ... and the DarkLord will mark him as his equal, but he will havepower the Dark Lord knows not... and either must dieat the hand of the other for neither can live while theother survives... The one with the power to vanquishthe Dark Lord will be born as the seventh monthdies...”

The slowly revolving Professor Trelawney sank backinto the silver mass below and vanished.

The silence within the office was absolute. NeitherDumbledore nor Harry nor any of the portraits madea sound. Even Fawkes had fallen silent.

“Professor Dumbledore?” Harry said very quietly, forDumbledore, still staring at the Pensieve, seemedcompletely lost in thought. “It ... did that mean ...What did that mean?”

Page | 1072Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It meant,” said Dumbledore, “that the person whohas the only chance of conquering Lord Voldemort forgood was born at the end of July, nearly sixteen yearsago. This boy would be born to parents who hadalready defied Voldemort three times.”

Harry felt as though something was closing in uponhim. His breathing seemed difficult again.

“It means — me?”

Dumbledore surveyed him for a moment through hisglasses.

“The odd thing is, Harry,” he said softly, “that it maynot have meant you at all. Sibyll’s prophecy couldhave applied to two wizard boys, both born at the endof July that year, both of whom had parents in theOrder of the Phoenix, both sets of parents havingnarrowly escaped Voldemort three times. One, ofcourse, was you. The other was Neville Longbottom.”

“But then ... but then, why was it my name on theprophecy and not Neville’s?”

“The official record was relabeled after Voldemort’sattack on you as a child,” said Dumbledore. “Itseemed plain to the keeper of the Hall of Prophecythat Voldemort could only have tried to kill youbecause he knew you to be the one to whom Sibyllwas referring.”

“Then — it might not be me?” said Harry.

“I am afraid,” said Dumbledore slowly, looking asthough every word cost him a great effort, “that thereis no doubt that it is you.”

Page | 1073Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“But you said — Neville was born at the end of Julytoo — and his mum and dad —”

“You are forgetting the next part of the prophecy, thefinal identifying feature of the boy who couldvanquish Voldemort... Voldemort himself would ‘markhim as his equal.’ And so he did, Harry. He choseyou, not Neville. He gave you the scar that has provedboth blessing and curse.”

“But he might have chosen wrong!” said Harry. “Hemight have marked the wrong person!”

“He chose the boy he thought most likely to be adanger to him,” said Dumbledore. “And notice this,Harry. He chose, not the pureblood (which, accordingto his creed, is the only kind of wizard worth being orknowing), but the half-blood, like himself. He sawhimself in you before he had ever seen you, and inmarking you with that scar, he did not kill you, as heintended, but gave you powers, and a future, whichhave fitted you to escape him not once, but four timesso far — something that neither your parents, norNeville’s parents, ever achieved.”

“Why did he do it, then?” said Harry, who felt numband cold. “Why did he try and kill me as a baby? Heshould have waited to see whether Neville or I lookedmore dangerous when we were older and tried to killwhoever it was then —”

“That might, indeed, have been the more practicalcourse,” said Dumbledore, “except that Voldemort’sinformation about the prophecy was incomplete. TheHog’s Head Inn, which Sibyll chose for its cheapness,has long attracted, shall we say, a more interestingclientele than the Three Broomsticks. As you andyour friends found out to your cost, and I to minethat night, it is a place where it is never safe toPage | 1074Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

assume you are not being overheard. Of course, I hadnot dreamed, when I set out to meet Sibyll Trelawney,that I would hear anything worth overhearing. My —our — one stroke of good fortune was that theeavesdropper was detected only a short way into theprophecy and thrown from the building.”

“So he only heard ... ?”

“He heard only the first part, the part foretelling thebirth of a boy in July to parents who had thrice defiedVoldemort. Consequently, he could not warn hismaster that to attack you would be to risktransferring power to you — again marking you as hisequal. So Voldemort never knew that there might bedanger in attacking you, that it might be wise to waitor to learn more. He did not know that you wouldhave ‘power the Dark Lord knows not’ —”

“But I don’t!” said Harry in a strangled voice. “Ihaven’t any powers he hasn’t got, I couldn’t fight theway he did tonight, I can’t possess people or — or killthem —”

“There is a room in the Department of Mysteries,”interrupted Dumbledore, “that is kept locked at alltimes. It contains a force that is at once morewonderful and more terrible than death, than humanintelligence, than forces of nature. It is also, perhaps,the most mysterious of the many subjects for studythat reside there. It is the power held within thatroom that you possess in such quantities and whichVoldemort has not at all. That power took you to saveSirius tonight. That power also saved you frompossession by Voldemort, because he could not bearto reside in a body so full of the force he detests. Inthe end, it mattered not that you could not close yourmind. It was your heart that saved you.”

Page | 1075Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry closed his eyes. If he had not gone to saveSirius, Sirius would not have died... More to stave offthe moment when he would have to think of Siriusagain, Harry asked, without caring much about theanswer, “The end of the prophecy ... it was somethingabout ... ‘neither can live...’ ”

“ ‘... while the other survives,’ ” said Dumbledore.

“So,” said Harry, dredging up the words from what feltlike a deep well of despair inside him, “so does thatmean that ... that one of us has got to kill the otherone ... in the end?”

“Yes,” said Dumbledore.

For a long time, neither of them spoke. Somewherefar beyond the office walls, Harry could hear thesound of voices, students heading down to the GreatHall for an early breakfast, perhaps. It seemedimpossible that there could be people in the worldwho still desired food, who laughed, who neither knewnor cared that Sirius Black was gone forever. Siriusseemed a million miles away already, even if a part ofHarry still believed that if he had only pulled backthat veil, he would have found Sirius looking back athim, greeting him, perhaps, with his laugh like abark...

“I feel I owe you another explanation, Harry,” saidDumbledore hesitantly. “You may, perhaps, havewondered why I never chose you as a prefect? I mustconfess ... that I rather thought ... you had enoughresponsibility to be going on with.”

Harry looked up at him and saw a tear trickling downDumbledore’s face into his long silver beard.

Page | 1076Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





THE SECOND WAR BEGINS

HE-WHO-MUST-NOT-BE-NAMED RETURNS

In a brief statement Friday night, Minister of MagicCornelius Fudge confirmed that He-Who-Must-Not-BeNamed has returned to this country and is activeonce more.

“It is with great regret that I must confirm that thewizard styling himself Lord — well, you know who Imean — is alive and among us again,” said Fudge,looking tired and flustered as he addressed reporters.“It is with almost equal regret that we report the massrevolt of the dementors of Azkaban, who have shownthemselves averse to continuing in the Ministry’semploy. We believe that the dementors are currentlytaking direction from Lord — Thingy.

“We urge the magical population to remain vigilant TheMinistry is currently publishing guides to elementaryhome and personal defense that will be delivered freeto all Wizarding homes within the coming month. ”

Page | 1077Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

The Minister’s statement was met with dismay andalarm from the Wizarding community, which asrecently as last Wednesday was receiving Ministryassurances that there was “no truth whatsoever inthese persistent rumors that You-Know-Who isoperating amongst us once more.”

Details of the events that led to the Ministryturnaround are still hazy, though it is believed thatHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named and a select band offollowers (known as Death Eaters) gained entry to theMinistry of Magic itself on Thursday evening.

Albus Dumbledore, newly reinstated headmaster ofHogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry,reinstated member of the International Confederationof Wizards, and reinstated Chief Warlock of theWizengamot, was unavailable for comment last night.He has insisted for a year that You-Know-Who wasnot dead, as was widely hoped and believed, butrecruiting followers once more for a fresh attempt toseize power. Meanwhile the Boy Who Lived —

“There you are, Harry, I knew they’d drag you into itsomehow,” said Hermione, looking over the top of thepaper at him.

They were in the hospital wing. Harry was sitting onthe end of Ron’s bed and they were both listening toHermione read the front page of the Sunday Prophet.Ginny, whose ankle had been mended in a trice byMadam Pomfrey, was curled up at the foot ofHermione’s bed; Neville, whose nose had likewisebeen returned to its normal size and shape, was in achair between the two beds; and Luna, who haddropped in to visit clutching the latest edition of TheQuibbler, was reading the magazine upside down andapparently not taking in a word Hermione was saying.

Page | 1078Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“He’s ‘the Boy Who Lived’ again now, though, isn’the?” said Ron darkly. “Not such a show-off maniacanymore, eh?”

He helped himself to a handful of Chocolate Frogsfrom the immense pile on his bedside cabinet, threw afew to Harry, Ginny, and Neville, and ripped off thewrapper of his own with his teeth. There were stilldeep welts on his forearms where the brain’s tentacleshad wrapped around him. According to MadamPomfrey, thoughts could leave deeper scarring thanalmost anything else, though since she had startedapplying copious amounts of Dr. Ubbly’s ObliviousUnction, there seemed to be some improvement.

“Yes, they’re very complimentary about you now,Harry,” said Hermione, now scanning down thearticle. “ ‘A lone voice of truth ... perceived asunbalanced, yet never wavered in his story ... forced tobear ridicule and slander ...’ Hmmm,” said Hermione,frowning, “I notice they don’t mention the fact that itwas them doing all the ridiculing and slandering,though...”

She winced slightly and put a hand to her ribs. Thecurse Dolohov had used on her, though less effectivethan it would have been had he been able to say theincantation aloud, had nevertheless caused, inMadam Pomfrey’s words, “quite enough damage to begoing on with.” Hermione was having to take tendifferent types of potion every day and although shewas improving greatly, was already bored with thehospital wing.

“ ‘You-Know-Who’s Last Attempt to Take Over, pagestwo to four, What the Ministry Should Have Told Us,page five, Why Nobody Listened to Albus Dumbledore,pages six to eight, Exclusive Interview with HarryPotter, page nine ...’ Well,” said Hermione, folding upPage | 1079Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

the newspaper and throwing it aside, “it’s certainlygiven them lots to write about. And that interviewwith Harry isn’t exclusive, it’s the one that was in TheQuibbler months ago...”

“Daddy sold it to them,” said Luna vaguely, turning apage of The Quibbler. “He got a very good price for ittoo, so we’re going to go on an expedition to Swedenthis summer and see if we can catch a Crumple-Horned Snorkack.”

Hermione seemed to struggle with herself for amoment, then said, “That sounds lovely.”

Ginny caught Harry’s eye and looked away quickly,grinning.

“So anyway,” said Hermione, sitting up a littlestraighter and wincing again, “what’s going on inschool?”

“Well, Flitwick’s got rid of Fred and George’s swamp,”said Ginny. “He did it in about three seconds. But heleft a tiny patch under the window and he’s roped itoff—”

“Why?” said Hermione, looking startled.

“Oh, he just says it was a really good bit of magic,”said Ginny, shrugging.

“I think he left it as a monument to Fred and George,”said Ron through a mouthful of chocolate. “They sentme all these, you know,” he told Harry, pointing atthe small mountain of Frogs beside him. “Must bedoing all right out of that joke shop, eh?”

Hermione looked rather disapproving and asked, “Sohas all the trouble stopped now Dumbledore’s back?”

Page | 1080Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Neville, “everything’s settled right backdown again.”

“I s’pose Filch is happy, is he?” asked Ron, propping aChocolate Frog card featuring Dumbledore against hiswater jug.

“Not at all,” said Ginny. “He’s really, really miserable,actually...” She lowered her voice to a whisper. “Hekeeps saying Umbridge was the best thing that everhappened to Hogwarts...”

All six of them looked around. Professor Umbridgewas lying in a bed opposite them, gazing up at theceiling. Dumbledore had strode alone into the forestto rescue her from the centaurs. How he had done it— how he had emerged from the trees supportingProfessor Umbridge without so much as a scratch onhim — nobody knew, and Umbridge was certainly nottelling. Since she had returned to the castle she hadnot, as far as any of them knew, uttered a singleword. Nobody really knew what was wrong with hereither. Her usually neat mousy hair was very untidyand there were bits of twig and leaf in it, butotherwise she seemed to be quite unscathed.

“Madam Pomfrey says she’s just in shock,” whisperedHermione.

“Sulking, more like,” said Ginny

“Yeah, she shows signs of life if you do this,” saidRon, and with his tongue he made soft clip-cloppingnoises. Umbridge sat bolt upright, looking wildlyaround.

“Anything wrong, Professor?” called Madam Pomfrey,poking her head around her office door.

Page | 1081Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“No ... no ...” said Umbridge, sinking back into herpillows, “no, I must have been dreaming...”

Hermione and Ginny muffled their laughter in thebedclothes.

“Speaking of centaurs,” said Hermione, when she hadrecovered a little, “who’s Divination teacher now? IsFirenze staying?”

“He’s got to,” said Harry, “the other centaurs won’ttake him back, will they?”

“It looks like he and Trelawney are both going toteach,” said Ginny.

“Bet Dumbledore wishes he could’ve got rid ofTrelawney for good,” said Ron, now munching on hisfourteenth Frog. “Mind you, the whole subjectsuseless if you ask me, Firenze isn’t a lot better...”

“How can you say that?” Hermione demanded. “Afterwe’ve just found out that there are real prophecies?”

Harry’s heart began to race. He had not told Ron,Hermione, or anyone else what the prophecy hadcontained. Neville had told them it had smashed whileHarry was pulling him up the steps in the DeathRoom, and Harry had not yet corrected thisimpression. He was not ready to see their expressionswhen he told them that he must be either murdereror victim, there was no other way...

“It is a pity it broke,” said Hermione quietly, shakingher head.

“Yeah, it is,” said Ron. “Still, at least You-Know-Whonever found out what was in it either — where are

Page | 1082Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

you going?” he added, looking both surprised anddisappointed as Harry stood up.

“Er — Hagrid’s,” said Harry. “You know, he just gotback and I promised I’d go down and see him and tellhim how you two are...”

“Oh all right then,” said Ron grumpily, looking out ofthe dormitory window at the patch of bright blue skybeyond. “Wish we could come ...”

“Say hello to him for us!” called Hermione, as Harryproceeded down the ward. “And ask him what’shappening about ... about his little friend!”

Harry gave a wave of his hand to show he had heardand understood as he left the dormitory.

The castle seemed very quiet even for a Sunday.Everybody was clearly out in the sunny grounds,enjoying the end of their exams and the prospect of alast few days of term unhampered by studying orhomework. Harry walked slowly along the desertedcorridor, peering out of windows as he went. He couldsee people messing around in the air over theQuidditch pitch and a couple of students swimmingin the lake, accompanied by the giant squid.

He was finding it hard at the moment to decidewhether he wanted to be with people or not.

Whenever he was in company he wanted to get away,and whenever he was alone he wanted company. Hethought he might really go and visit Hagrid, though;he had not talked to him properly since he hadreturned...

Harry had just descended the last marble step intothe entrance hall when Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyleemerged from a door on the right that Harry knew led

Page | 1083Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

down to the Slytherin common room. Harry stoppeddead; so did Malfoy and the others. For a fewmoments, the only sounds were the shouts, laughter,and splashes drifting into the hall from the groundsthrough the open front doors.

Malfoy glanced around. Harry knew he was checkingfor signs of teachers. Then he looked back at Harryand said in a low voice, “You’re dead, Potter.”

Harry raised his eyebrows. “Funny,” he said, “you’dthink I’d have stopped walking around...”

Malfoy looked angrier than Harry had ever seen him.He felt a kind of detached satisfaction at the sight ofhis pale, pointed face contorted with rage.

“You’re going to pay,” said Malfoy in a voice barelylouder than a whisper. “I’m going to make you pay forwhat you’ve done to my father...”

“Well, I’m terrified now,” said Harry sarcastically. “Is’pose Lord Voldemort’s just a warm-up act comparedto you three — what’s the matter?” he said, forMalfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had all looked stricken atthe sound of the name. “He’s your dad’s mate, isn’the? Not scared of him, are you?”

“You think you’re such a big man, Potter,” saidMalfoy, advancing now, Crabbe and Goyle flankinghim. “You wait. I’ll have you. You can’t land my fatherin prison —”

“I thought I just had,” said Harry.

“The dementors have left Azkaban,” said Malfoyquietly. “Dad and the others’ll be out in no time...”

Page | 1084Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, I expect they will,” said Harry. “Still, at leasteveryone knows what scumbags they are now —”

Malfoy’s hand flew toward his wand, but Harry wastoo quick for him. He had drawn his own wand beforeMalfoy’s fingers had even entered the pocket of hisrobes.

“Potter!”

The voice rang across the entrance hall; Snape hademerged from the staircase leading down to his office,and at the sight of him Harry felt a great rush ofhatred beyond anything he felt toward Malfoy...Whatever Dumbledore said, he would never forgiveSnape ... never ...

“What are you doing, Potter?” said Snape coldly asever, as he strode over to the four of them.

“I’m trying to decide what curse to use on Malfoy, sir,”said Harry fiercely.

Snape stared at him.

“Put that wand away at once,” he said curtly. “Tenpoints from Gryff —”

Snape looked toward the giant hourglasses on thewalls and gave a sneering smile.

“Ah. I see there are no longer any points left in theGryffindor hourglass to take away. In that case,

Potter, we will simply have to —”

“Add some more?”

Professor McGonagall had just stumped up the stonesteps into the castle. She was carrying a tartan

Page | 1085Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

carpetbag in one hand and leaning heavily on awalking stick with her other, but otherwise lookedquite well.

“Professor McGonagall!” said Snape, striding forward.“Out of St. Mungo’s, I see!”

“Yes, Professor Snape,” said Professor McGonagall,shrugging off her traveling cloak, “I’m quite as good asnew. You two — Crabbe — Goyle —”

She beckoned them forward imperiously and theycame, shuffling their large feet and looking awkward.

“Here,” said Professor McGonagall, thrusting hercarpetbag into Crabbe’s chest and her cloak intoGoyle’s, “take these up to my office for me.”

They turned and stumped away up the marblestaircase.

“Right then,” said Professor McGonagall, looking upat the hourglasses on the wall, “well, I think Potterand his friends ought to have fifty points apiece foralerting the world to the return of You-Know-Who!What say you, Professor Snape?”

“What?” snapped Snape, though Harry knew he hadheard perfectly well. “Oh — well — I suppose ...”

“So that’s fifty each for Potter, the two Weasleys,Longbottom, and Miss Granger,” said ProfessorMcGonagall, and a shower of rubies fell down into thebottom bulb of Gryffindor’s hourglass as she spoke.

“Oh — and fifty for Miss Lovegood, I suppose,” sheadded, and a number of sapphires fell intoRavenclaw’s glass. “Now, you wanted to take ten fromMr. Potter, I think, Professor Snape — so there weare...”

Page | 1086Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

A few rubies retreated into the upper bulb, leaving arespectable amount below nevertheless.

“Well, Potter, Malfoy, I think you ought to be outsideon a glorious day like this,” Professor McGonagallcontinued briskly.

Harry did not need telling twice. He thrust his wandback inside his robes and headed straight for thefront doors without another glance at Snape andMalfoy.

The hot sun hit him with a blast as he walked acrossthe lawns toward Hagrid’s cabin. Students lyingaround on the grass sunbathing, talking, reading theSunday Prophet, and eating sweets looked up at himas he passed. Some called out to him, or else waved,clearly eager to show that they, like the Prophet, haddecided he was something of a hero. Harry saidnothing to any of them. He had no idea how muchthey knew of what had happened three days ago, buthe had so far avoided being questioned and preferredit that way.

He thought at first when he knocked on Hagrid’scabin door that he was out, but then Fang camecharging around the corner and almost bowled himover with the enthusiasm of his welcome. Hagrid, ittranspired, was picking runner beans in his backgarden.

“All righ’, Harry!” he said, beaming, when Harryapproached the fence. “Come in, come in, we’ll have acup o’ dandelion juice...

“How’s things?” Hagrid asked him, as they settleddown at his wooden table with a glass apiece of icedjuice. “You — er — feelin’ all righ’, are yeh?”

Page | 1087Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry knew from the look of concern on Hagrid’s facethat he was not referring to Harry’s physical well-being.

“I’m fine,” Harry said quickly, because he could notbear to discuss the thing that he knew was inHagrid’s mind. “So, where’ve you been?”

“Bin hidin’ out in the mountains,” said Hagrid. “Up ina cave, like Sirius did when he —”

Hagrid broke off, cleared his throat gruffly, looked atHarry, and took a long draft of juice.

“Anyway, back now,” he said feebly.

“You — you look better,” said Harry, who wasdetermined to keep the conversation moving awayfrom Sirius.

“Wha?” said Hagrid, raising a massive hand andfeeling his face. “Oh — oh yeah. Well, Grawpy’s loadsbetter behaved now, loads. Seemed right pleased tersee me when I got back, ter tell yeh the truth. He’s agood lad, really... I’ve bin thinkin’ abou’ tryin’ ter findhim a lady friend, actually...”

Harry would normally have tried to persuade Hagridout of this idea at once. The prospect of a secondgiant taking up residence in the forest, possibly evenwilder and more brutal than Grawp, was positivelyalarming, but somehow Harry could not muster theenergy necessary to argue the point. He was startingto wish he was alone again, and with the idea ofhastening his departure he took several large gulps ofhis dandelion juice, half emptying his glass.

Page | 1088Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Ev’ryone knows you’ve bin tellin’ the truth now,Harry,” said Hagrid softly and unexpectedly. “Tha’sgotta be better, hasn’ it?”

Harry shrugged.

“Look ...” Hagrid leaned toward him across the table,“I knew Sirius longer ’n you did... He died in battle,an’ tha’s the way he’d’ve wanted ter go —”

“He didn’t want to go at all!” said Harry angrily.

Hagrid bowed his great shaggy head.

“Nah, I don’ reckon he did,” he said quietly. “But still,Harry ... he was never one ter sit around at home an’let other people do the fightin’. He couldn’ have livedwith himself if he hadn’ gone ter help —”

Harry leapt up again.

“I’ve got to go and visit Ron and Hermione in thehospital wing,” he said mechanically.

“Oh,” said Hagrid, looking rather upset. “Oh ... allrigh then, Harry ... Take care of yerself then, an’ dropback in if yeh’ve got a mo...”

“Yeah ... right ...”

Harry crossed to the door as fast as he could andpulled it open. He was out in the sunshine againbefore Hagrid had finished saying goodbye andwalked away across the lawn. Once again, peoplecalled out to him as he passed. He closed his eyes fora few moments, wishing they would all vanish, thathe could open his eyes and find himself alone in thegrounds...

Page | 1089Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

A few days ago, before his exams had finished and hehad seen the vision Voldemort had planted in hismind, he would have given almost anything for theWizarding world to know that he had been telling thetruth, for them to believe that Voldemort was backand know that he was neither a liar nor mad. Now,however ...

He walked a short way around the lake, sat down onits bank, sheltered from the gaze of passersby behinda tangle of shrubs, and stared out over the gleamingwater, thinking...

Perhaps the reason he wanted to be alone wasbecause he had felt isolated from everybody since histalk with Dumbledore. An invisible barrier separatedhim from the rest of the world. He was — he hadalways been — a marked man. It was just that he hadnever really understood what that meant...

And yet sitting here on the edge of the lake, with theterrible weight of grief dragging at him, with the lossof Sirius so raw and fresh inside, he could not musterany great sense of fear. It was sunny and the groundsaround him were full of laughing people, and eventhough he felt as distant from them as though hebelonged to a different race, it was still very hard tobelieve as he sat here that his life must include, orend in, murder...

He sat there for a long time, gazing out at the water,trying not to think about his godfather or toremember that it was directly across from here, onthe opposite bank, that Sirius had collapsed trying tofend off a hundred dementors...

The sun had fallen before he realized that he wascold. He got up and returned to the castle, wiping hisface on his sleeve as he went.

Page | 1090Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Ron and Hermione left the hospital wing completelycured three days before the end of term. Hermioneshowed signs of wanting to talk about Sirius, but Rontended to make hushing noises every time shementioned his name. Harry was not sure whether ornot he wanted to talk about his godfather yet; hiswishes varied with his mood. He knew one thing,though: Unhappy as he felt at the moment, he wouldgreatly miss Hogwarts in a few days’ time when hewas back at number four, Privet Drive. Even thoughhe now understood exactly why he had to returnthere every summer, he did not feel any better aboutit. Indeed, he had never dreaded his return more.

Professor Umbridge left Hogwarts the day before theend of term. It seemed that she had crept out of thehospital wing during dinnertime, evidently hoping todepart undetected, but unfortunately for her, she metPeeves on the way, who seized his last chance to doas Fred had instructed and chased her gleefully fromthe premises, whacking her alternately with a walkingstick and a sock full of chalk. Many students ran outinto the entrance hall to watch her running awaydown the path, and the Heads of Houses tried onlyhalfheartedly to restrain their pupils. Indeed,

Professor McGonagall sank back into her chair at thestaff table after a few feeble remonstrances and wasclearly heard to express a regret that she could notrun cheering after Umbridge herself, because Peeveshad borrowed her walking stick.

Their last evening at school arrived; most people hadfinished packing and were already heading down tothe end-of-term feast, but Harry had not even started.

“Just do it tomorrow!” said Ron, who was waiting bythe door of their dormitory. “Come on, I’m starving...”

“I won’t be long... Look, you go ahead...”

Page | 1091Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

But when the dormitory door closed behind Ron,Harry made no effort to speed up his packing. Thevery last thing he wanted to do was to attend the end-of-term feast. He was worried that Dumbledore wouldmake some reference to him in his speech. He wassure to mention Voldemort’s return; he had talked tothem about it last year, after all...

Harry pulled some crumpled robes out of the verybottom of his trunk to make way for folded ones and,as he did so, noticed a badly wrapped package lyingin a corner of it. He could not think what it was doingthere. He bent down, pulled it out from underneathhis trainers, and examined it.

He realized what it was within seconds. Sirius hadgiven it to him just inside the front door of twelveGrimmauld Place. Use it if you need me, all right?

Harry sank down onto his bed and unwrapped thepackage. Out fell a small, square mirror. It looked old;it was certainly dirty. Harry held it up to his face andsaw his own reflection looking back at him.

He turned the mirror over. There on the reverse sidewas a scribbled note from Sirius.

This is a two-way mirror. I’ve got the other. If you needto speak to me, just say my name into it; you’ll appearin my mirror and I’ll be able to talk in yours. Jamesand I used to use them when we were in separatedetentions.

And Harry’s heart began to race. He rememberedseeing his dead parents in the Mirror of Erised fouryears ago. He was going to be able to talk to Siriusagain, right now, he knew it —

Page | 1092Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

He looked around to make sure there was nobody elsethere; the dormitory was quite empty. He looked backat the mirror, raised it in front of his face withtrembling hands, and said, loudly and clearly,

“Sirius.”

His breath misted the surface of the glass. He heldthe mirror even closer, excitement flooding throughhim, but the eyes blinking back at him through thefog were definitely his own.

He wiped the mirror clear again and said, so thatevery syllable rang clearly through the room, “SiriusBlack!”

Nothing happened. The frustrated face looking backout of the mirror was still, definitely, his own...

Sirius didn’t have his mirror on him when he wentthrough the archway, said a small voice in Harry’shead. That’s why it’s not working...

Harry remained quite still for a moment, then hurledthe mirror back into the trunk where it shattered. Hehad been convinced, for a whole, shining minute, thathe was going to see Sirius, talk to him again...

Disappointment was burning in his throat. He got upand began throwing his things pell-mell into thetrunk on top of the broken mirror —

But then an idea struck him... A better idea than amirror ... A much bigger, more important idea ... Howhad he never thought of it before — why had he neverasked?

He was sprinting out of the dormitory and down thespiral staircase, hitting the walls as he ran and barelynoticing. He hurtled across the empty common room,

Page | 1093Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

through the portrait hole and off along the corridor,ignoring the Fat Lady, who called after him, “The feastis about to start, you know, you’re cutting it veryfine!”

But Harry had no intention of going to the feast ...

How could it be that the place was full of ghostswhenever you didn’t need one, yet now ...

He ran down staircases and along corridors and metnobody either alive or dead. They were all, clearly, inthe Great Hall. Outside his Charms classroom hecame to a halt, panting and thinking disconsolatelythat he would have to wait until later, until after theend of the feast ...

But just as he had given up hope he saw it — atranslucent somebody drifting across the end of thecorridor.

“Hey — hey Nick! NICK!”

The ghost stuck its head back out of the wall,revealing the extravagantly plumed hat anddangerously wobbling head of Sir Nicholas de Mimsy-Porpington.

“Good evening,” he said, withdrawing the rest of hisbody from the solid stone and smiling at Harry. “I amnot the only one who is late, then? Though,” hesighed, “in rather different senses, of course ...”

“Nick, can I ask you something?”

A most peculiar expression stole over Nearly HeadlessNick’s face as he inserted a finger in the stiff ruff athis neck and tugged it a little straighter, apparently togive himself thinking time. He desisted only when his

Page | 1094Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

partially severed neck seemed about to give waycompletely.

“Er — now, Harry?” said Nick, looking discomforted.“Can’t it wait until after the feast?”

“No — Nick — please,” said Harry, “I really need totalk to you. Can we go in here?”

Harry opened the door of the nearest classroom andNearly Headless Nick sighed.

“Oh very well,” he said, looking resigned. “I can’tpretend I haven’t been expecting it.”

Harry was holding the door open for him, but hedrifted through the wall instead.

“Expecting what?” Harry asked, as he closed the door.

“You to come and find me,” said Nick, now glidingover to the window and looking out at the darkeninggrounds. “It happens, sometimes ... when somebodyhas suffered a ... loss.”

“Well,” said Harry, refusing to be deflected. “You wereright, I’ve — I’ve come to find you.”

Nick said nothing.

“It’s —” said Harry, who was finding this moreawkward than he had anticipated, “it’s just — you’redead. But you’re still here, aren’t you?”

Nick sighed and continued to gaze out at the grounds.

“That’s right, isn’t it?” Harry urged him. “You died,but I’m talking to you... You can walk aroundHogwarts and everything, can’t you?”

Page | 1095Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Nearly Headless Nick quietly, “I walk andtalk, yes.”

“So, you came back, didn’t you?” said Harry urgently.“People can come back, right? As ghosts. They don’thave to disappear completely. Well?” he addedimpatiently, when Nick continued to say nothing.

Nearly Headless Nick hesitated, then said, “Noteveryone can come back as a ghost.”

“What d’you mean?” said Harry quickly.

“Only ... only wizards.”

“Oh,” said Harry, and he almost laughed with relief.“Well, that’s okay then, the person I’m asking about isa wizard. So he can come back, right?”

Nick turned away from the window and lookedmournfully at Harry. “He won’t come back.”

“Who?”

“Sirius Black,” said Nick.

“But you did!” said Harry angrily. “You came back —you’re dead and you didn’t disappear —”

“Wizards can leave an imprint of themselves upon theearth, to walk palely where their living selves oncetrod,” said Nick miserably. “But very few wizardschoose that path.”

“Why not?” said Harry. “Anyway — it doesn’t matter— Sirius won’t care if it’s unusual, he’ll come back, Iknow he will!”

Page | 1096Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

And so strong was his belief that Harry actuallyturned his head to check the door, sure, for a splitsecond, that he was going to see Sirius, pearly whiteand transparent but beaming, walking through ittoward him.

“He will not come back,” repeated Nick quietly. “Hewill have ... gone on.”

“What d’you mean, ‘gone on’?” said Harry quickly.“Gone on where? Listen — what happens when youdie, anyway? Where do you go? Why doesn’t everyonecome back? Why isn’t this place full of ghosts? Why— ?”

“I cannot answer,” said Nick.

“You’re dead, aren’t you?” said Harry exasperatedly.“Who can answer better than you?”

“I was afraid of death,” said Nick. “I chose to remainbehind. I sometimes wonder whether I oughtn’t tohave ... Well, that is neither here nor there... In fact, Iam neither here nor there...” He gave a small sadchuckle. “I know nothing of the secrets of death,

Harry, for I chose my feeble imitation of life instead. Ibelieve learned wizards study the matter in theDepartment of Mysteries —”

“Don’t talk to me about that place!” said Harryfiercely.

“I am sorry not to have been more help,” said Nickgently. “Well ... well, do excuse me ... the feast, youknow ...”

And he left the room, leaving Harry there alone,gazing blankly at the wall through which Nick haddisappeared.

Page | 1097Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry felt almost as though he had lost his godfatherall over again in losing the hope that he might be ableto see or speak to him once more. He walked slowlyand miserably back up through the empty castle,wondering whether he would ever feel cheerful again.

He had turned the corner toward the Fat Lady’scorridor when he saw somebody up ahead fastening anote to a board on the wall. A second glance showedhim that it was Luna. There were no good hidingplaces nearby, she was bound to have heard hisfootsteps, and in any case, Harry could hardly musterthe energy to avoid anyone at the moment.

“Hello,” said Luna vaguely, glancing around at him asshe stepped back from the notice.

“How come you’re not at the feast?” Harry asked.

“Well, I’ve lost most of my possessions,” said Lunaserenely. “People take them and hide them, you know.But as it’s the last night, I really do need them back,so I’ve been putting up signs.”

She gestured toward the notice board, upon which,sure enough, she had pinned a list of all her missingbooks and clothes, with a plea for their return.

An odd feeling rose in Harry — an emotion quitedifferent from the anger and grief that had filled himsince Sirius’s death. It was a few moments before herealized that he was feeling sorry for Luna.

“How come people hide your stuff?” he asked her,frowning.

“Oh ... well ...” She shrugged. “I think they think I’m abit odd, you know. Some people call me ‘Loony’Lovegood, actually.”

Page | 1098Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked at her and the new feeling of pityintensified rather painfully.

“That’s no reason for them to take your things,” hesaid flatly. “D’you want help finding them?”

“Oh no,” she said, smiling at him. “They’ll come back,they always do in the end. It was just that I wanted topack tonight. Anyway ... why aren’t you at the feast?”

Harry shrugged. “Just didn’t feel like it.”

“No,” said Luna, observing him with those oddlymisty, protuberant eyes. “I don’t suppose you do.

That man the Death Eaters killed was your godfather,wasn’t he? Ginny told me.”

Harry nodded curtly, but found that for some reasonhe did not mind Luna talking about Sirius. He hadjust remembered that she too could see thestrals.

“Have you ...” he began. “I mean, who ... has anyoneyou’ve known ever died?”

“Yes,” said Luna simply, “my mother. She was a quiteextraordinary witch, you know, but she did like toexperiment and one of her spells went rather badlywrong one day. I was nine.”

“I’m sorry,” Harry mumbled.

“Yes, it was rather horrible,” said Lunaconversationally. “I still feel very sad about itsometimes. But I’ve still got Dad. And anyway, it’s notas though I’ll never see Mum again, is it?”

“Er — isn’t it?” said Harry uncertainly.

Page | 1099Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

She shook her head in disbelief. “Oh, come on. Youheard them, just behind the veil, didn’t you?”

“You mean ...”

“In that room with the archway. They were justlurking out of sight, that’s all. You heard them.”

They looked at each other. Luna was smiling slightly.Harry did not know what to say, or to think. Lunabelieved so many extraordinary things ... yet he hadbeen sure he had heard voices behind the veil too...

“Are you sure you don’t want me to help you look foryour stuff?” he said.

“Oh no,” said Luna. “No, I think I’ll just go down andhave some pudding and wait for it all to turn up... Italways does in the end... Well, have a nice holiday,Harry.”

“Yeah ... yeah, you too.”

She walked away from him, and as he watched hergo, he found that the terrible weight in his stomachseemed to have lessened slightly.

The journey home on the Hogwarts Express next daywas eventful in several ways. Firstly, Malfoy, Crabbe,and Goyle, who had clearly been waiting all week forthe opportunity to strike without teacher witnesses,attempted to ambush Harry halfway down the trainas he made his way back from the toilet. The attackmight have succeeded had it not been for the fact thatthey unwittingly chose to stage the attack rightoutside a compartment full of D.A. members, who sawwhat was happening through the glass and rose asone to rush to Harry’s aid. By the time ErnieMacmillan, Hannah Abbott, Susan Bones, JustinPage | llOOHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Finch-Fletchley, Anthony Goldstein, and Terry Boothad finished using a wide variety of the hexes andjinxes Harry had taught them, Malfoy, Crabbe, andGoyle resembled nothing so much as three giganticslugs squeezed into Hogwarts uniforms as Harry,

Ernie, and Justin hoisted them into the luggage rackand left them there to ooze.

“I must say, I’m looking forward to seeing Malfoy’smother’s face when he gets off the train,” said Erniewith some satisfaction, as he watched Malfoy squirmabove him. Ernie had never quite got over theindignity of Malfoy docking points from Hufflepuffduring his brief spell as a member of the InquisitorialSquad.

“Goyle’s mum’ll be really pleased, though,” said Ron,who had come to investigate the source of thecommotion. “He’s loads betterlooking now... Anyway,Harry, the food trolley’s just stopped if you wantanything...”

Harry thanked the others and accompanied Ron backto their compartment, where he bought a large pile ofCauldron Cakes and Pumpkin Pasties. Hermione wasreading the Daily Prophet again, Ginny was doing aquiz in The Quibbler, and Neville was stroking hisMimbulus mimbletonia, which had grown a great dealover the year and now made odd crooning noiseswhen touched.

Harry and Ron whiled away most of the journeyplaying wizard chess while Hermione read outsnippets from the Prophet It was now full of articlesabout how to repel dementors, attempts by theMinistry to track down Death Eaters, and hystericalletters claiming that the writer had seen LordVoldemort walking past their house that verymorning...

Page | llOlHarry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“It hasn’t really started yet,” sighed Hermionegloomily, folding up the newspaper again. “But itwon’t be long now...”

“Hey, Harry,” said Ron, nodding toward the glasswindow onto the corridor.

Harry looked around. Cho was passing, accompaniedby Marietta Edgecombe, who was wearing a balaclava.His and Cho’s eyes met for a moment. Cho blushedand kept walking. Harry looked back down at thechessboard just in time to see one of his pawnschased off its square by Ron’s knight.

“What’s — er — going on with you and her anyway?”Ron asked quietly.

“Nothing,” said Harry truthfully.

“I — er — heard she’s going out with someone elsenow,” said Hermione tentatively.

Harry was surprised to find that this information didnot hurt at all. Wanting to impress Cho seemed tobelong to a past that was no longer quite connectedwith him. So much of what he had wanted beforeSirius’s death felt that way these days... The weekthat had elapsed since he had last seen Sirius seemedto have lasted much, much longer: It stretched acrosstwo universes, the one with Sirius in it, and the onewithout.

“You’re well out of it, mate,” said Ron forcefully. “Imean, she’s quite good-looking and all that, but youwant someone a bit more cheerful.”

“She’s probably cheerful enough with someone else,”said Harry, shrugging.

Page | 1102Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Who’s she with now anyway?” Ron asked Hermione,but it was Ginny who answered.

“Michael Corner,” she said.

“Michael — but —” said Ron, craning around in hisseat to stare at her. “But you were going out withhim!”

“Not anymore,” said Ginny resolutely. “He didn’t likeGryffindor beating Ravenclaw at Quidditch and gotreally sulky, so I ditched him and he ran off tocomfort Cho instead.” She scratched her noseabsently with the end of her quill, turned TheQuibbler upside down, and began marking heranswers. Ron looked highly delighted.

“Well, I always thought he was a bit of an idiot,” hesaid, prodding his queen forward toward Harry’squivering castle. “Good for you. Just choose someone— better — next time.”

He cast Harry an oddly furtive look as he said it.

“Well, I’ve chosen Dean Thomas, would you say he’sbetter?” asked Ginny vaguely.

“WHAT?” shouted Ron, upending the chessboard.Crookshanks went plunging after the pieces andHedwig and Pigwidgeon twittered and hooted angrilyfrom overhead.

As the train slowed down in the approach to King’sCross, Harry thought he had never wanted to leave itless. He even wondered fleetingly what would happenif he simply refused to get off, but remainedstubbornly sitting there until the first of September,when it would take him back to Hogwarts. When itfinally puffed to a standstill, however, he lifted downPage | 1103Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Hedwig’s cage and prepared to drag his trunk fromthe train as usual.

When the ticket inspector signaled to him, Ron, andHermione that it was safe to walk through themagical barrier between platforms nine and ten,however, he found a surprise awaiting him on theother side: a group of people standing there to greethim whom he had not expected at all.

There was Mad-Eye Moody, looking quite as sinisterwith his bowler hat pulled low over his magical eye ashe would have done without it, his gnarled handsclutching a long staff, his body wrapped in avoluminous traveling cloak. Tonks stood just behindhim, her bright bubble-gum-pink hair gleaming in thesunlight filtering through the dirty glass stationceiling, wearing heavily patched jeans and a brightpurple T-shirt bearing the legend THE WEIRDSISTERS. Next to Tonks was Lupin, his face pale, hishair graying, a long and threadbare overcoat coveringa shabby jumper and trousers. At the front of thegroup stood Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, dressed in theirMuggle best, and Fred and George, who were bothwearing brand-new jackets in some lurid green, scalymaterial.

“Ron, Ginny!” called Mrs. Weasley, hurrying forwardand hugging her children tightly. “Oh, and Harry dear— how are you?”

“Fine,” lied Harry, as she pulled him into a tightembrace. Over her shoulder he saw Ron goggling atthe twins’ new clothes.

“What are they supposed to be?” he asked, pointing atthe jackets.

Page | 1104Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Finest dragon skin, little bro,” said Fred, giving hiszip a little tweak. “Business is booming and wethought we’d treat ourselves.”

“Hello, Harry,” said Lupin, as Mrs. Weasley let go ofHarry and turned to greet Hermione.

“Hi,” said Harry. “I didn’t expect ... what are you alldoing here?”

“Well,” said Lupin with a slight smile, “we thought wemight have a little chat with your aunt and unclebefore letting them take you home.”

“I dunno if that’s a good idea,” said Harry at once.

“Oh, I think it is,” growled Moody, who had limped alittle closer. “That’ll be them, will it, Potter?”

He pointed with his thumb over his shoulder; hismagical eye was evidently peering through the back ofhis head and his bowler hat. Harry leaned an inch orso to the left to see where Mad-Eye was pointing andthere, sure enough, were the three Dursleys, wholooked positively appalled to see Harry’s receptioncommittee.

“Ah, Harry!” said Mr. Weasley, turning fromHermione’s parents, whom he had been greetingenthusiastically, and who were taking it in turns tohug Hermione. “Well — shall we do it, then?”

“Yeah, I reckon so, Arthur,” said Moody.

He and Mr. Weasley took the lead across the stationtoward the place where the Dursleys stood,apparently rooted to the floor. Hermione disengagedherself gently from her mother to join the group.

Page | 1105Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

“Good afternoon,” said Mr. Weasley pleasantly toUncle Vernon, coming to a halt right in front of him.“You might remember me, my name’s ArthurWeasley.”

As Mr. Weasley had singlehandedly demolished mostof the Dursleys’ living room two years previously,

Harry would have been very surprised if Uncle Vernonhad forgotten him. Sure enough, Uncle Vernon turneda deeper shade of puce and glared at Mr. Weasley,but chose not to say anything, partly, perhaps,because the Dursleys were outnumbered two to one.Aunt Petunia looked both frightened andembarrassed. She kept glancing around, as thoughterrified somebody she knew would see her in suchcompany. Dudley, meanwhile, seemed to be trying tolook small and insignificant, a feat at which he wasfailing extravagantly.

“We thought we’d just have a few words with youabout Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, still smiling.

“Yeah,” growled Moody. “About how he’s treated whenhe’s at your place.”

Uncle Vernon’s mustache seemed to bristle withindignation. Possibly because the bowler hat gave himthe entirely mistaken impression that he was dealingwith a kindred spirit, he addressed himself to Moody.

“I am not aware that it is any of your business whatgoes on in my house —”

“I expect what you’re not aware of would fill severalbooks, Dursley,” growled Moody.

“Anyway, that’s not the point,” interjected Tonks,whose pink hair seemed to offend Aunt Petunia morethan all the rest put together, for she closed her eyes

Page | 1106Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

rather than look at her. “The point is, if we find outyou’ve been horrible to Harry —”

“— and make no mistake, we’ll hear about it,” addedLupin pleasantly.

“Yes,” said Mr. Weasley, “even if you won’t let Harryuse the fellytone —”

“Telephone,” whispered Hermione.

“Yeah, if we get any hint that Potter’s been mistreatedin any way, you’ll have us to answer to,” said Moody.

Uncle Vernon swelled ominously. His sense of outrageseemed to outweigh even his fear of this bunch ofoddballs.

“Are you threatening me, sir?” he said, so loudly thatpassersby actually turned to stare.

“Yes, I am,” said Mad-Eye, who seemed rather pleasedthat Uncle Vernon had grasped this fact so quickly.

“And do I look like the kind of man who can beintimidated?” barked Uncle Vernon.

“Well ...” said Moody, pushing back his bowler hat toreveal his sinisterly revolving magical eye. UncleVernon leapt backward in horror and collidedpainfully with a luggage trolley. “Yes, I’d have to sayyou do, Dursley.”

He turned from Uncle Vernon to Harry. “So, Potter ...give us a shout if you need us. If we don’t hear fromyou for three days in a row, well send someonealong...”

Page | 1107Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling

Aunt Petunia whimpered piteously. It could not havebeen plainer that she was thinking of what theneighbors would say if they caught sight of thesepeople marching up the garden path.

“ T3ye, then, Potter,” said Moody, grasping Harry’sshoulder for a moment with a gnarled hand.

“Take care, Harry,” said Lupin quietly. “Keep intouch.”

“Harry, we’ll have you away from there as soon as wecan,” Mrs. Weasley whispered, hugging him again.

“We’ll see you soon, mate,” said Ron anxiously,shaking Harry’s hand.

“Really soon, Harry,” said Hermione earnestly. “Wepromise.”

Harry nodded. He somehow could not find words totell them what it meant to him, to see them all rangedthere, on his side. Instead he smiled, raised a hand infarewell, turned around, and led the way out of thestation toward the sunlit street, with Uncle Vernon,Aunt Petunia, and Dudley hurrying along in his wake.

Page | 1108Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix - J.K. Rowling





