Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


Harry Potter Series (PDFs)





Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


J.K. Rowling

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.1)



/



THE WORST BIRTHDAY

Not for the first time, an argument had broken outover breakfast at number four, Privet Drive. Mr.Vernon Dursley had been woken in the early hours ofthe morning by a loud, hooting noise from his nephewHarry’s room.

“Third time this week!” he roared across the table. “Ifyou can’t control that owl, it’ll have to go!”

Harry tried, yet again, to explain.

“She’s bored,” he said. “She’s used to flying aroundoutside. If I could just let her out at night —”

“Do I look stupid?” snarled Uncle Vernon, a bit offried egg dangling from his bushy mustache. “I knowwhat 11 happen if that owl’s let out.”

He exchanged dark looks with his wife, Petunia.

Harry tried to argue back but his words were drownedby a long, loud belch from the Dursleys’ son, Dudley.

Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I want more bacon.”

“There’s more in the frying pan, sweetums,” said AuntPetunia, turning misty eyes on her massive son. “Wemust build you up while we’ve got the chance. ... Idon’t like the sound of that school food. ...”

“Nonsense, Petunia, I never went hungry when / wasat Smeltings,” said Uncle Vernon heartily. “Dudleygets enough, don’t you, son?”

Dudley, who was so large his bottom drooped overeither side of the kitchen chair, grinned and turned toHarry.

“Pass the frying pan.”

“You’ve forgotten the magic word,” said Harryirritably.

The effect of this simple sentence on the rest of thefamily was incredible: Dudley gasped and fell off hischair with a crash that shook the whole kitchen; Mrs.Dursley gave a small scream and clapped her handsto her mouth; Mr. Dursley jumped to his feet, veinsthrobbing in his temples.

“I meant ‘please’!” said Harry quickly. “I didn’t mean

“WHAT HAVE I TOLD YOU,” thundered his uncle,spraying spit over the table, “ABOUT SAYING THE ‘M’WORD IN OUR HOUSE?”

“But I —”

“HOW DARE YOU THREATEN DUDLEY!” roaredUncle Vernon, pounding the table with his fist.

Page | 3 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I just —”

“I WARNED YOU! I WILL NOT TOLERATE MENTIONOF YOUR ABNORMALITY UNDER THIS ROOF!”

Harry stared from his purple-faced uncle to his paleaunt, who was trying to heave Dudley to his feet.

“All right,” said Harry, “all right...”

Uncle Vernon sat back down, breathing like a windedrhinoceros and watching Harry closely out of thecorners of his small, sharp eyes.

Ever since Harry had come home for the summerholidays, Uncle Vernon had been treating him like abomb that might go off at any moment, because HarryPotter wasn’t a normal boy. As a matter of fact, hewas as not normal as it is possible to be.

Harry Potter was a wizard — a wizard fresh from hisfirst year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft andWizardry. And if the Dursleys were unhappy to havehim back for the holidays, it was nothing to howHarry felt.

He missed Hogwarts so much it was like having aconstant stomachache. He missed the castle, with itssecret passageways and ghosts, his classes (thoughperhaps not Snape, the Potions master), the mailarriving by owl, eating banquets in the Great Hall,sleeping in his four-poster bed in the tower dormitory,visiting the gamekeeper, Hagrid, in his cabin next tothe Forbidden Forest in the grounds, and, especially,Quidditch, the most popular sport in the wizardingworld (six tall goal posts, four flying balls, andfourteen players on broomsticks).

Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

All Harry’s spellbooks, his wand, robes, cauldron, andtop-of-the-line Nimbus Two Thousand broomstick hadbeen locked in a cupboard under the stairs by UncleVernon the instant Harry had come home. What didthe Dursleys care if Harry lost his place on the HouseQuidditch team because he hadn’t practiced allsummer? What was it to the Dursleys if Harry wentback to school without any of his homework done?

The Dursleys were what wizards called Muggles (not adrop of magical blood in their veins), and as far asthey were concerned, having a wizard in the familywas a matter of deepest shame. Uncle Vernon hadeven padlocked Harry’s owl, Hedwig, inside her cage,to stop her from carrying messages to anyone in thewizarding world.

Harry looked nothing like the rest of the family. UncleVernon was large and neckless, with an enormousblack mustache; Aunt Petunia was horse-faced andbony; Dudley was blond, pink, and porky. Harry, onthe other hand, was small and skinny, with brilliantgreen eyes and jet-black hair that was always untidy.He wore round glasses, and on his forehead was athin, lightning-shaped scar.

It was this scar that made Harry so particularlyunusual, even for a wizard. This scar was the onlyhint of Harry’s very mysterious past, of the reason hehad been left on the Dursleys’ doorstep eleven yearsbefore.

At the age of one year old, Harry had somehowsurvived a curse from the greatest Dark sorcerer of alltime, Lord Voldemort, whose name most witches andwizards still feared to speak. Harry’s parents had diedin Voldemort’s attack, but Harry had escaped with hislightning scar, and somehow — nobody understoodwhy — Voldemort’s powers had been destroyed theinstant he had failed to kill Harry.

Page | 5 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

So Harry had been brought up by his dead mother’ssister and her husband. He had spent ten years withthe Dursleys, never understanding why he keptmaking odd things happen without meaning to,believing the Dursleys’ story that he had got his scarin the car crash that had killed his parents.

And then, exactly a year ago, Hogwarts had written toHarry, and the whole story had come out. Harry hadtaken up his place at wizard school, where he and hisscar were famous ... but now the school year wasover, and he was back with the Dursleys for thesummer, back to being treated like a dog that hadrolled in something smelly.

The Dursleys hadn’t even remembered that todayhappened to be Harry’s twelfth birthday. Of course,his hopes hadn’t been high; they’d never given him areal present, let alone a cake — but to ignore itcompletely ...

At that moment, Uncle Vernon cleared his throatimportantly and said, “Now, as we all know, today is avery important day.”

Harry looked up, hardly daring to believe it.

“This could well be the day I make the biggest deal ofmy career,” said Uncle Vernon.

Harry went back to his toast. Of course, he thoughtbitterly, Uncle Vernon was talking about the stupiddinner party. He’d been talking of nothing else for twoweeks. Some rich builder and his wife were coming todinner and Uncle Vernon was hoping to get a hugeorder from him (Uncle Vernon’s company made drills).

Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I think we should run through the schedule onemore time,” said Uncle Vernon. “We should all be inposition at eight o’clock. Petunia, you will be — ?”

“In the lounge,” said Aunt Petunia promptly, “waitingto welcome them graciously to our home.”

“Good, good. And Dudley?”

“I’ll be waiting to open the door.” Dudley put on afoul, simpering smile. “May I take your coats, Mr. andMrs. Mason?”

“They’ll love him!” cried Aunt Petunia rapturously.

“Excellent, Dudley,” said Uncle Vernon. Then herounded on Harry. “And you?”

“I’ll be in my bedroom, making no noise andpretending I’m not there,” said Harry tonelessly.

“Exactly,” said Uncle Vernon nastily. “I will lead theminto the lounge, introduce you, Petunia, and pourthem drinks. At eight-fifteen —”

“I’ll announce dinner,” said Aunt Petunia.

“And, Dudley, you 11 say —”

“May I take you through to the dining room, Mrs.Mason?” said Dudley, offering his fat arm to aninvisible woman.

“My perfect little gentleman!” sniffed Aunt Petunia.

“And you?” said Uncle Vernon viciously to Harry.

“I’ll be in my room, making no noise and pretendingI’m not there,” said Harry dully.

Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Precisely. Now, we should aim to get in a few goodcompliments at dinner. Petunia, any ideas?”

“Vernon tells me you’re a wonderful golfer, Mr.

Mason. ... Do tell me where you bought your dress,Mrs. Mason. ...”

“Perfect ... Dudley?”

“How about — ‘We had to write an essay about ourhero at school, Mr. Mason, and I wrote about you.’ ”

This was too much for both Aunt Petunia and Harry.Aunt Petunia burst into tears and hugged her son,while Harry ducked under the table so they wouldn’tsee him laughing.

“And you, boy?”

Harry fought to keep his face straight as he emerged.

“I’ll be in my room, making no noise and pretendingI’m not there,” he said.

“Too right, you will,” said Uncle Vernon forcefully.

“The Masons don’t know anything about you and it’sgoing to stay that way. When dinner’s over, you takeMrs. Mason back to the lounge for coffee, Petunia,and I’ll bring the subject around to drills. With anyluck, I’ll have the deal signed and sealed before thenews at ten. We’ll be shopping for a vacation home inMajorca this time tomorrow.”

Harry couldn’t feel too excited about this. He didn’tthink the Dursleys would like him any better inMajorca than they did on Privet Drive.

“Right — I’m off into town to pick up the dinnerjackets for Dudley and me. And you,” he snarled at

Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry. “You stay out of your aunt’s way while she’scleaning.”

Harry left through the back door. It was a brilliant,sunny day. He crossed the lawn, slumped down onthe garden bench, and sang under his breath:

“Happy birthday to me ... happy birthday to me ...”

No cards, no presents, and he would be spending theevening pretending not to exist. He gazed miserablyinto the hedge. He had never felt so lonely. More thananything else at Hogwarts, more even than playingQuidditch, Harry missed his best friends, RonWeasley and Hermione Granger. They, however, didn’tseem to be missing him at all. Neither of them hadwritten to him all summer, even though Ron had saidhe was going to ask Harry to come and stay.

Countless times, Harry had been on the point ofunlocking Hedwig’s cage by magic and sending her toRon and Hermione with a letter, but it wasn’t worththe risk. Underage wizards weren’t allowed to usemagic outside of school. Harry hadn’t told theDursleys this; he knew it was only their terror that hemight turn them all into dung beetles that stoppedthem from locking him in the cupboard under thestairs with his wand and broomstick. For the firstcouple of weeks back, Harry had enjoyed mutteringnonsense words under his breath and watchingDudley tearing out of the room as fast as his fat legswould carry him. But the long silence from Ron andHermione had made Harry feel so cut off from themagical world that even taunting Dudley had lost itsappeal — and now Ron and Hermione had forgottenhis birthday.

What wouldn’t he give now for a message fromHogwarts? From any witch or wizard? He’d almost be

Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

glad of a sight of his archenemy, Draco Malfoy, just tobe sure it hadn’t all been a dream. ...

Not that his whole year at Hogwarts had been fun. Atthe very end of last term, Harry had come face-to-facewith none other than Lord Voldemort himself.Voldemort might be a ruin of his former self, but hewas still terrifying, still cunning, still determined toregain power. Harry had slipped through Voldemort’sclutches for a second time, but it had been a narrowescape, and even now, weeks later, Harry kept wakingin the night, drenched in cold sweat, wondering whereVoldemort was now, remembering his livid face, hiswide, mad eyes —

Harry suddenly sat bolt upright on the garden bench.He had been staring absent-mindedly into the hedge— and the hedge was staring back. Two enormousgreen eyes had appeared among the leaves.

Harry jumped to his feet just as a jeering voice floatedacross the lawn.

“I know what day it is,” sang Dudley, waddling towardhim.

The huge eyes blinked and vanished.

“What?” said Harry, not taking his eyes off the spotwhere they had been.

“I know what day it is,” Dudley repeated, coming rightup to him.

“Well done,” said Harry. “So you’ve finally learned thedays of the week.”

Page | 10 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Today’s your birthday,” sneered Dudley. “How comeyou haven’t got any cards? Haven’t you even gotfriends at that freak place?”

“Better not let your mum hear you talking about myschool,” said Harry coolly.

Dudley hitched up his trousers, which were slippingdown his fat bottom.

“Why’re you staring at the hedge?” he saidsuspiciously.

“I’m trying to decide what would be the best spell toset it on fire,” said Harry.

Dudley stumbled backward at once, a look of panicon his fat face.

“You c-can’t — Dad told you you’re not to do m-magic— he said hell chuck you out of the house — and youhaven’t got anywhere else to go — you haven’t got anyfriends to take you —”

“ Jiggery pokeryV’ said Harry in a fierce voice. “Hocuspocus — squiggly wiggly —”

“MUUUUUUM!” howled Dudley, tripping over his feetas he dashed back toward the house. “MUUUUM!

He’s doing you know what!”

Harry paid dearly for his moment of fun. As neitherDudley nor the hedge was in any way hurt, AuntPetunia knew he hadn’t really done magic, but he stillhad to duck as she aimed a heavy blow at his headwith the soapy frying pan. Then she gave him work todo, with the promise he wouldn’t eat again until he’dfinished.

Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

While Dudley lolled around watching and eating icecream, Harry cleaned the windows, washed the car,mowed the lawn, trimmed the flowerbeds, pruned andwatered the roses, and repainted the garden bench.The sun blazed overhead, burning the back of hisneck. Harry knew he shouldn’t have risen to Dudley’sbait, but Dudley had said the very thing Harry hadbeen thinking himself ... maybe he didn’t have anyfriends at Hogwarts. ...

Wish they could see famous Harry Potter now, hethought savagely as he spread manure on the flowerbeds, his back aching, sweat running down his face.

It was half past seven in the evening when at last,exhausted, he heard Aunt Petunia calling him.

“Get in here! And walk on the newspaper!”

Harry moved gladly into the shade of the gleamingkitchen. On top of the fridge stood tonight’s pudding:a huge mound of whipped cream and sugared violets.A loin of roast pork was sizzling in the oven.

“Eat quickly! The Masons will be here soon!” snappedAunt Petunia, pointing to two slices of bread and alump of cheese on the kitchen table. She was alreadywearing a salmon-pink cocktail dress.

Harry washed his hands and bolted down his pitifulsupper. The moment he had finished, Aunt Petuniawhisked away his plate. “Upstairs! Hurry!”

As he passed the door to the living room, Harrycaught a glimpse of Uncle Vernon and Dudley in bowties and dinner jackets. He had only just reached theupstairs landing when the doorbell rang and UncleVernon’s furious face appeared at the foot of thestairs.

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Remember, boy — one sound —”

Harry crossed to his bedroom on tiptoe, slippedinside, closed the door, and turned to collapse on hisbed.

The trouble was, there was already someone sittingon it.

Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





DOBBY’S WARNING

Harry managed not to shout out, but it was a closething. The little creature on the bed had large, bat-like ears and bulging green eyes the size of tennisballs. Harry knew instantly that this was what hadbeen watching him out of the garden hedge thatmorning.

As they stared at each other, Harry heard Dudley’svoice from the hall.

“May I take your coats, Mr. and Mrs. Mason?”

The creature slipped off the bed and bowed so lowthat the end of its long, thin nose touched the carpet.Harry noticed that it was wearing what looked like anold pillowcase, with rips for arm- and leg-holes.

“Er — hello,” said Harry nervously.

“Harry Potter!” said the creature in a high-pitchedvoice Harry was sure would carry down the stairs. “So

Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

long has Dobby wanted to meet you, sir ... Such anhonor it is. ...”

“Th-thank you,” said Harry, edging along the wall andsinking into his desk chair, next to Hedwig, who wasasleep in her large cage. He wanted to ask, “What areyou?” but thought it would sound too rude, so insteadhe said, “Who are you?”

“Dobby, sir. Just Dobby. Dobby the house-elf,” saidthe creature.

“Oh — really?” said Harry. “Er — I don’t want to berude or anything, but — this isn’t a great time for meto have a house-elf in my bedroom.”

Aunt Petunia’s high, false laugh sounded from theliving room. The elf hung his head.

“Not that I’m not pleased to meet you,” said Harryquickly, “but, er, is there any particular reason you’rehere?”

“Oh, yes, sir,” said Dobby earnestly. “Dobby has cometo tell you, sir ... it is difficult, sir ... Dobby wonderswhere to begin. ...”

“Sit down,” said Harry politely, pointing at the bed.

To his horror, the elf burst into tears — very noisytears.

“S-sit down).” he wailed. “Never ... never ever ...”

Harry thought he heard the voices downstairs falter.

“I’m sorry,” he whispered, “I didn’t mean to offend youor anything —”

Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Offend Dobby!” choked the elf. “Dobby has neverbeen asked to sit down by a wizard — like an equal —

Harry, trying to say “Shh!” and look comforting at thesame time, ushered Dobby back onto the bed wherehe sat hiccoughing, looking like a large and very uglydoll. At last he managed to control himself, and satwith his great eyes fixed on Harry in an expression ofwatery adoration.

“You can’t have met many decent wizards,” saidHarry, trying to cheer him up.

Dobby shook his head. Then, without warning, heleapt up and started banging his head furiously onthe window, shouting, “Bad Dobby! Bad Dobby!”

“Don’t — what are you doing?” Harry hissed,springing up and pulling Dobby back onto the bed —Hedwig had woken up with a particularly loudscreech and was beating her wings wildly against thebars of her cage.

“Dobby had to punish himself, sir,” said the elf, whohad gone slightly cross-eyed. “Dobby almost spoke illof his family, sir. ...”

“Your family?”

“The wizard family Dobby serves, sir. ... Dobby is ahouse-elf — bound to serve one house and one familyforever. ...”

“Do they know you’re here?” asked Harry curiously.Dobby shuddered.

Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, no, sir, no ... Dobby will have to punish himselfmost grievously for coming to see you, sir. Dobby willhave to shut his ears in the oven door for this. If theyever knew, sir —”

“But won’t they notice if you shut your ears in theoven door?”

“Dobby doubts it, sir. Dobby is always having topunish himself for something, sir. They lets Dobby geton with it, sir. Sometimes they reminds me to doextra punishments. ...”

“But why don’t you leave? Escape?”

“A house-elf must be set free, sir. And the family willnever set Dobby free ... Dobby will serve the familyuntil he dies, sir. ...”

Harry stared.

“And I thought I had it bad staying here for anotherfour weeks,” he said. “This makes the Dursleys soundalmost human. Can’t anyone help you? Can’t I?”

Almost at once, Harry wished he hadn’t spoken.

Dobby dissolved again into wails of gratitude.

“Please,” Harry whispered frantically, “please be quiet.If the Dursleys hear anything, if they know you’rehere —”

“Harry Potter asks if he can help Dobby ... Dobby hasheard of your greatness, sir, but of your goodness,Dobby never knew. ...”

Harry, who was feeling distinctly hot in the face, said,“Whatever you’ve heard about my greatness is a load

Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

of rubbish. I’m not even top of my year at Hogwarts;that’s Hermione, she —”

But he stopped quickly, because thinking aboutHermione was painful.

“Harry Potter is humble and modest,” said Dobbyreverently, his orb-like eyes aglow. “Harry Potterspeaks not of his triumph over He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named —”

“Voldemort?” said Harry.

Dobby clapped his hands over his bat ears andmoaned, “Ah, speak not the name, sir! Speak not thename!”

“Sorry,” said Harry quickly. “I know lots of peopledon’t like it. My friend Ron —”

He stopped again. Thinking about Ron was painful,too.

Dobby leaned toward Harry, his eyes wide asheadlights.

“Dobby heard tell,” he said hoarsely, “that HarryPotter met the Dark Lord for a second time, justweeks ago ... that Harry Potter escaped yet again.”

Harry nodded and Dobby’s eyes suddenly shone withtears.

“Ah, sir,” he gasped, dabbing his face with a corner ofthe grubby pillowcase he was wearing. “Harry Potteris valiant and bold! He has braved so many dangersalready! But Dobby has come to protect Harry Potter,to warn him, even if he does have to shut his ears in

Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

the oven door later. ... Harry Potter must not go backto Hogwarts.”

There was a silence broken only by the chink ofknives and forks from downstairs and the distantrumble of Uncle Vernon’s voice.

“W-what?” Harry stammered. “But I’ve got to go back— term starts on September first. It’s all that’skeeping me going. You don’t know what it’s like here.

I don’t belong here. I belong in your world — atHogwarts.”

“No, no, no,” squeaked Dobby, shaking his head sohard his ears flapped. “Harry Potter must stay wherehe is safe. He is too great, too good, to lose. If HarryPotter goes back to Hogwarts, he will be in mortaldanger.”

“Why?” said Harry in surprise.

“There is a plot, Harry Potter. A plot to make mostterrible things happen at Hogwarts School ofWitchcraft and Wizardry this year,” whispered Dobby,suddenly trembling all over. “Dobby has known it formonths, sir. Harry Potter must not put himself inperil. He is too important, sir!”

“What terrible things?” said Harry at once. “Who’splotting them?”

Dobby made a funny choking noise and then bangedhis head frantically against the wall.

“All right!” cried Harry, grabbing the elf’s arm to stophim. “You can’t tell me. I understand. But why areyou warning me?” A sudden, unpleasant thoughtstruck him. “Hang on — this hasn’t got anything todo with Vol — sorry — with You-Know-Who, has it?Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

You could just shake or nod,” he added hastily asDobby’s head tilted worryingly close to the wall again.

Slowly, Dobby shook his head.

“Not — not He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named, sir —”

But Dobby’s eyes were wide and he seemed to betrying to give Harry a hint. Harry, however, wascompletely lost.

“He hasn’t got a brother, has he?”

Dobby shook his head, his eyes wider than ever.

“Well then, I can’t think who else would have achance of making horrible things happen atHogwarts,” said Harry. “I mean, there’s Dumbledore,for one thing — you know who Dumbledore is, don’tyou?”

Dobby bowed his head.

“Albus Dumbledore is the greatest headmasterHogwarts has ever had. Dobby knows it, sir. Dobbyhas heard Dumbledore’s powers rival those of He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named at the height of hisstrength. But, sir” — Dobby’s voice dropped to anurgent whisper — “there are powers Dumbledoredoesn’t ... powers no decent wizard ...”

And before Harry could stop him, Dobby bounded offthe bed, seized Harry’s desk lamp, and startedbeating himself around the head with earsplittingyelps.

A sudden silence fell downstairs. Two seconds laterHarry, heart thudding madly, heard Uncle Vernon

Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

coming into the hall, calling, “Dudley must have lefthis television on again, the little tyke!”

“Quick! In the closet!” hissed Harry, stuffing Dobbyin, shutting the door, and flinging himself onto thebed just as the door handle turned.

“What — the — devil — are — you — doing?” saidUncle Vernon through gritted teeth, his face horriblyclose to Harry’s. “You’ve just ruined the punch line ofmy Japanese golfer joke. ... One more sound andyou’ll wish you’d never been born, boy!”

He stomped flat-footed from the room.

Shaking, Harry let Dobby out of the closet.

“See what it’s like here?” he said. “See why I’ve got togo back to Hogwarts? It’s the only place I’ve got —well, I think I’ve got friends.”

“Friends who don’t even write to Harry Potter?” saidDobby slyly.

“I expect they’ve just been — wait a minute,” saidHarry, frowning. “How do you know my friendshaven’t been writing to me?”

Dobby shuffled his feet.

“Harry Potter mustn’t be angry with Dobby. Dobbydid it for the best —”

“Have you been stopping my letters?”

“Dobby has them here, sir,” said the elf. Steppingnimbly out of Harry’s reach, he pulled a thick wad ofenvelopes from the inside of the pillowcase he waswearing. Harry could make out Hermione’s neat

Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

writing, Ron’s untidy scrawl, and even a scribble thatlooked as though it was from the Hogwartsgamekeeper, Hagrid.

Dobby blinked anxiously up at Harry.

“Harry Potter mustn’t be angry. ... Dobby hoped ... ifHarry Potter thought his friends had forgotten him ...Harry Potter might not want to go back to school, sir.

Harry wasn’t listening. He made a grab for the letters,but Dobby jumped out of reach.

“Harry Potter will have them, sir, if he gives Dobby hisword that he will not return to Hogwarts. Ah, sir, thisis a danger you must not face! Say you won’t go back,sir!”

“No,” said Harry angrily. “Give me my friends’ letters!”

“Then Harry Potter leaves Dobby no choice,” said theelf sadly.

Before Harry could move, Dobby had darted to thebedroom door, pulled it open, and sprinted down thestairs.

Mouth dry, stomach lurching, Harry sprang after him,trying not to make a sound. He jumped the last sixsteps, landing catlike on the hall carpet, lookingaround for Dobby. From the dining room he heardUncle Vernon saying, "... tell Petunia that very funnystory about those American plumbers, Mr. Mason.She’s been dying to hear ...”

Harry ran up the hall into the kitchen and felt hisstomach disappear.

Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Aunt Petunia’s masterpiece of a pudding, themountain of cream and sugared violets, was floatingup near the ceiling. On top of a cupboard in thecorner crouched Dobby.

“No,” croaked Harry. “Please ... they’ll kill me. ...”“Harry Potter must say he’s not going back to school

“Dobby ... please ...”

“Say it, sir —”

“I can’t —”

Dobby gave him a tragic look.

“Then Dobby must do it, sir, for Harry Potter’s owngood.”

The pudding fell to the floor with a heart-stoppingcrash. Cream splattered the windows and walls as thedish shattered. With a crack like a whip, Dobbyvanished.

There were screams from the dining room and UncleVernon burst into the kitchen to find Harry, rigid withshock, covered from head to foot in Aunt Petunia’spudding.

At first, it looked as though Uncle Vernon wouldmanage to gloss the whole thing over. (“Just ournephew — very disturbed — meeting strangers upsetshim, so we kept him upstairs. ...”) He shooed theshocked Masons back into the dining room, promisedHarry he would flay him to within an inch of his lifewhen the Masons had left, and handed him a mop.Aunt Petunia dug some ice cream out of the freezerPage | 23 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

and Harry, still shaking, started scrubbing thekitchen clean.

Uncle Vernon might still have been able to make hisdeal — if it hadn’t been for the owl.

Aunt Petunia was just passing around a box of after-dinner mints when a huge barn owl swooped throughthe dining room window, dropped a letter on Mrs.Mason’s head, and swooped out again. Mrs. Masonscreamed like a banshee and ran from the houseshouting about lunatics. Mr. Mason stayed just longenough to tell the Dursleys that his wife was mortallyafraid of birds of all shapes and sizes, and to askwhether this was their idea of a joke.

Harry stood in the kitchen, clutching the mop forsupport, as Uncle Vernon advanced on him, ademonic glint in his tiny eyes.

“Read it!” he hissed evilly, brandishing the letter theowl had delivered. “Go on — read it!”

Harry took it. It did not contain birthday greetings.

Dear Mr. Potter,

We have received intelligence that a Hover Charm wasused at your place of residence this evening at twelveminutes past nine.

As you know, underage wizards are not permitted toperform spells outside school, and further spellwork onyour part may lead to expulsion from said school(Decree for the Reasonable Restriction of UnderageSorcery, 1875, Paragraph C).

We would also ask you to remember that any magicalactivity that risks notice by members of the non-

P a g e | 24 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

magical community (Muggles) is a serious offenseunder section 13 of the International Confederation ofWarlocks’ Statute of Secrecy.

Enjoy your holidays!

Yours sincerely,

Mafalda Hopkirk

IMPROPER USE OF MAGIC OFFICEMinistry of Magic

Harry looked up from the letter and gulped.

“You didn’t tell us you weren’t allowed to use magicoutside school,” said Uncle Vernon, a mad gleamdancing in his eyes. “Forgot to mention it. ... Slippedyour mind, I daresay. ...”

He was bearing down on Harry like a great bulldog,all his teeth bared. “Well, I’ve got news for you, boy. ...I’m locking you up. ... You’re never going back to thatschool ... never ... and if you try and magic yourselfout — they 11 expel you!”

And laughing like a maniac, he dragged Harry backupstairs.

Uncle Vernon was as bad as his word. The followingmorning, he paid a man to fit bars on Harry’s window.He himself fitted a cat-flap in the bedroom door, sothat small amounts of food could be pushed insidethree times a day. They let Harry out to use thebathroom morning and evening. Otherwise, he waslocked in his room around the clock.

Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Three days later, the Dursleys were showing no signof relenting, and Harry couldn’t see any way out of hissituation. He lay on his bed watching the sun sinkingbehind the bars on the window and wonderedmiserably what was going to happen to him.

What was the good of magicking himself out of hisroom if Hogwarts would expel him for doing it? Yet lifeat Privet Drive had reached an all-time low. Now thatthe Dursleys knew they weren’t going to wake up asfruit bats, he had lost his only weapon. Dobby mighthave saved Harry from horrible happenings atHogwarts, but the way things were going, he’dprobably starve to death anyway.

The cat-flap rattled and Aunt Petunia’s handappeared, pushing a bowl of canned soup into theroom. Harry, whose insides were aching with hunger,jumped off his bed and seized it. The soup was stone-cold, but he drank half of it in one gulp. Then hecrossed the room to Hedwig’s cage and tipped thesoggy vegetables at the bottom of the bowl into herempty food tray. She ruffled her feathers and gavehim a look of deep disgust.

“It’s no good turning your beak up at it — that’s allwe’ve got,” said Harry grimly.

He put the empty bowl back on the floor next to thecat-flap and lay back down on the bed, somehow evenhungrier than he had been before the soup.

Supposing he was still alive in another four weeks,what would happen if he didn’t turn up at Hogwarts?Would someone be sent to see why he hadn’t comeback? Would they be able to make the Dursleys lethim go?

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

The room was growing dark. Exhausted, stomachrumbling, mind spinning over the same unanswerablequestions, Harry fell into an uneasy sleep.

He dreamed that he was on show in a zoo, with a cardreading UNDERAGE WIZARD attached to his cage.People goggled through the bars at him as he lay,starving and weak, on a bed of straw. He saw Dobby’sface in the crowd and shouted out, asking for help,but Dobby called, “Harry Potter is safe there, sir!” andvanished. Then the Dursleys appeared and Dudleyrattled the bars of the cage, laughing at him.

“Stop it,” Harry muttered as the rattling pounded inhis sore head. “Leave me alone ... cut it out ... I’mtrying to sleep. ...”

He opened his eyes. Moonlight was shining throughthe bars on the window. And someone was gogglingthrough the bars at him: a freckle-faced, red-haired,long-nosed someone.

Ron Weasley was outside Harry’s window.

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



THE BURROW

“Ron\” breathed Harry, creeping to the window andpushing it up so they could talk through the bars.“Ron, how did you — What the — ?”

Harry’s mouth fell open as the full impact of what hewas seeing hit him. Ron was leaning out of the backwindow of an old turquoise car, which was parked inmidair. Grinning at Harry from the front seats wereFred and George, Ron’s elder twin brothers.

“All right, Harry?” asked George.

“What’s been going on?” said Ron. “Why haven’t youbeen answering my letters? I’ve asked you to stayabout twelve times, and then Dad came home andsaid you’d got an official warning for using magic infront of Muggles —”

“It wasn’t me — and how did he know?”

“He works for the Ministry,” said Ron. “You knowwe’re not supposed to do spells outside school —”

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“You should talk,” said Harry, staring at the floatingcar.

“Oh, this doesn’t count,” said Ron. “We’re onlyborrowing this. It’s Dad’s, we didn’t enchant it. Butdoing magic in front of those Muggles you live with —”

“I told you, I didn’t — but it’ll take too long to explainnow — look, can you tell them at Hogwarts that theDursleys have locked me up and won’t let me comeback, and obviously I can’t magic myself out, becausethe Ministry’ll think that’s the second spell I’ve donein three days, so —”

“Stop gibbering,” said Ron. “We’ve come to take youhome with us.”

“But you can’t magic me out either —”

“We don’t need to,” said Ron, jerking his head towardthe front seat and grinning. “You forget who I’ve gotwith me.”

“Tie that around the bars,” said Fred, throwing theend of a rope to Harry.

“If the Dursleys wake up, I’m dead,” said Harry as hetied the rope tightly around a bar and Fred revved upthe car.

“Don’t worry,” said Fred, “and stand back.”

Harry moved back into the shadows next to Hedwig,who seemed to have realized how important this wasand kept still and silent. The car revved louder andlouder and suddenly, with a crunching noise, thebars were pulled clean out of the window as Freddrove straight up in the air. Harry ran back to thewindow to see the bars dangling a few feet above thePage | 29 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

ground. Panting, Ron hoisted them up into the car.Harry listened anxiously, but there was no soundfrom the Dursleys’ bedroom.

When the bars were safely in the back seat with Ron,Fred reversed as close as possible to Harry’s window.

“Get in,” Ron said.

“But all my Hogwarts stuff — my wand — mybroomstick —”

“Where is it?”

“Locked in the cupboard under the stairs, and I can’tget out of this room —”

“No problem,” said George from the front passengerseat. “Out of the way, Harry.”

Fred and George climbed catlike through the windowinto Harry’s room. You had to hand it to them,thought Harry, as George took an ordinary hairpinfrom his pocket and started to pick the lock.

“A lot of wizards think it’s a waste of time, knowingthis sort of Muggle trick,” said Fred, “but we feelthey’re skills worth learning, even if they are a bitslow.”

There was a small click and the door swung open.

“So — we’ll get your trunk — you grab anything youneed from your room and hand it out to Ron,”whispered George.

“Watch out for the bottom stair — it creaks,” Harrywhispered back as the twins disappeared onto thedark landing.

Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry dashed around his room, collecting his thingsand passing them out of the window to Ron. Then hewent to help Fred and George heave his trunk up thestairs. Harry heard Uncle Vernon cough.

At last, panting, they reached the landing, thencarried the trunk through Harry’s room to the openwindow. Fred climbed back into the car to pull withRon, and Harry and George pushed from the bedroomside. Inch by inch, the trunk slid through the window.

Uncle Vernon coughed again.

“A bit more,” panted Fred, who was pulling frominside the car. “One good push —”

Harry and George threw their shoulders against thetrunk and it slid out of the window into the back seatof the car.

“Okay, let’s go,” George whispered.

But as Harry climbed onto the windowsill there camea sudden loud screech from behind him, followedimmediately by the thunder of Uncle Vernon’s voice.

“THAT RUDDY OWL!”

“I’ve forgotten Hedwig!”

Harry tore back across the room as the landing lightclicked on — he snatched up Hedwig’s cage, dashedto the window, and passed it out to Ron. He wasscrambling back onto the chest of drawers whenUncle Vernon hammered on the unlocked door — andit crashed open.

Page | 31 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

For a split second, Uncle Vernon stood framed in thedoorway; then he let out a bellow like an angry bulland dived at Harry, grabbing him by the ankle.

Ron, Fred, and George seized Harry’s arms and pulledas hard as they could.

“Petunia!” roared Uncle Vernon. “He’s getting away!HE’S GETTING AWAY!”

But the Weasleys gave a gigantic tug and Harry’s legslid out of Uncle Vernon’s grasp — Harry was in thecar — he’d slammed the door shut —

“Put your foot down, Fred!” yelled Ron, and the carshot suddenly toward the moon.

Harry couldn’t believe it — he was free. He rolleddown the window, the night air whipping his hair,and looked back at the shrinking rooftops of PrivetDrive. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley wereall hanging, dumbstruck, out of Harry’s window.

“See you next summer!” Harry yelled.

The Weasleys roared with laughter and Harry settledback in his seat, grinning from ear to ear.

“Let Hedwig out,” he told Ron. “She can fly behind us.She hasn’t had a chance to stretch her wings forages.”

George handed the hairpin to Ron and, a momentlater, Hedwig soared joyfully out of the window toglide alongside them like a ghost.

“So — what’s the story, Harry?” said Ron impatiently.“What’s been happening?”

Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry told them all about Dobby, the warning he’dgiven Harry and the fiasco of the violet pudding.There was a long, shocked silence when he hadfinished.

“Very fishy,” said Fred finally.

“Definitely dodgy,” agreed George. “So he wouldn’teven tell you who’s supposed to be plotting all thisstuff?”

“I don’t think he could,” said Harry. “I told you, everytime he got close to letting something slip, he startedbanging his head against the wall.”

He saw Fred and George look at each other.

“What, you think he was lying to me?” said Harry.

“Well,” said Fred, “put it this way — house-elves havegot powerful magic of their own, but they can’tusually use it without their master’s permission. Ireckon old Dobby was sent to stop you coming backto Hogwarts. Someone’s idea of a joke. Can you thinkof anyone at school with a grudge against you?”

“Yes,” said Harry and Ron together, instantly.

“Draco Malfoy,” Harry explained. “He hates me.”

“Draco Malfoy?” said George, turning around. “NotLucius Malfoy’s son?”

“Must be, it’s not a very common name, is it?” saidHarry. “Why?”

“I’ve heard Dad talking about him,” said George. “Hewas a big supporter of You-Know-Who.”

Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“And when You-Know-Who disappeared,” said Fred,craning around to look at Harry, “Lucius Malfoy cameback saying he’d never meant any of it. Load of dung— Dad reckons he was right in You-Know-Who’sinner circle.”

Harry had heard these rumors about Malfoy’s familybefore, and they didn’t surprise him at all. Malfoymade Dudley Dursley look like a kind, thoughtful,and sensitive boy.

“I don’t know whether the Malfoys own a house-elf.

...” said Harry.

“Well, whoever owns him will be an old wizardingfamily, and they’ll be rich,” said Fred.

“Yeah, Mum’s always wishing we had a house-elf todo the ironing,” said George. “But all we’ve got is alousy old ghoul in the attic and gnomes all over thegarden. House-elves come with big old manors andcastles and places like that; you wouldn’t catch one inour house. ...”

Harry was silent. Judging by the fact that DracoMalfoy usually had the best of everything, his familywas rolling in wizard gold; he could just see Malfoystrutting around a large manor house. Sending thefamily servant to stop Harry from going back toHogwarts also sounded exactly like the sort of thingMalfoy would do. Had Harry been stupid to takeDobby seriously?

“I’m glad we came to get you, anyway,” said Ron. “Iwas getting really worried when you didn’t answerany of my letters. I thought it was Errol’s fault at first

“Who’s Errol?”

Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Our owl. He’s ancient. It wouldn’t be the first timehe’d collapsed on a delivery. So then I tried to borrowHermes —”

“Who?”

“The owl Mum and Dad bought Percy when he wasmade prefect,” said Fred from the front.

“But Percy wouldn’t lend him to me,” said Ron. “Saidhe needed him.”

“Percy’s been acting very oddly this summer,” saidGeorge, frowning. “And he has been sending a lot ofletters and spending a load of time shut up in hisroom. ... I mean, there’s only so many times you canpolish a prefect badge. ... You’re driving too far west,Fred,” he added, pointing at a compass on thedashboard. Fred twiddled the steering wheel.

“So, does your dad know you’ve got the car?” saidHarry, guessing the answer.

“Er, no,” said Ron, “he had to work tonight. Hopefullywe’ll be able to get it back in the garage without Mumnoticing we flew it.”

“What does your dad do at the Ministry of Magic,anyway?”

“He works in the most boring department,” said Ron.“The Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office.”

“The what?”

“It’s all to do with bewitching things that are Muggle-made, you know, in case they end up back in aMuggle shop or house. Like, last year, some old witchdied and her tea set was sold to an antiques shop.

Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

This Muggle woman bought it, took it home, and triedto serve her friends tea in it. It was a nightmare —Dad was working overtime for weeks.”

“What happened?”

“The teapot went berserk and squirted boiling tea allover the place and one man ended up in the hospitalwith the sugar tongs clamped to his nose. Dad wasgoing frantic — it’s only him and an old warlockcalled Perkins in the office — and they had to doMemory Charms and all sorts of stuff to cover it up —

“But your dad — this car —”

Fred laughed. “Yeah, Dad’s crazy about everything todo with Muggles; our shed’s full of Muggle stuff. Hetakes it apart, puts spells on it, and puts it backtogether again. If he raided our house he’d have to puthimself under arrest. It drives Mum mad.”

“That’s the main road,” said George, peering downthrough the windshield. “We’ll be there in tenminutes. ... Just as well, it’s getting light. ...”

A faint pinkish glow was visible along the horizon tothe east.

Fred brought the car lower, and Harry saw a darkpatchwork of fields and clumps of trees.

“We’re a little way outside the village,” said George.“Ottery St. Catchpole.”

Lower and lower went the flying car. The edge of abrilliant red sun was now gleaming through the trees.

Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Touchdown!” said Fred as, with a slight bump, theyhit the ground. They had landed next to atumbledown garage in a small yard, and Harry lookedout for the first time at Ron’s house.

It looked as though it had once been a large stonepigpen, but extra rooms had been added here andthere until it was several stories high and so crookedit looked as though it were held up by magic (which,Harry reminded himself, it probably was). Four or fivechimneys were perched on top of the red roof. Alopsided sign stuck in the ground near the entranceread, THE BURROW. Around the front door lay ajumble of rubber boots and a very rusty cauldron.Several fat brown chickens were pecking their wayaround the yard.

“It’s not much,” said Ron.

“It’s wonderful,” said Harry happily, thinking of PrivetDrive.

They got out of the car.

“Now, we’ll go upstairs really quietly,” said Fred, “andwait for Mum to call us for breakfast. Then, Ron, youcome bounding downstairs going, ‘Mum, look whoturned up in the night!’ and she’ll be all pleased tosee Harry and no one need ever know we flew thecar.”

“Right,” said Ron. “Come on, Harry, I sleep at the —at the top —”

Ron had gone a nasty greenish color, his eyes fixed onthe house. The other three wheeled around.

Mrs. Weasley was marching across the yard,scattering chickens, and for a short, plump, kind-

P a g e | 37 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

faced woman, it was remarkable how much shelooked like a saber-toothed tiger.

“Ah,” said Fred.

“Oh, dear,” said George.

Mrs. Weasley came to a halt in front of them, herhands on her hips, staring from one guilty face to thenext. She was wearing a flowered apron with a wandsticking out of the pocket.

“So,” she said.

“ ’Morning, Mum,” said George, in what he clearlythought was a jaunty, winning voice.

“Have you any idea how worried I’ve been?” said Mrs.Weasley in a deadly whisper.

“Sorry, Mum, but see, we had to —”

All three of Mrs. Weasley’s sons were taller than shewas, but they cowered as her rage broke over them.

“Beds empty\ No note\ Car gone — could have crashed— out of my mind with worry — did you care? —never, as long as I’ve lived — you wait until your fathergets home, we never had trouble like this from Bill orCharlie or Percy —”

“Perfect Percy,” muttered Fred.

“YOU COULD DO WITH TAKING A LEAF OUT OFPERCY’S BOOK!” yelled Mrs. Weasley, prodding afinger in Fred’s chest. “You could havedied, you couldhave been seen, you could have lost your father hisjob

Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

It seemed to go on for hours. Mrs. Weasley hadshouted herself hoarse before she turned on Harry,who backed away.

“I’m very pleased to see you, Harry, dear,” she said.“Come in and have some breakfast.”

She turned and walked back into the house andHarry, after a nervous glance at Ron, who noddedencouragingly, followed her.

The kitchen was small and rather cramped. Therewas a scrubbed wooden table and chairs in themiddle, and Harry sat down on the edge of his seat,looking around. He had never been in a wizard housebefore.

The clock on the wall opposite him had only one handand no numbers at all. Written around the edge werethings like Time to make tea, Time to feed thechickens, and You’re late. Books were stacked threedeep on the mantelpiece, books with titles like CharmYour Own Cheese, Enchantment in Baking, and OneMinute Feasts — It’s Magid And unless Harry’s earswere deceiving him, the old radio next to the sink hadjust announced that coming up was “Witching Hour,with the popular singing sorceress, CelestinaWarbeck.”

Mrs. Weasley was clattering around, cookingbreakfast a little haphazardly, throwing dirty looks ather sons as she threw sausages into the frying pan.Every now and then she muttered things like “don’tknow what you were thinking of,” and “never wouldhave believed it.”

“I don’t blame you, dear,” she assured Harry, tippingeight or nine sausages onto his plate. “Arthur and Ihave been worried about you, too. Just last night we

Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

were saying we’d come and get you ourselves if youhadn’t written back to Ron by Friday. But really” (shewas now adding three fried eggs to his plate), “flyingan illegal car halfway across the country — anyonecould have seen you —”

She flicked her wand casually at the dishes in thesink, which began to clean themselves, clinkinggently in the background.

“It was cloudy, Mum!” said Fred.

“You keep your mouth closed while you’re eating!”Mrs. Weasley snapped.

“They were starving him, Mum!” said George.

“And you!” said Mrs. Weasley, but it was with aslightly softened expression that she started cuttingHarry bread and buttering it for him.

At that moment there was a diversion in the form of asmall, redheaded figure in a long nightdress, whoappeared in the kitchen, gave a small squeal, and ranout again.

“Ginny,” said Ron in an undertone to Harry. “Mysister. She’s been talking about you all summer.”

“Yeah, she’ll be wanting your autograph, Harry,” Fredsaid with a grin, but he caught his mother’s eye andbent his face over his plate without another word.Nothing more was said until all four plates wereclean, which took a surprisingly short time.

“Blimey, I’m tired,” yawned Fred, setting down hisknife and fork at last. “I think I’ll go to bed and —”

Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“You will not,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “It’s your ownfault you’ve been up all night. You’re going to de-gnome the garden for me; they’re getting completelyout of hand again —”

“Oh, Mum —”

“And you two,” she said, glaring at Ron and Fred.

“You can go up to bed, dear,” she added to Harry.

“You didn’t ask them to fly that wretched car —”

But Harry, who felt wide awake, said quickly, “I’ll helpRon. I’ve never seen a de-gnoming —”

“That’s very sweet of you, dear, but it’s dull work,”said Mrs. Weasley. “Now, let’s see what Lockhart’s gotto say on the subject —”

And she pulled a heavy book from the stack on themantelpiece. George groaned.

“Mum, we know how to de-gnome a garden —”

Harry looked at the cover of Mrs. Weasley’s book.Written across it in fancy gold letters were the wordsGilderoy Lockhart’s Guide to Household Pests. Therewas a big photograph on the front of a very good-looking wizard with wavy blond hair and bright blueeyes. As always in the wizarding world, thephotograph was moving; the wizard, who Harrysupposed was Gilderoy Lockhart, kept winkingcheekily up at them all. Mrs. Weasley beamed downat him.

“Oh, he is marvelous,” she said. “He knows hishousehold pests, all right, it’s a wonderful book. ...”

“Mum fancies him,” said Fred, in a very audiblewhisper.

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t be so ridiculous, Fred,” said Mrs. Weasley, hercheeks rather pink. “All right, if you think you knowbetter than Lockhart, you can go and get on with it,and woe betide you if there’s a single gnome in thatgarden when I come out to inspect it.”

Yawning and grumbling, the Weasleys slouchedoutside with Harry behind them. The garden waslarge, and in Harry’s eyes, exactly what a gardenshould be. The Dursleys wouldn’t have liked it —there were plenty of weeds, and the grass neededcutting — but there were gnarled trees all around thewalls, plants Harry had never seen spilling from everyflower bed, and a big green pond full of frogs.

“Muggles have garden gnomes, too, you know,” Harrytold Ron as they crossed the lawn.

“Yeah, I’ve seen those things they think are gnomes,”said Ron, bent double with his head in a peony bush,“like fat little Santa Clauses with fishing rods. ...”

There was a violent scuffling noise, the peony bushshuddered, and Ron straightened up. “This is agnome,” he said grimly.

“Gerroff me! Gerroff me!” squealed the gnome.

It was certainly nothing like Santa Claus. It was smalland leathery looking, with a large, knobby, bald headexactly like a potato. Ron held it at arm’s length as itkicked out at him with its horny little feet; he graspedit around the ankles and turned it upside down.

“This is what you have to do,” he said. He raised thegnome above his head (“Gerroff me!”) and started toswing it in great circles like a lasso. Seeing theshocked look on Harry’s face, Ron added, “It doesn’t

Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

hurt them — you’ve just got to make them really dizzyso they can’t find their way back to the gnomeholes.”

He let go of the gnome’s ankles: It flew twenty feetinto the air and landed with a thud in the field overthe hedge.

“Pitiful,” said Fred. “I bet I can get mine beyond thatstump.”

Harry learned quickly not to feel too sorry for thegnomes. He decided just to drop the first one hecaught over the hedge, but the gnome, sensingweakness, sank its razor-sharp teeth into Harry’sfinger and he had a hard job shaking it off— until —

“Wow, Harry — that must’ve been fifty feet. ...”

The air was soon thick with flying gnomes.

“See, they’re not too bright,” said George, seizing fiveor six gnomes at once. “The moment they know thede-gnoming’s going on they storm up to have a look.You’d think they’d have learned by now just to stayput.”

Soon, the crowd of gnomes in the field started walkingaway in a straggling line, their little shouldershunched.

“They’ll be back,” said Ron as they watched thegnomes disappear into the hedge on the other side ofthe field. “They love it here. ... Dad’s too soft withthem; he thinks they’re funny. ...”

Just then, the front door slammed.

“He’s back!” said George. “Dad’s home!”

Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

They hurried through the garden and back into thehouse.

Mr. Weasley was slumped in a kitchen chair with hisglasses off and his eyes closed. He was a thin man,going bald, but the little hair he had was as red asany of his children’s. He was wearing long greenrobes, which were dusty and travel-worn.

“What a night,” he mumbled, groping for the teapot asthey all sat down around him. “Nine raids. Nine! Andold Mundungus Fletcher tried to put a hex on mewhen I had my back turned. ...”

Mr. Weasley took a long gulp of tea and sighed.

“Find anything, Dad?” said Fred eagerly.

“All I got were a few shrinking door keys and a bitingkettle,” yawned Mr. Weasley. “There was some prettynasty stuff that wasn’t my department, though.Mortlake was taken away for questioning about someextremely odd ferrets, but that’s the Committee onExperimental Charms, thank goodness. ...”

“Why would anyone bother making door keysshrink?” said George.

“Just Muggle-baiting,” sighed Mr. Weasley. “Sell thema key that keeps shrinking to nothing so they cannever find it when they need it. ... Of course, it’s veryhard to convict anyone because no Muggle wouldadmit their key keeps shrinking — they’ll insist theyjust keep losing it. Bless them, they’ll go to anylengths to ignore magic, even if it’s staring them inthe face. ... But the things our lot have taken toenchanting, you wouldn’t believe —”

“LIKE CARS, FOR INSTANCE?”

Page | 44 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley had appeared, holding a long poker likea sword. Mr. Weasley’s eyes jerked open. He staredguiltily at his wife.

“C-cars, Molly, dear?”

“Yes, Arthur, cars,” said Mrs. Weasley, her eyesflashing. “Imagine a wizard buying a rusty old car andtelling his wife all he wanted to do with it was take itapart to see how it worked, while really he wasenchanting it to make it fly.”

Mr. Weasley blinked.

“Well, dear, I think you’ll find that he would be quitewithin the law to do that, even if — er — he maybewould have done better to, um, tell his wife the truth.... There’s a loophole in the law, you’ll find. ... As longas he wasn’t intending to fly the car, the fact that thecar could fly wouldn’t —”

“Arthur Weasley, you made sure there was a loopholewhen you wrote that law!” shouted Mrs. Weasley.“Just so you could carry on tinkering with all thatMuggle rubbish in your shed! And for yourinformation, Harry arrived this morning in the caryou weren’t intending to fly!”

“Harry?” said Mr. Weasley blankly. “Harry who?”

He looked around, saw Harry, and jumped.

“Good lord, is it Harry Potter? Very pleased to meetyou, Ron’s told us so much about —”

“Your sons flew that car to Harry’s house and backlast nighti” shouted Mrs. Weasley. “What have you gotto say about that, eh?”

Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Did you really?” said Mr. Weasley eagerly. “Did it goall right? I — I mean,” he faltered as sparks flew fromMrs. Weasley’s eyes, “that — that was very wrong,boys — very wrong indeed. ...”

“Let’s leave them to it,” Ron muttered to Harry asMrs. Weasley swelled like a bullfrog. “Come on, I’llshow you my bedroom.”

They slipped out of the kitchen and down a narrowpassageway to an uneven staircase, which wound itsway, zigzagging up through the house. On the thirdlanding, a door stood ajar. Harry just caught sight ofa pair of bright brown eyes staring at him before itclosed with a snap.

“Ginny,” said Ron. “You don’t know how weird it is forher to be this shy. She never shuts up normally —”

They climbed two more flights until they reached adoor with peeling paint and a small plaque on it,saying RONALD’S ROOM.

Harry stepped in, his head almost touching thesloping ceiling, and blinked. It was like walking into afurnace: Nearly everything in Ron’s room seemed tobe a violent shade of orange: the bedspread, the walls,even the ceiling. Then Harry realized that Ron hadcovered nearly every inch of the shabby wallpaperwith posters of the same seven witches and wizards,all wearing bright orange robes, carrying broomsticks,and waving energetically.

“Your Quidditch team?” said Harry.

“The Chudley Cannons,” said Ron, pointing at theorange bedspread, which was emblazoned with twogiant black C’s and a speeding cannonball. “Ninth inthe league.”

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ron’s school spellbooks were stacked untidily in acorner, next to a pile of comics that all seemed tofeature The Adventures of Martin Miggs, the MadMuggle. Ron’s magic wand was lying on top of a fishtank full of frog spawn on the windowsill, next to hisfat gray rat, Scabbers, who was snoozing in a patch ofsun.

Harry stepped over a pack of Self-Shuffling playingcards on the floor and looked out of the tiny window.In the field far below he could see a gang of gnomessneaking one by one back through the Weasleys’hedge. Then he turned to look at Ron, who waswatching him almost nervously, as though waiting forhis opinion.

“It’s a bit small,” said Ron quickly. “Not like that roomyou had with the Muggles. And I’m right underneaththe ghoul in the attic; he’s always banging on thepipes and groaning. ...”

But Harry, grinning widely, said, “This is the besthouse I’ve ever been in.”

Ron’s ears went pink.

Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





AT FLOURISH AND BLOTTS

Life at the Burrow was as different as possible fromlife on Privet Drive. The Dursleys liked everythingneat and ordered; the Weasleys’ house burst with thestrange and unexpected. Harry got a shock the firsttime he looked in the mirror over the kitchenmantelpiece and it shouted, “Tuck your shirt in,scruffyV’ The ghoul in the attic howled and droppedpipes whenever he felt things were getting too quiet,and small explosions from Fred and George’sbedroom were considered perfectly normal. WhatHarry found most unusual about life at Ron’s,however, wasn’t the talking mirror or the clankingghoul: It was the fact that everybody there seemed tolike him.

Mrs. Weasley fussed over the state of his socks andtried to force him to eat fourth helpings at every meal.Mr. Weasley liked Harry to sit next to him at thedinner table so that he could bombard him withquestions about life with Muggles, asking him toexplain how things like plugs and the postal serviceworked.

Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Fascinating!” he would say as Harry talked himthrough using a telephone. “Ingenious, really, howmany ways Muggles have found of getting alongwithout magic.”

Harry heard from Hogwarts one sunny morning abouta week after he had arrived at the Burrow. He andRon went down to breakfast to find Mr. and Mrs.Weasley and Ginny already sitting at the kitchentable. The moment she saw Harry, Ginny accidentallyknocked her porridge bowl to the floor with a loudclatter. Ginny seemed very prone to knocking thingsover whenever Harry entered a room. She dived underthe table to retrieve the bowl and emerged with herface glowing like the setting sun. Pretending he hadn’tnoticed this, Harry sat down and took the toast Mrs.Weasley offered him.

“Letters from school,” said Mr. Weasley, passingHarry and Ron identical envelopes of yellowishparchment, addressed in green ink. “Dumbledorealready knows you’re here, Harry — doesn’t miss atrick, that man. You two’ve got them, too,” he added,as Fred and George ambled in, still in their pajamas.

For a few minutes there was silence as they all readtheir letters. Harry’s told him to catch the HogwartsExpress as usual from King’s Cross station onSeptember first. There was also a list of the newbooks he’d need for the coming year.

SECOND-YEAR STUDENTS WILL REQUIRE:

The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 2 by MirandaGoshawk

Break with a Banshee by Gilderoy Lockhart

Gadding with Ghouls by Gilderoy Lockhart

Page | 49 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



Holidays with Hags by Gilderoy Lockhart

Travels with Trolls by Gilderoy Lockhart

Voyages with Vampires by Gilderoy Lockhart

Wanderings with Werewolves by Gilderoy Lockhart

Year with the Yeti by Gilderoy Lockhart

Fred, who had finished his own list, peered over atHarry’s.

“You’ve been told to get all Lockhart’s books, too!” hesaid. “The new Defense Against the Dark Arts teachermust be a fan — bet it’s a witch.”

At this point, Fred caught his mother’s eye andquickly busied himself with the marmalade.

“That lot won’t come cheap,” said George, with aquick look at his parents. “Lockhart’s books are reallyexpensive. ...”

“Well, we’ll manage,” said Mrs. Weasley, but shelooked worried. “I expect we’ll be able to pick up a lotof Ginny’s things secondhand.”

“Oh, are you starting at Hogwarts this year?” Harryasked Ginny.

She nodded, blushing to the roots of her flaming hair,and put her elbow in the butter dish. Fortunately noone saw this except Harry, because just then Ron’selder brother Percy walked in. He was alreadydressed, his Hogwarts prefect badge pinned to hissweater vest.

“Morning, all,” said Percy briskly. “Lovely day.”

Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

He sat down in the only remaining chair but leapt upagain almost immediately, pulling from underneathhim a molting, gray feather duster — at least, thatwas what Harry thought it was, until he saw that itwas breathing.

“Errol!” said Ron, taking the limp owl from Percy andextracting a letter from under its wing. “Finally — he’sgot Hermione’s answer. I wrote to her saying we weregoing to try and rescue you from the Dursleys.”

He carried Errol to a perch just inside the back doorand tried to stand him on it, but Errol floppedstraight off again so Ron laid him on the drainingboard instead, muttering, “Pathetic.” Then he rippedopen Hermione’s letter and read it out loud:

“ ‘Dear Ron, and Harry if you’re there,

“ ‘I hope everything went all right and that Harry isokay and that you didn’t do anything illegal to get himout, Ron, because that would get Harry into trouble,too. I’ve been really worried and if Harry is all right,will you please let me know at once, but perhaps itwould be better if you used a different owl, because Ithink another delivery might finish your one off

“ ‘I’m very busy with schoolwork, of course’ — How canshe be?” said Ron in horror. “We’re on vacation! —‘and we’re going to London next Wednesday to buy mynew books. Why don’t we meet in Diagon Alley?

“ ‘Let me know what’s happening as soon as you can.Love from Hermione.’ ”

“Well, that fits in nicely, we can go and get all yourthings then, too,” said Mrs. Weasley, starting to clearthe table. “What’re you all up to today?”

Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry, Ron, Fred, and George were planning to go upthe hill to a small paddock the Weasleys owned. Itwas surrounded by trees that blocked it from view ofthe village below, meaning that they could practiceQuidditch there, as long as they didn’t fly too high.They couldn’t use real Quidditch balls, which wouldhave been hard to explain if they had escaped andflown away over the village; instead they threw applesfor one another to catch. They took turns ridingHarry’s Nimbus Two Thousand, which was easily thebest broom; Ron’s old Shooting Star was oftenoutstripped by passing butterflies.

Five minutes later they were marching up the hill,broomsticks over their shoulders. They had askedPercy if he wanted to join them, but he had said hewas busy. Harry had only seen Percy at mealtimes sofar; he stayed shut in his room the rest of the time.

“Wish I knew what he was up to,” said Fred, frowning.“He’s not himself. His exam results came the daybefore you did; twelve O.W.L.s and he hardly gloatedat all.”

“Ordinary Wizarding Levels,” George explained, seeingHarry’s puzzled look. “Bill got twelve, too. If we’re notcareful, we’ll have another Head Boy in the family. Idon’t think I could stand the shame.”

Bill was the oldest Weasley brother. He and the nextbrother, Charlie, had already left Hogwarts. Harryhad never met either of them, but knew that Charliewas in Romania studying dragons and Bill in Egyptworking for the wizard’s bank, Gringotts.

“Dunno how Mum and Dad are going to afford all ourschool stuff this year,” said George after a while. “Fivesets of Lockhart books! And Ginny needs robes and awand and everything. ...”

Page | 52 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry said nothing. He felt a bit awkward. Stored inan underground vault at Gringotts in London was asmall fortune that his parents had left him. Of course,it was only in the wizarding world that he had money;you couldn’t use Galleons, Sickles, and Knuts inMuggle shops. He had never mentioned his Gringottsbank account to the Dursleys; he didn’t think theirhorror of anything connected with magic wouldstretch to a large pile of gold.

Mrs. Weasley woke them all early the followingWednesday. After a quick half a dozen baconsandwiches each, they pulled on their coats and Mrs.Weasley took a flowerpot off the kitchen mantelpieceand peered inside.

“We’re running low, Arthur,” she sighed. “We’ll haveto buy some more today. ... Ah well, guests first! Afteryou, Harry dear!”

And she offered him the flowerpot.

Harry stared at them all watching him.

“W-what am I supposed to do?” he stammered.

“He’s never traveled by Floo powder,” said Ronsuddenly. “Sorry, Harry, I forgot.”

“Never?” said Mr. Weasley. “But how did you get toDiagon Alley to buy your school things last year?”

“I went on the Underground —”

“Really?” said Mr. Weasley eagerly. “Were thereescapators? How exactly —”

Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Not now, Arthur,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Floo powder’sa lot quicker, dear, but goodness me, if you’ve neverused it before —”

“He’ll be all right, Mum,” said Fred. “Harry, watch usfirst.”

He took a pinch of glittering powder out of theflowerpot, stepped up to the fire, and threw thepowder into the flames.

With a roar, the fire turned emerald green and rosehigher than Fred, who stepped right into it, shouted,“Diagon Alley!” and vanished.

“You must speak clearly, dear,” Mrs. Weasley toldHarry as George dipped his hand into the flowerpot.“And be sure to get out at the right grate. ...”

“The right what?” said Harry nervously as the fireroared and whipped George out of sight, too.

“Well, there are an awful lot of wizard fires to choosefrom, you know, but as long as you’ve spoken clearly

“He’ll be fine, Molly, don’t fuss,” said Mr. Weasley,helping himself to Floo powder, too.

“But, dear, if he got lost, how would we ever explainto his aunt and uncle?”

“They wouldn’t mind,” Harry reassured her. “Dudleywould think it was a brilliant joke if I got lost up achimney, don’t worry about that —”

“Well ... all right ... you go after Arthur,” said Mrs.Weasley. “Now, when you get into the fire, say whereyou’re going —”

Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“And keep your elbows tucked in,” Ron advised.

“And your eyes shut,” said Mrs. Weasley. “The soot —

“Don’t fidget,” said Ron. “Or you might well fall out ofthe wrong fireplace —”

“But don’t panic and get out too early; wait until yousee Fred and George.”

Trying hard to bear all this in mind, Harry took apinch of Floo powder and walked to the edge of thefire. He took a deep breath, scattered the powder intothe flames, and stepped forward; the fire felt like awarm breeze; he opened his mouth and immediatelyswallowed a lot of hot ash.

“D-Dia-gon Alley,” he coughed.

It felt as though he were being sucked down a giantdrain. He seemed to be spinning very fast — theroaring in his ears was deafening — he tried to keephis eyes open but the whirl of green flames made himfeel sick — something hard knocked his elbow and hetucked it in tightly, still spinning and spinning — nowit felt as though cold hands were slapping his face —squinting through his glasses he saw a blurredstream of fireplaces and snatched glimpses of therooms beyond — his bacon sandwiches werechurning inside him — he closed his eyes againwishing it would stop, and then —

He fell, face forward, onto cold stone and felt thebridge of his glasses snap.

Dizzy and bruised, covered in soot, he got gingerly tohis feet, holding his broken glasses up to his eyes. Hewas quite alone, but where he was, he had no idea.

Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

All he could tell was that he was standing in the stonefireplace of what looked like a large, dimly lit wizard’sshop — but nothing in here was ever likely to be on aHogwarts school list.

A glass case nearby held a withered hand on acushion, a bloodstained pack of cards, and a staringglass eye. Evil-looking masks stared down from thewalls, an assortment of human bones lay upon thecounter, and rusty, spiked instruments hung fromthe ceiling. Even worse, the dark, narrow street Harrycould see through the dusty shop window wasdefinitely not Diagon Alley.

The sooner he got out of here, the better. Nose stillstinging where it had hit the hearth, Harry made hisway swiftly and silently toward the door, but beforehe’d got halfway toward it, two people appeared onthe other side of the glass — and one of them was thevery last person Harry wanted to meet when he waslost, covered in soot, and wearing broken glasses:Draco Malfoy.

Harry looked quickly around and spotted a largeblack cabinet to his left; he shot inside it and pulledthe doors closed, leaving a small crack to peerthrough. Seconds later, a bell clanged, and Malfoystepped into the shop.

The man who followed could only be Draco’s father.

He had the same pale, pointed face and identical cold,gray eyes. Mr. Malfoy crossed the shop, looking lazilyat the items on display, and rang a bell on thecounter before turning to his son and saying, “Touchnothing, Draco.”

Malfoy, who had reached for the glass eye, said, “Ithought you were going to buy me a present.”

Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I said I would buy you a racing broom,” said hisfather, drumming his fingers on the counter.

“What’s the good of that if I’m not on the Houseteam?” said Malfoy, looking sulky and bad-tempered.“Harry Potter got a Nimbus Two Thousand last year.Special permission from Dumbledore so he could playfor Gryffindor. He’s not even that good, it’s justbecause he’s famous ... famous for having a stupidscar on his forehead. ...”

Malfoy bent down to examine a shelf full of skulls.

"... everyone thinks he’s so smart, wonderful Potterwith his scar and his broomstick —”

“You have told me this at least a dozen timesalready,” said Mr. Malfoy, with a quelling look at hisson. “And I would remind you that it is not — prudent— to appear less than fond of Harry Potter, not whenmost of our kind regard him as the hero who madethe Dark Lord disappear — ah, Mr. Borgin.”

A stooping man had appeared behind the counter,smoothing his greasy hair back from his face.

“Mr. Malfoy, what a pleasure to see you again,” saidMr. Borgin in a voice as oily as his hair. “Delighted —and young Master Malfoy, too — charmed. How may Ibe of assistance? I must show you, just in today, andvery reasonably priced —”

“I’m not buying today, Mr. Borgin, but selling,” saidMr. Malfoy.

“Selling?” The smile faded slightly from Mr. Borgin’sface.

Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“You have heard, of course, that the Ministry isconducting more raids,” said Mr. Malfoy, taking a rollof parchment from his inside pocket and unraveling itfor Mr. Borgin to read. “I have a few — ah — items athome that might embarrass me, if the Ministry wereto call. ...”

Mr. Borgin fixed a pair of pince-nez to his nose andlooked down the list.

“The Ministry wouldn’t presume to trouble you, sir,surely?”

Mr. Malfoy’s lip curled.

“I have not been visited yet. The name Malfoy stillcommands a certain respect, yet the Ministry growsever more meddlesome. There are rumors about anew Muggle Protection Act — no doubt that flea-bitten, Muggle-loving fool Arthur Weasley is behind it

Harry felt a hot surge of anger.

“— and as you see, certain of these poisons mightmake it appear—”

“I understand, sir, of course,” said Mr. Borgin. “Letme see ...”

“Can I have that?” interrupted Draco, pointing at thewithered hand on its cushion.

“Ah, the Hand of Glory!” said Mr. Borgin, abandoningMr. Malfoy’s list and scurrying over to Draco. “Insert acandle and it gives light only to the holder! Best friendof thieves and plunderers! Your son has fine taste,sir.”

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I hope my son will amount to more than a thief or aplunderer, Borgin,” said Mr. Malfoy coldly, and Mr.Borgin said quickly, “No offense, sir, no offense meant

“Though if his grades don’t pick up,” said Mr. Malfoy,more coldly still, “that may indeed be all he is fit for

“It’s not my fault,” retorted Draco. “The teachers allhave favorites, that Hermione Granger —”

“I would have thought you’d be ashamed that a girl ofno wizard family beat you in every exam,” snappedMr. Malfoy.

“Ha!” said Harry under his breath, pleased to seeDraco looking both abashed and angry.

“It’s the same all over,” said Mr. Borgin, in his oilyvoice. “Wizard blood is counting for less everywhere —

“Not with me,” said Mr. Malfoy, his long nostrilsflaring.

“No, sir, nor with me, sir,” said Mr. Borgin, with adeep bow.

“In that case, perhaps we can return to my list,” saidMr. Malfoy shortly. “I am in something of a hurry,Borgin, I have important business elsewhere today —”

They started to haggle. Harry watched nervously asDraco drew nearer and nearer to his hiding place,examining the objects for sale. Draco paused toexamine a long coil of hangman’s rope and to read,smirking, the card propped on a magnificent necklace

Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

of opals, Caution: Do Not Touch. Cursed — HasClaimed the Lives of Nineteen Muggle Owners to Date.

Draco turned away and saw the cabinet right in frontof him. He walked forward — he stretched out hishand for the handle —

“Done,” said Mr. Malfoy at the counter. “Come, Draco

Harry wiped his forehead on his sleeve as Dracoturned away.

“Good day to you, Mr. Borgin. Ill expect you at themanor tomorrow to pick up the goods.”

The moment the door had closed, Mr. Borgin droppedhis oily manner.

“Good day yourself, Mister Malfoy, and if the storiesare true, you haven’t sold me half of what’s hidden inyour manor. ...”

Muttering darkly, Mr. Borgin disappeared into a backroom. Harry waited for a minute in case he cameback, then, quietly as he could, slipped out of thecabinet, past the glass cases, and out of the shopdoor.

Clutching his broken glasses to his face, Harry staredaround. He had emerged into a dingy alleyway thatseemed to be made up entirely of shops devoted to theDark Arts. The one he’d just left, Borgin and Burkes,looked like the largest, but opposite was a nastywindow display of shrunken heads and, two doorsdown, a large cage was alive with gigantic blackspiders. Two shabby-looking wizards were watchinghim from the shadow of a doorway, muttering to eachother. Feeling jumpy, Harry set off, trying to hold hisPage | 60 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

glasses on straight and hoping against hope he’d beable to find a way out of here.

An old wooden street sign hanging over a shop sellingpoisonous candles told him he was in KnockturnAlley. This didn’t help, as Harry had never heard ofsuch a place. He supposed he hadn’t spoken clearlyenough through his mouthful of ashes back in theWeasleys’ fire. Trying to stay calm, he wondered whatto do.

“Not lost are you, my dear?” said a voice in his ear,making him jump.

An aged witch stood in front of him, holding a tray ofwhat looked horribly like whole human fingernails.

She leered at him, showing mossy teeth. Harrybacked away.

“I’m fine, thanks,” he said. “I’m just —”

“HARRY! What d’yeh think yer doin’ down there?”

Harry’s heart leapt. So did the witch; a load offingernails cascaded down over her feet and shecursed as the massive form of Hagrid, the Hogwartsgamekeeper, came striding toward them, beetle-blackeyes flashing over his great bristling beard.

“Hagrid!” Harry croaked in relief. “I was lost — Floopowder —”

Hagrid seized Harry by the scruff of the neck andpulled him away from the witch, knocking the trayright out of her hands. Her shrieks followed them allthe way along the twisting alleyway out into brightsunlight. Harry saw a familiar, snow-white marblebuilding in the distance — Gringotts Bank. Hagridhad steered him right into Diagon Alley.

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Yer a mess!” said Hagrid gruffly, brushing soot offHarry so forcefully he nearly knocked him into abarrel of dragon dung outside an apothecary.

“Skulkin’ around Knockturn Alley, I dunno — dodgyplace, Harry — don’ want no one ter see yeh downthere —”

“I realized that,” said Harry, ducking as Hagrid madeto brush him off again. “I told you, I was lost — whatwere you doing down there, anyway?”

“I was lookin’ fer a Flesh-Eatin’ Slug Repellent,”growled Hagrid. “They’re ruinin’ the school cabbages.Yer not on yer own?”

“I’m staying with the Weasleys but we got separated,”Harry explained. “I’ve got to go and find them. ...”

They set off together down the street.

“How come yeh never wrote back ter me?” said Hagridas Harry jogged alongside him (he had to take threesteps to every stride of Hagrid’s enormous boots).Harry explained all about Dobby and the Dursleys.

“Lousy Muggles,” growled Hagrid. “If I’d’ve known —”

“Harry! Harry! Over here!”

Harry looked up and saw Hermione Granger standingat the top of the white flight of steps to Gringotts. Sheran down to meet them, her bushy brown hair flyingbehind her.

“What happened to your glasses? Hello, Hagrid — Oh,it’s wonderful to see you two again — Are you cominginto Gringotts, Harry?”

“As soon as I’ve found the Weasleys,” said Harry.

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Yeh won’t have long ter wait,” Hagrid said with agrin.

Harry and Hermione looked around: Sprinting up thecrowded street were Ron, Fred, George, Percy, andMr. Weasley.

“Harry,” Mr. Weasley panted. “We hoped you’d onlygone one grate too far. ...” He mopped his glisteningbald patch. “Molly’s frantic — she’s coming now —”

“Where did you come out?” Ron asked.

“Knockturn Alley,” said Hagrid grimly.

“Excellent.” said Fred and George together.

“We’ve never been allowed in,” said Ron enviously.

“I should ruddy well think not,” growled Hagrid.

Mrs. Weasley now came galloping into view, herhandbag swinging wildly in one hand, Ginny justclinging onto the other.

“Oh, Harry — oh, my dear — you could have beenanywhere —”

Gasping for breath she pulled a large clothes brushout of her bag and began sweeping off the soot Hagridhadn’t managed to beat away. Mr. Weasley tookHarry’s glasses, gave them a tap of his wand, andreturned them, good as new.

“Well, gotta be off,” said Hagrid, who was having hishand wrung by Mrs. Weasley (“Knockturn Alley! If youhadn’t found him, Hagrid!”). “See yer at Hogwarts!”And he strode away, head and shoulders taller thananyone else in the packed street.

Page | 63 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Guess who I saw in Borgin and Burkes?” Harryasked Ron and Hermione as they climbed theGringotts steps. “Malfoy and his father.”

“Did Lucius Malfoy buy anything?” said Mr. Weasleysharply behind them.

“No, he was selling —”

“So he’s worried,” said Mr. Weasley with grimsatisfaction. “Oh, I’d love to get Lucius Malfoy forsomething. ...”

“You be careful, Arthur,” said Mrs. Weasley sharplyas they were bowed into the bank by a goblin at thedoor. “That family’s trouble. Don’t go biting off morethan you can chew —”

“So you don’t think I’m a match for Lucius Malfoy?”said Mr. Weasley indignantly, but he was distractedalmost at once by the sight of Hermione’s parents,who were standing nervously at the counter that ranall along the great marble hall, waiting for Hermioneto introduce them.

“But you’re Mugglesl” said Mr. Weasley delightedly.“We must have a drink! What’s that you’ve got there?Oh, you’re changing Muggle money. Molly, look!” Hepointed excitedly at the ten-pound notes in Mr.Granger’s hand.

“Meet you back here,” Ron said to Hermione as theWeasleys and Harry were led off to their undergroundvaults by another Gringotts goblin.

The vaults were reached by means of small, goblin-driven carts that sped along minature train tracksthrough the bank’s underground tunnels. Harryenjoyed the breakneck journey down to the Weasleys’

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

vault, but felt dreadful, far worse than he had inKnock-turn Alley, when it was opened. There was avery small pile of silver Sickles inside, and just onegold Galleon. Mrs. Weasley felt right into the cornersbefore sweeping the whole lot into her bag. Harry felteven worse when they reached his vault. He tried toblock the contents from view as he hastily shovedhandfuls of coins into a leather bag.

Back outside on the marble steps, they all separated.Percy muttered vaguely about needing a new quill.Fred and George had spotted their friend fromHogwarts, Lee Jordan. Mrs. Weasley and Ginny weregoing to a secondhand robe shop. Mr. Weasley wasinsisting on taking the Grangers off to the LeakyCauldron for a drink.

“Well all meet at Flourish and Blotts in an hour tobuy your schoolbooks,” said Mrs. Weasley, setting offwith Ginny. “And not one step down KnockturnAlley!” she shouted at the twins’ retreating backs.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione strolled off along thewinding, cobbled street. The bag of gold, silver, andbronze jangling cheerfully in Harry’s pocket wasclamoring to be spent, so he bought three largestrawberry-and-peanut-butter ice creams, which theyslurped happily as they wandered up the alley,examining the fascinating shop windows. Ron gazedlongingly at a full set of Chudley Cannon robes in thewindows of Quality Quidditch Supplies untilHermione dragged them off to buy ink and parchmentnext door. In Gambol and Japes Wizarding JokeShop, they met Fred, George, and Lee Jordan, whowere stocking up on Dr. Filibuster’s Fabulous Wet-Start, No-Heat Fireworks, and in a tiny junk shop fullof broken wands, lopsided brass scales, and oldcloaks covered in potion stains they found Percy,

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

deeply immersed in a small and deeply boring bookcalled Prefects Who Gained Power.

“A study of Hogwarts prefects and their later careers,”Ron read aloud off the back cover. “That soundsfascinating. ...”

“Go away,” Percy snapped.

“ ’Course, he’s very ambitious, Percy, he’s got it allplanned out. ... He wants to be Minister of Magic ...”Ron told Harry and Hermione in an undertone as theyleft Percy to it.

An hour later, they headed for Flourish and Blotts.They were by no means the only ones making theirway to the bookshop. As they approached it, they sawto their surprise a large crowd jostling outside thedoors, trying to get in. The reason for this wasproclaimed by a large banner stretched across theupper windows:

GILDEROY LOCKHART

will be signing copies of his autobiography

MAGICAL ME

today 12:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m.

“We can actually meet him!” Hermione squealed. “Imean, he’s written almost the whole booklist!”

The crowd seemed to be made up mostly of witchesaround Mrs. Weasley’s age. A harassed-looking wizardstood at the door, saying, “Calmly, please, ladies. ...Don’t push, there ... mind the books, now. ...”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione squeezed inside. A longline wound right to the back of the shop, whereGilderoy Lockhart was signing his books. They each

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

grabbed a copy of The Standard Book of Spells, Grade2 and sneaked up the line to where the rest of theWeasleys were standing with Mr. and Mrs. Granger.

“Oh, there you are, good,” said Mrs. Weasley. Shesounded breathless and kept patting her hair. “Wellbe able to see him in a minute. ...”

Gilderoy Lockhart came slowly into view, seated at atable surrounded by large pictures of his own face, allwinking and flashing dazzlingly white teeth at thecrowd. The real Lockhart was wearing robes of forget-me-not blue that exactly matched his eyes; hispointed wizard’s hat was set at a jaunty angle on hiswavy hair.

A short, irritable-looking man was dancing aroundtaking photographs with a large black camera thatemitted puffs of purple smoke with every blindingflash.

“Out of the way, there,” he snarled at Ron, movingback to get a better shot. “This is for the Daily Prophet

“Big deal,” said Ron, rubbing his foot where thephotographer had stepped on it.

Gilderoy Lockhart heard him. He looked up. He sawRon — and then he saw Harry. He stared. Then heleapt to his feet and positively shouted, “It can’t beHarry Potter?”

The crowd parted, whispering excitedly; Lockhartdived forward, seized Harry’s arm, and pulled him tothe front. The crowd burst into applause. Harry’s faceburned as Lockhart shook his hand for thephotographer, who was clicking away madly, waftingthick smoke over the Weasleys.

Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Nice big smile, Harry,” said Lockhart, through hisown gleaming teeth. “Together, you and I are worththe front page.”

When he finally let go of Harry’s hand, Harry couldhardly feel his fingers. He tried to sidle back over tothe Weasleys, but Lockhart threw an arm around hisshoulders and clamped him tightly to his side.

“Ladies and gentlemen,” he said loudly, waving forquiet. “What an extraordinary moment this is! Theperfect moment for me to make a little announcementI’ve been sitting on for some time!

“When young Harry here stepped into Flourish andBlotts today, he only wanted to buy my autobiography— which I shall be happy to present him now, free ofcharge —” The crowd applauded again. “He had noidea,” Lockhart continued, giving Harry a little shakethat made his glasses slip to the end of his nose, “thathe would shortly be getting much, much more thanmy book, Magical Me. He and his schoolmates will, infact, be getting the real magical me. Yes, ladies andgentlemen, I have great pleasure and pride inannouncing that this September, I will be taking upthe post of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher atHogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry!”

The crowd cheered and clapped and Harry foundhimself being presented with the entire works ofGilderoy Lockhart. Staggering slightly under theirweight, he managed to make his way out of thelimelight to the edge of the room, where Ginny wasstanding next to her new cauldron.

“You have these,” Harry mumbled to her, tipping thebooks into the cauldron. “I’ll buy my own —”

Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Bet you loved that, didn’t you, Potter?” said a voiceHarry had no trouble recognizing. He straightened upand found himself face-to-face with Draco Malfoy,who was wearing his usual sneer.

“Famous Harry Potter,” said Malfoy. “Can’t even gointo a bookshop without making the front page.”

“Leave him alone, he didn’t want all that!” said Ginny.It was the first time she had spoken in front of Harry.She was glaring at Malfoy.

“Potter, you’ve got yourself a girlfriend).” drawledMalfoy. Ginny went scarlet as Ron and Hermionefought their way over, both clutching stacks ofLockhart’s books.

“Oh, it’s you,” said Ron, looking at Malfoy as if hewere something unpleasant on the sole of his shoe.“Bet you’re surprised to see Harry here, eh?”

“Not as surprised as I am to see you in a shop,Weasley,” retorted Malfoy. “I suppose your parentswill go hungry for a month to pay for all those.”

Ron went as red as Ginny. He dropped his books intothe cauldron, too, and started toward Malfoy, butHarry and Hermione grabbed the back of his jacket.

“Ron!” said Mr. Weasley, struggling over with Fredand George. “What are you doing? It’s too crowded inhere, let’s go outside.”

“Well, well, well — Arthur Weasley.”

It was Mr. Malfoy. He stood with his hand on Draco’sshoulder, sneering in just the same way.

“Lucius,” said Mr. Weasley, nodding coldly.

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Busy time at the Ministry, I hear,” said Mr. Malfoy.“All those raids ... I hope they’re paying youovertime?”

He reached into Ginny’s cauldron and extracted, fromamid the glossy Lockhart books, a very old, verybattered copy of A Beginner’s Guide to Transfiguration.

“Obviously not,” Mr. Malfoy said. “Dear me, what’sthe use of being a disgrace to the name of wizard ifthey don’t even pay you well for it?”

Mr. Weasley flushed darker than either Ron or Ginny.

“We have a very different idea of what disgraces thename of wizard, Malfoy,” he said.

“Clearly,” said Mr. Malfoy, his pale eyes straying toMr. and Mrs. Granger, who were watchingapprehensively. “The company you keep, Weasley ...and I thought your family could sink no lower —”

There was a thud of metal as Ginny’s cauldron wentflying; Mr. Weasley had thrown himself at Mr. Malfoy,knocking him backward into a bookshelf. Dozens ofheavy spellbooks came thundering down on all theirheads; there was a yell of, “Get him, Dad!” from Fredor George; Mrs. Weasley was shrieking, “No, Arthur,no!”; the crowd stampeded backward, knocking moreshelves over; “Gentlemen, please — please!” cried theassistant, and then, louder than all —

“Break it up, there, gents, break it up —”

Hagrid was wading toward them through the sea ofbooks. In an instant he had pulled Mr. Weasley andMr. Malfoy apart. Mr. Weasley had a cut lip and Mr.Malfoy had been hit in the eye by an Encyclopedia ofToadstools. He was still holding Ginny’s oldPage | 70 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Transfiguration book. He thrust it at her, his eyesglittering with malice.

“Here, girl — take your book — it’s the best yourfather can give you —” Pulling himself out of Hagrid’sgrip he beckoned to Draco and swept from the shop.

“Yeh should’ve ignored him, Arthur,” said Hagrid,almost lifting Mr. Weasley off his feet as hestraightened his robes. “Rotten ter the core, the wholefamily, everyone knows that — no Malfoy’s worthlistenin’ ter — bad blood, that’s what it is — come onnow — let’s get outta here.”

The assistant looked as though he wanted to stopthem from leaving, but he barely came up to Hagrid’swaist and seemed to think better of it. They hurriedup the street, the Grangers shaking with fright andMrs. Weasley beside herself with fury.

“A fine example to set for your children ... brawling inpublic ... what Gilderoy Lockhart must’ve thought —”

“He was pleased,” said Fred. “Didn’t you hear him aswe were leaving? He was asking that bloke from theDaily Prophet if he’d be able to work the fight into hisreport — said it was all publicity —”

But it was a subdued group that headed back to thefireside in the Leaky Cauldron, where Harry, theWeasleys, and all their shopping would be travelingback to the Burrow using Floo powder. They saidgood-bye to the Grangers, who were leaving the pubfor the Muggle street on the other side; Mr. Weasleystarted to ask them how bus stops worked, butstopped quickly at the look on Mrs. Weasley’s face.

Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry took off his glasses and put them safely in hispocket before helping himself to Floo powder. Itdefinitely wasn’t his favorite way to travel.

Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



THE WHOMPING WILLOW

The end of the summer vacation came too quickly forHarry’s liking. He was looking forward to getting backto Hogwarts, but his month at the Burrow had beenthe happiest of his life. It was difficult not to feeljealous of Ron when he thought of the Dursleys andthe sort of welcome he could expect next time heturned up on Privet Drive.

On their last evening, Mrs. Weasley conjured up asumptuous dinner that included all of Harry’s favoritethings, ending with a mouthwatering treacle pudding.Fred and George rounded off the evening with adisplay of Filibuster fireworks; they filled the kitchenwith red and blue stars that bounced from ceiling towall for at least half an hour. Then it was time for alast mug of hot chocolate and bed.

It took a long while to get started next morning. Theywere up at dawn, but somehow they still seemed tohave a great deal to do. Mrs. Weasley dashed about ina bad mood looking for spare socks and quills; peoplekept colliding on the stairs, half-dressed with bits ofPage | 73 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

toast in their hands; and Mr. Weasley nearly brokehis neck, tripping over a stray chicken as he crossedthe yard carrying Ginny’s trunk to the car.

Harry couldn’t see how eight people, six large trunks,two owls, and a rat were going to fit into one smallFord Anglia. He had reckoned, of course, without thespecial features that Mr. Weasley had added.

“Not a word to Molly,” he whispered to Harry as heopened the trunk and showed him how it had beenmagically expanded so that the luggage fitted easily.

When at last they were all in the car, Mrs. Weasleyglanced into the back seat, where Harry, Ron, Fred,George, and Percy were all sitting comfortably side byside, and said, “Muggles do know more than we givethem credit for, don’t they?” She and Ginny got intothe front seat, which had been stretched so that itresembled a park bench. “I mean, you’d never know itwas this roomy from the outside, would you?”

Mr. Weasley started up the engine and they trundledout of the yard, Harry turning back for a last look atthe house. He barely had time to wonder when he’dsee it again when they were back — George hadforgotten his box of Filibuster fireworks. Five minutesafter that, they skidded to a halt in the yard so thatFred could run in for his broomstick. They hadalmost reached the highway when Ginny shriekedthat she’d left her diary. By the time she hadclambered back into the car, they were running verylate, and tempers were running high.

Mr. Weasley glanced at his watch and then at hiswife.

“Molly, dear —”

Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“No, Arthur —”

“No one would see — this little button here is anInvisibility Booster I installed — that’d get us up inthe air — then we fly above the clouds. We’d be therein ten minutes and no one would be any the wiser —”

“I said no, Arthur, not in broad daylight —”

They reached King’s Cross at a quarter to eleven. Mr.Weasley dashed across the road to get trolleys fortheir trunks and they all hurried into the station.

Harry had caught the Hogwarts Express the previousyear. The tricky part was getting onto platform nineand three-quarters, which wasn’t visible to theMuggle eye. What you had to do was walk throughthe solid barrier dividing platforms nine and ten. Itdidn’t hurt, but it had to be done carefully so thatnone of the Muggles noticed you vanishing.

“Percy first,” said Mrs. Weasley, looking nervously atthe clock overhead, which showed they had only fiveminutes to disappear casually through the barrier.

Percy strode briskly forward and vanished. Mr.Weasley went next; Fred and George followed.

“I’ll take Ginny and you two come right after us,” Mrs.Weasley told Harry and Ron, grabbing Ginny’s handand setting off. In the blink of an eye they were gone.

“Let’s go together, we’ve only got a minute,” Ron saidto Harry.

Harry made sure that Hedwig’s cage was safelywedged on top of his trunk and wheeled his trolleyaround to face the barrier. He felt perfectly confident;this wasn’t nearly as uncomfortable as using Floo

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

powder. Both of them bent low over the handles oftheir trolleys and walked purposefully toward thebarrier, gathering speed. A few feet away from it, theybroke into a run and —

CRASH.

Both trolleys hit the barrier and bounced backward;Ron’s trunk fell off with a loud thump, Harry wasknocked off his feet, and Hedwig’s cage bounced ontothe shiny floor, and she rolled away, shriekingindignantly; people all around them stared and aguard nearby yelled, “What in blazes d’you thinkyou’re doing?”

“Lost control of the trolley,” Harry gasped, clutchinghis ribs as he got up. Ron ran to pick up Hedwig, whowas causing such a scene that there was a lot ofmuttering about cruelty to animals from thesurrounding crowd.

“Why can’t we get through?” Harry hissed to Ron.

“I dunno —”

Ron looked wildly around. A dozen curious peoplewere still watching them.

“We’re going to miss the train,” Ron whispered. “Idon’t understand why the gateway’s sealed itself—”

Harry looked up at the giant clock with a sickeningfeeling in the pit of his stomach. Ten seconds ... nineseconds ...

He wheeled his trolley forward cautiously until it wasright against the barrier and pushed with all hismight. The metal remained solid.

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Three seconds ... two seconds ... one second ...

“It’s gone,” said Ron, sounding stunned. “The train’sleft. What if Mum and Dad can’t get back through tous? Have you got any Muggle money?”

Harry gave a hollow laugh. “The Dursleys haven’tgiven me pocket money for about six years.”

Ron pressed his ear to the cold barrier.

“Can’t hear a thing,” he said tensely. “What’re wegoing to do? I don’t know how long it’ll take Mum andDad to get back to us.”

They looked around. People were still watching them,mainly because of Hedwig’s continuing screeches.

“I think we’d better go and wait by the car,” saidHarry. “We’re attracting too much atten —”

“Harry!” said Ron, his eyes gleaming. “The car!”

“What about it?”

“We can fly the car to Hogwarts!”

“But I thought —”

“We’re stuck, right? And we’ve got to get to school,haven’t we? And even underage wizards are allowed touse magic if it’s a real emergency, section nineteen orsomething of the Restriction of Thingy —”

“But your mum and dad ...” said Harry, pushingagainst the barrier again in the vain hope that itwould give way. “How will they get home?”

Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“They don’t need the car!” said Ron impatiently. “Theyknow how to Apparate! You know, just vanish andreappear at home! They only bother with Floo powderand the car because we’re all underage and we’re notallowed to Apparate yet. ...”

Harry’s feeling of panic turned suddenly toexcitement.

“Can you fly it?”

“No problem,” said Ron, wheeling his trolley around toface the exit. “C’mon, let’s go. If we hurry we’ll be ableto follow the Hogwarts Express —”

And they marched off through the crowd of curiousMuggles, out of the station and back onto the sideroad where the old Ford Anglia was parked.

Ron unlocked the cavernous trunk with a series oftaps from his wand. They heaved their luggage backin, put Hedwig on the back seat, and got into thefront.

“Check that no one’s watching,” said Ron, starting theignition with another tap of his wand. Harry stuck hishead out of the window: Traffic was rumbling alongthe main road ahead, but their street was empty.

“Okay,” he said.

Ron pressed a tiny silver button on the dashboard.The car around them vanished — and so did they.Harry could feel the seat vibrating beneath him, hearthe engine, feel his hands on his knees and hisglasses on his nose, but for all he could see, he hadbecome a pair of eyeballs, floating a few feet above theground in a dingy street full of parked cars.

Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Let’s go,” said Ron’s voice from his right.

And the ground and the dirty buildings on either sidefell away, dropping out of sight as the car rose; inseconds, the whole of London lay, smoky andglittering, below them.

Then there was a popping noise and the car, Harry,and Ron reappeared.

“Uh-oh,” said Ron, jabbing at the Invisibility Booster.“It’s faulty —”

Both of them pummeled it. The car vanished. Then itflickered back again.

“Hold on!” Ron yelled, and he slammed his foot on theaccelerator; they shot straight into the low, woollyclouds and everything turned dull and foggy.

“Now what?” said Harry, blinking at the solid mass ofcloud pressing in on them from all sides.

“We need to see the train to know what direction to goin,” said Ron.

“Dip back down again — quickly —”

They dropped back beneath the clouds and twistedaround in their seats, squinting at the ground.

“I can see it!” Harry yelled. “Right ahead — there!”

The Hogwarts Express was streaking along belowthem like a scarlet snake.

“Due north,” said Ron, checking the compass on thedashboard. “Okay, we’ll just have to check on it everyhalf hour or so — hold on —”

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

And they shot up through the clouds. A minute later,they burst out into a blaze of sunlight.

It was a different world. The wheels of the carskimmed the sea of fluffy cloud, the sky a bright,endless blue under the blinding white sun.

“All we’ve got to worry about now are airplanes,” saidRon.

They looked at each other and started to laugh; for along time, they couldn’t stop.

It was as though they had been plunged into afabulous dream. This, thought Harry, was surely theonly way to travel — past swirls and turrets of snowycloud, in a car full of hot, bright sunlight, with a fatpack of toffees in the glove compartment, and theprospect of seeing Fred’s and George’s jealous faceswhen they landed smoothly and spectacularly on thesweeping lawn in front of Hogwarts castle.

They made regular checks on the train as they flewfarther and farther north, each dip beneath theclouds showing them a different view. London wassoon far behind them, replaced by neat green fieldsthat gave way in turn to wide, purplish moors, a greatcity alive with cars like multicolored ants, villageswith tiny toy churches.

Several uneventful hours later, however, Harry had toadmit that some of the fun was wearing off. Thetoffees had made them extremely thirsty and they hadnothing to drink. He and Ron had pulled off theirsweaters, but Harry’s T-shirt was sticking to the backof his seat and his glasses kept sliding down to theend of his sweaty nose. He had stopped noticing thefantastic cloud shapes now and was thinkinglongingly of the train miles below, where you couldPage | 80 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

buy ice-cold pumpkin juice from a trolley pushed by aplump witch. Why hadn’t they been able to get ontoplatform nine and three-quarters?

“Can’t be much further, can it?” croaked Ron, hourslater still, as the sun started to sink into their floor ofcloud, staining it a deep pink. “Ready for anothercheck on the train?”

It was still right below them, winding its way past asnowcapped mountain. It was much darker beneaththe canopy of clouds.

Ron put his foot on the accelerator and drove themupward again, but as he did so, the engine began towhine.

Harry and Ron exchanged nervous glances.

“It’s probably just tired,” said Ron. “It’s never beenthis far before. ...”

And they both pretended not to notice the whininggrowing louder and louder as the sky became steadilydarker. Stars were blossoming in the blackness.

Harry pulled his sweater back on, trying to ignore theway the windshield wipers were now waving feebly, asthough in protest.

“Not far,” said Ron, more to the car than to Harry,

“not far now,” and he patted the dashboardnervously.

When they flew back beneath the clouds a little whilelater, they had to squint through the darkness for alandmark they knew.

“There!” Harry shouted, making Ron and Hedwigjump. “Straight ahead!”

Page | 81 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Silhouetted on the dark horizon, high on the cliff overthe lake, stood the many turrets and towers ofHogwarts castle.

But the car had begun to shudder and was losingspeed.

“Come on,” Ron said cajolingly, giving the steeringwheel a little shake, “nearly there, come on —”

The engine groaned. Narrow jets of steam wereissuing from under the hood. Harry found himselfgripping the edges of his seat very hard as they flewtoward the lake.

The car gave a nasty wobble. Glancing out of hiswindow, Harry saw the smooth, black, glassy surfaceof the water, a mile below. Ron’s knuckles were whiteon the steering wheel. The car wobbled again.

“Come on,” Ron muttered.

They were over the lake — the castle was right ahead— Ron put his foot down.

There was a loud clunk, a splutter, and the enginedied completely.

“Uh-oh,” said Ron, into the silence.

The nose of the car dropped. They were falling,gathering speed, heading straight for the solid castlewall.

“IVoooooo!” Ron yelled, swinging the steering wheelaround; they missed the dark stone wall by inches asthe car turned in a great arc, soaring over the darkgreenhouses, then the vegetable patch, and then outover the black lawns, losing altitude all the time.

Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ron let go of the steering wheel completely and pulledhis wand out of his back pocket —

“STOP! STOP!” he yelled, whacking the dashboardand the windshield, but they were still plummeting,the ground flying up toward them —

“WATCH OUT FOR THAT TREE!” Harry bellowed,lunging for the steering wheel, but too late —

CRUNCH.

With an earsplitting bang of metal on wood, they hitthe thick tree trunk and dropped to the ground with aheavy jolt. Steam was billowing from under thecrumpled hood; Hedwig was shrieking in terror; agolf-ball-sized lump was throbbing on Harry’s headwhere he had hit the windshield; and to his right, Ronlet out a low, despairing groan.

“Are you okay?” Harry said urgently.

“My wand,” said Ron, in a shaky voice. “Look at mywand —”

It had snapped, almost in two; the tip was danglinglimply, held on by a few splinters.

Harry opened his mouth to say he was sure they’d beable to mend it up at the school, but he never evengot started. At that very moment, something hit hisside of the car with the force of a charging bull,sending him lurching sideways into Ron, just as anequally heavy blow hit the roof.

“What’s happen — ?”

Ron gasped, staring through the windshield, andHarry looked around just in time to see a branch as

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

thick as a python smash into it. The tree they had hitwas attacking them. Its trunk was bent almostdouble, and its gnarled boughs were pummeling everyinch of the car it could reach.

“Aaargh!” said Ron as another twisted limb punched alarge dent into his door; the windshield was nowtrembling under a hail of blows from knuckle-liketwigs and a branch as thick as a battering ram waspounding furiously on the roof, which seemed to becaving —

“Run for it!” Ron shouted, throwing his full weightagainst his door, but next second he had beenknocked backward into Harry’s lap by a viciousuppercut from another branch.

“We’re done for!” he moaned as the ceiling sagged, butsuddenly the floor of the car was vibrating — theengine had restarted.

“Reverse!” Harry yelled, and the car shot backward;the tree was still trying to hit them; they could hearits roots creaking as it almost ripped itself up, lashingout at them as they sped out of reach.

“That,” panted Ron, “was close. Well done, car —”

The car, however, had reached the end of its tether.With two sharp clunks, the doors flew open and Harryfelt his seat tip sideways: Next thing he knew he wassprawled on the damp ground. Loud thuds told himthat the car was ejecting their luggage from the trunk;Hedwig’s cage flew through the air and burst open;she rose out of it with an angry screech and sped offtoward the castle without a backward look. Then,dented, scratched, and steaming, the car rumbled offinto the darkness, its rear lights blazing angrily.

Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Come back!” Ron yelled after it, brandishing hisbroken wand. “Dad’ll kill me!”

But the car disappeared from view with one last snortfrom its exhaust.

“Can you believe our luck?” said Ron miserably,bending down to pick up Scabbers. “Of all the treeswe could’ve hit, we had to get one that hits back.”

He glanced over his shoulder at the ancient tree,which was still flailing its branches threateningly.

“Come on,” said Harry wearily, “we’d better get up tothe school. ...”

It wasn’t at all the triumphant arrival they hadpictured. Stiff, cold, and bruised, they seized the endsof their trunks and began dragging them up thegrassy slope, toward the great oak front doors.

“I think the feast’s already started,” said Ron,dropping his trunk at the foot of the front steps andcrossing quietly to look through a brightly lit window.“Hey — Harry — come and look — it’s the Sorting!”

Harry hurried over and, together, he and Ron peeredin at the Great Hall.

Innumerable candles were hovering in midair overfour long, crowded tables, making the golden platesand goblets sparkle. Overhead, the bewitched ceiling,which always mirrored the sky outside, sparkled withstars.

Through the forest of pointed black Hogwarts hats,Harry saw a long line of scared-looking first yearsfiling into the Hall. Ginny was among them, easilyvisible because of her vivid Weasley hair. Meanwhile,

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Professor McGonagall, a bespectacled witch with herhair in a tight bun, was placing the famous HogwartsSorting Hat on a stool before the newcomers.

Every year, this aged old hat, patched, frayed, anddirty, sorted new students into the four Hogwartshouses (Gryffindor, Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, andSlytherin). Harry well remembered putting it on,exactly one year ago, and waiting, petrified, for itsdecision as it muttered aloud in his ear. For a fewhorrible seconds he had feared that the hat was goingto put him in Slytherin, the House that had turnedout more Dark witches and wizards than any other —but he had ended up in Gryffindor, along with Ron,Hermione, and the rest of the Weasleys. Last term,Harry and Ron had helped Gryffindor win the HouseChampionship, beating Slytherin for the first time inseven years.

A very small, mousy-haired boy had been calledforward to place the hat on his head. Harry’s eyeswandered past him to where Professor Dumbledore,the headmaster, sat watching the Sorting from thestaff table, his long silver beard and half-moonglasses shining brightly in the candlelight. Severalseats along, Harry saw Gilderoy Lockhart, dressed inrobes of aquamarine. And there at the end wasHagrid, huge and hairy, drinking deeply from hisgoblet.

“Hang on ...” Harry muttered to Ron. “There’s anempty chair at the staff table. ... Where’s Snape?”

Professor Severus Snape was Harry’s least favoriteteacher. Harry also happened to be Snape’s leastfavorite student. Cruel, sarcastic, and disliked byeverybody except the students from his own House(Slytherin), Snape taught Potions.

Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Maybe he’s ill!” said Ron hopefully.

“Maybe he’s left,” said Harry, “because he missed outon the Defense Against the Dark Arts job again).”

“Or he might have been sacked).” said Ronenthusiastically. “I mean, everyone hates him —”

“Or maybe,” said a very cold voice right behind them,“he’s waiting to hear why you two didn’t arrive on theschool train.”

Harry spun around. There, his black robes rippling ina cold breeze, stood Severus Snape. He was a thinman with sallow skin, a hooked nose, and greasy,shoulder-length black hair, and at this moment, hewas smiling in a way that told Harry he and Ron werein very deep trouble.

“Follow me,” said Snape.

Not daring even to look at each other, Harry and Ronfollowed Snape up the steps into the vast, echoingentrance hall, which was lit with flaming torches. Adelicious smell of food was wafting from the GreatHall, but Snape led them away from the warmth andlight, down a narrow stone staircase that led into thedungeons.

“In!” he said, opening a door halfway down the coldpassageway and pointing.

They entered Snape’s office, shivering. The shadowywalls were lined with shelves of large glass jars, inwhich floated all manner of revolting things Harrydidn’t really want to know the name of at themoment. The fireplace was dark and empty. Snapeclosed the door and turned to look at them.

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“So,” he said softly, “the train isn’t good enough forthe famous Harry Potter and his faithful sidekick,Weasley. Wanted to arrive with a bang, did we, boys?”

“No, sir, it was the barrier at King’s Cross, it —”

“Silence!” said Snape coldly. “What have you donewith the car?”

Ron gulped. This wasn’t the first time Snape hadgiven Harry the impression of being able to readminds. But a moment later, he understood, as Snapeunrolled today’s issue of the Evening Prophet

“You were seen,” he hissed, showing them theheadline: FLYING FORD ANGLIA MYSTIFIESMUGGLES. He began to read aloud: “Two Muggles inLondon, convinced they saw an old car flying over thePost Office tower ... at noon in Norfolk, Mrs. HettyBayliss, while hanging out her washing ... Mr. AngusFleet, of Peebles, reported to police ... Six or sevenMuggles in all. I believe your father works in theMisuse of Muggle Artifacts Office?” he said, lookingup at Ron and smiling still more nastily. “Dear, dear... his own son ...”

Harry felt as though he’d just been walloped in thestomach by one of the mad tree’s larger branches. Ifanyone found out Mr. Weasley had bewitched the car...he hadn’t thought of that. ...

“I noticed, in my search of the park, that considerabledamage seems to have been done to a very valuableWhomping Willow,” Snape went on.

“That tree did more damage to us than we —” Ronblurted out.

Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Silence!” snapped Snape again. “Most unfortunately,you are not in my House and the decision to expelyou does not rest with me. I shall go and fetch thepeople who do have that happy power. You will waithere.”

Harry and Ron stared at each other, white-faced.Harry didn’t feel hungry anymore. He now feltextremely sick. He tried not to look at a large, slimysomething suspended in green liquid on a shelfbehind Snape’s desk. If Snape had gone to fetchProfessor McGonagall, head of Gryffindor House, theywere hardly any better off. She might be fairer thanSnape, but she was still extremely strict.

Ten minutes later, Snape returned, and sure enoughit was Professor McGonagall who accompanied him.Harry had seen Professor McGonagall angry onseveral occasions, but either he had forgotten justhow thin her mouth could go, or he had never seenher this angry before. She raised her wand themoment she entered; Harry and Ron both flinched,but she merely pointed it at the empty fireplace,where flames suddenly erupted.

“Sit,” she said, and they both backed into chairs bythe fire.

“Explain,” she said, her glasses glinting ominously.

Ron launched into the story, starting with the barrierat the station refusing to let them through.

“— so we had no choice, Professor, we couldn’t get onthe train.”

“Why didn’t you send us a letter by owl? I believe youhave an owl?” Professor McGonagall said coldly toHarry.

Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry gaped at her. Now she’d said it, that seemedthe obvious thing to have done.

“I — I didn’t think —”

“That,” said Professor McGonagall, “is obvious.”

There was a knock on the office door and Snape, nowlooking happier than ever, opened it. There stood theheadmaster, Professor Dumbledore.

Harry’s whole body went numb. Dumbledore waslooking unusually grave. He stared down his verycrooked nose at them, and Harry suddenly foundhimself wishing he and Ron were still being beaten upby the Whomping Willow.

There was a long silence. Then Dumbledore said,“Please explain why you did this.”

It would have been better if he had shouted. Harryhated the disappointment in his voice. For somereason, he was unable to look Dumbledore in theeyes, and spoke instead to his knees. He toldDumbledore everything except that Mr. Weasleyowned the bewitched car, making it sound as thoughhe and Ron had happened to find a flying car parkedoutside the station. He knew Dumbledore would seethrough this at once, but Dumbledore asked noquestions about the car. When Harry had finished, hemerely continued to peer at them through hisspectacles.

“Well go and get our stuff,” said Ron in a hopelesssort of voice.

“What are you talking about, Weasley?” barkedProfessor McGonagall.

Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Well, you’re expelling us, aren’t you?” said Ron.

Harry looked quickly at Dumbledore.

“Not today, Mr. Weasley,” said Dumbledore. “But Imust impress upon both of you the seriousness ofwhat you have done. I will be writing to both yourfamilies tonight. I must also warn you that if you doanything like this again, I will have no choice but toexpel you.”

Snape looked as though Christmas had beencanceled. He cleared his throat and said, “ProfessorDumbledore, these boys have flouted the Decree forthe Restriction of Underage Wizardry, caused seriousdamage to an old and valuable tree — surely acts ofthis nature —”

“It will be for Professor McGonagall to decide on theseboys’ punishments, Severus,” said Dumbledorecalmly. “They are in her House and are therefore herresponsibility.” He turned to Professor McGonagall. “Imust go back to the feast, Minerva, I’ve got to give outa few notices. Come, Severus, there’s a delicious-looking custard tart I want to sample —”

Snape shot a look of pure venom at Harry and Ron ashe allowed himself to be swept out of his office,leaving them alone with Professor McGonagall, whowas still eyeing them like a wrathful eagle.

“You’d better get along to the hospital wing, Weasley,you’re bleeding.”

“Not much,” said Ron, hastily wiping the cut over hiseye with his sleeve. “Professor, I wanted to watch mysister being Sorted —”

Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“The Sorting Ceremony is over,” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “Your sister is also in Gryffindor.”

“Oh, good,” said Ron.

“And speaking of Gryffindor —” Professor McGonagallsaid sharply, but Harry cut in: “Professor, when wetook the car, term hadn’t started, so — so Gryffindorshouldn’t really have points taken from it — shouldit?” he finished, watching her anxiously.

Professor McGonagall gave him a piercing look, buthe was sure she had almost smiled. Her mouthlooked less thin, anyway.

“I will not take any points from Gryffindor,” she said,and Harry’s heart lightened considerably. “But youwill both get a detention.”

It was better than Harry had expected. As forDumbledore’s writing to the Dursleys, that wasnothing. Harry knew perfectly well they’d just bedisappointed that the Whomping Willow hadn’tsquashed him flat.

Professor McGonagall raised her wand again andpointed it at Snape’s desk. A large plate ofsandwiches, two silver goblets, and a jug of icedpumpkin juice appeared with a pop.

“You will eat in here and then go straight up to yourdormitory,” she said. “I must also return to the feast.”

When the door had closed behind her, Ron let out along, low whistle.

“I thought we’d had it,” he said, grabbing a sandwich.

“So did I,” said Harry, taking one, too.

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Can you believe our luck, though?” said Ron thicklythrough a mouthful of chicken and ham. “Fred andGeorge must’ve flown that car five or six times and noMuggle ever saw them.” He swallowed and tookanother huge bite. “Why couldn’t we get through thebarrier?”

Harry shrugged. “We’ll have to watch our step fromnow on, though,” he said, taking a grateful swig ofpumpkin juice. “Wish we could’ve gone up to thefeast. ...”

“She didn’t want us showing off,” said Ron sagely.“Doesn’t want people to think it’s clever, arriving byflying car.”

When they had eaten as many sandwiches as theycould (the plate kept refilling itself), they rose and leftthe office, treading the familiar path to GryffindorTower. The castle was quiet; it seemed that the feastwas over. They walked past muttering portraits andcreaking suits of armor, and climbed narrow flights ofstone stairs, until at last they reached the passagewhere the secret entrance to Gryffindor Tower washidden, behind an oil painting of a very fat woman ina pink silk dress.

“Password?” she said as they approached.

“Er —” said Harry.

They didn’t know the new year’s password, not havingmet a Gryffindor prefect yet, but help came almostimmediately; they heard hurrying feet behind themand turned to see Hermione dashing toward them.

“There you are! Where have you been? The mostridiculous rumors — someone said you’d beenexpelled for crashing a flying car —”

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Well, we haven’t been expelled,” Harry assured her.

“You’re not telling me you did fly here?” saidHermione, sounding almost as severe as ProfessorMcGonagall.

“Skip the lecture,” said Ron impatiently, “and tell usthe new password.”

“It’s ‘wattlebird,’ ” said Hermione impatiently, “butthat’s not the point —”

Her words were cut short, however, as the portrait ofthe fat lady swung open and there was a suddenstorm of clapping. It looked as though the whole ofGryffindor House was still awake, packed into thecircular common room, standing on the lopsidedtables and squashy armchairs, waiting for them toarrive. Arms reached through the portrait hole to pullHarry and Ron inside, leaving Hermione to scramblein after them.

“Brilliant!” yelled Lee Jordan. “Inspired! What anentrance! Flying a car right into the WhompingWillow, people’ll be talking about that one for years —

“Good for you,” said a fifth year Harry had neverspoken to; someone was patting him on the back asthough he’d just won a marathon; Fred and Georgepushed their way to the front of the crowd and saidtogether, “Why couldn’t we’ve come in the car, eh?”Ron was scarlet in the face, grinning embarrassedly,but Harry could see one person who didn’t look happyat all. Percy was visible over the heads of someexcited first years, and he seemed to be trying to getnear enough to start telling them off. Harry nudgedRon in the ribs and nodded in Percy’s direction. Rongot the point at once.

Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Got to get upstairs — bit tired,” he said, and the twoof them started pushing their way toward the door onthe other side of the room, which led to a spiralstaircase and the dormitories.

“ ’Night,” Harry called back to Hermione, who waswearing a scowl just like Percy’s.

They managed to get to the other side of the commonroom, still having their backs slapped, and gained thepeace of the staircase. They hurried up it, right to thetop, and at last reached the door of their olddormitory, which now had a sign on it sayingSECOND YEARS. They entered the familiar, circularroom, with its five four-posters hung with red velvetand its high, narrow windows. Their trunks had beenbrought up for them and stood at the ends of theirbeds.

Ron grinned guiltily at Harry.

“I know I shouldn’t’ve enjoyed that or anything, but —

The dormitory door flew open and in came the othersecond year Gryffindor boys, Seamus Finnigan, DeanThomas, and Neville Longbottom.

“Unbelievablel” beamed Seamus.

“Cool,” said Dean.

“Amazing,” said Neville, awestruck.

Harry couldn’t help it. He grinned, too.

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



GILDEROY LOCKHART

The next day, however, Harry barely grinned once.Things started to go downhill from breakfast in theGreat Hall. The four long House tables were ladenwith tureens of porridge, plates of kippers, mountainsof toast, and dishes of eggs and bacon, beneath theenchanted ceiling (today, a dull, cloudy gray). Harryand Ron sat down at the Gryffindor table next toHermione, who had her copy of Voyages withVampires propped open against a milk jug. There wasa slight stiffness in the way she said “ ’Morning,”which told Harry that she was still disapproving of theway they had arrived. Neville Longbottom, on theother hand, greeted them cheerfully. Neville was around-faced and accident-prone boy with the worstmemory of anyone Harry had ever met.

“Mail’s due any minute — I think Gran’s sending afew things I forgot.”

Harry had only just started his porridge when, sureenough, there was a rushing sound overhead and ahundred or so owls streamed in, circling the hall and

Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

dropping letters and packages into the chatteringcrowd. A big, lumpy package bounced off Neville’shead and, a second later, something large and grayfell into Hermione’s jug, spraying them all with milkand feathers.

“Errol\” said Ron, pulling the bedraggled owl out bythe feet. Errol slumped, unconscious, onto the table,his legs in the air and a damp red envelope in hisbeak.

“Oh, no —” Ron gasped.

“It’s all right, he’s still alive,” said Hermione, proddingErrol gently with the tip of her finger.

“It’s not that — it’s that.”

Ron was pointing at the red envelope. It looked quiteordinary to Harry, but Ron and Neville were bothlooking at it as though they expected it to explode.

“What’s the matter?” said Harry.

“She’s — she’s sent me a Howler,” said Ron faintly.

“You’d better open it, Ron,” said Neville in a timidwhisper. “It’ll be worse if you don’t. My gran sent meone once, and I ignored it and” — he gulped — “it washorrible.”

Harry looked from their petrified faces to the redenvelope.

“What’s a Howler?” he said.

But Ron’s whole attention was fixed on the letter,which had begun to smoke at the corners.

Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Open it,” Neville urged. “It’ll all be over in a fewminutes —”

Ron stretched out a shaking hand, eased the envelopefrom Errol’s beak, and slit it open. Neville stuffed hisfingers in his ears. A split second later, Harry knewwhy. He thought for a moment it had exploded; a roarof sound filled the huge hall, shaking dust from theceiling.

“— STEALING THE CAR, I WOULDN’T HAVE BEENSURPRISED IF THEY’D EXPELLED YOU, YOU WAITTILL I GET HOLD OF YOU, I DON’T SUPPOSE YOUSTOPPED TO THINK WHAT YOUR FATHER AND IWENT THROUGH WHEN WE SAW IT WAS GONE —”

Mrs. Weasley’s yells, a hundred times louder thanusual, made the plates and spoons rattle on the table,and echoed deafeningly off the stone walls. Peoplethroughout the hall were swiveling around to see whohad received the Howler, and Ron sank so low in hischair that only his crimson forehead could be seen.

“— LETTER FROM DUMBLEDORE LAST NIGHT, ITHOUGHT YOUR FATHER WOULD DIE OF SHAME,

WE DIDN’T BRING YOU UP TO BEHAVE LIKE THIS,YOU AND HARRY COULD BOTH HAVE DIED —”

Harry had been wondering when his name was goingto crop up. He tried very hard to look as though hecouldn’t hear the voice that was making his eardrumsthrob.

“— ABSOLUTELY DISGUSTED — YOUR FATHER’SFACING AN INQUIRY AT WORK, IT’S ENTIRELY YOURFAULT AND IF YOU PUT ANOTHER TOE OUT OF LINEWE’LL BRING YOU STRAIGHT BACK HOME.”

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

A ringing silence fell. The red envelope, which haddropped from Ron’s hand, burst into flames andcurled into ashes. Harry and Ron sat stunned, asthough a tidal wave had just passed over them. A fewpeople laughed and, gradually, a babble of talk brokeout again.

Hermione closed Voyages with Vampires and lookeddown at the top of Ron’s head.

“Well, I don’t know what you expected, Ron, but you

“Don’t tell me I deserved it,” snapped Ron.

Harry pushed his porridge away. His insides wereburning with guilt. Mr. Weasley was facing an inquiryat work. After all Mr. and Mrs. Weasley had done forhim over the summer ...

But he had no time to dwell on this; ProfessorMcGonagall was moving along the Gryffindor table,handing out course schedules. Harry took his andsaw that they had double Herbology with theHufflepuffs first.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione left the castle together,crossed the vegetable patch, and made for thegreenhouses, where the magical plants were kept. Atleast the Howler had done one good thing: Hermioneseemed to think they had now been punished enoughand was being perfectly friendly again.

As they neared the greenhouses they saw the rest ofthe class standing outside, waiting for ProfessorSprout. Harry, Ron, and Hermione had only justjoined them when she came striding into view acrossthe lawn, accompanied by Gilderoy Lockhart.

Professor Sprout’s arms were full of bandages, andPage | 99 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

with another twinge of guilt, Harry spotted theWhomping Willow in the distance, several of itsbranches now in slings.

Professor Sprout was a squat little witch who wore apatched hat over her flyaway hair; there was usuallya large amount of earth on her clothes and herfingernails would have made Aunt Petunia faint.Gilderoy Lockhart, however, was immaculate insweeping robes of turquoise, his golden hair shiningunder a perfectly positioned turquoise hat with goldtrimming.

“Oh, hello there!” he called, beaming around at the

assembled students. “Just been showing Professor

Sprout the right way to doctor a Whomping Willow!

But I don’t want you running away with the idea that

I’m better at Herbology than she is! I just happen to

have met several of these exotic plants on my travels??

“Greenhouse three today, chaps!” said ProfessorSprout, who was looking distinctly disgruntled, not atall her usual cheerful self.

There was a murmur of interest. They had only everworked in greenhouse one before — greenhouse threehoused far more interesting and dangerous plants.Professor Sprout took a large key from her belt andunlocked the door. Harry caught a whiff of dampearth and fertilizer mingling with the heavy perfumeof some giant, umbrella-sized flowers dangling fromthe ceiling. He was about to follow Ron and Hermioneinside when Lockhart’s hand shot out.

“Harry! I’ve been wanting a word — you don’t mind ifhe’s a couple of minutes late, do you, ProfessorSprout?”

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Judging by Professor Sprout’s scowl, she did mind,but Lockhart said, “That’s the ticket,” and closed thegreenhouse door in her face.

“Harry,” said Lockhart, his large white teeth gleamingin the sunlight as he shook his head. “Harry, Harry,Harry.”

Completely nonplussed, Harry said nothing.

“When I heard — well, of course, it was all my fault.Could have kicked myself.”

Harry had no idea what he was talking about. He wasabout to say so when Lockhart went on, “Don’t knowwhen I’ve been more shocked. Flying a car toHogwarts! Well, of course, I knew at once why you’ddone it. Stood out a mile. Harry, Harry, Harry.”

It was remarkable how he could show every one ofthose brilliant teeth even when he wasn’t talking.

“Gave you a taste for publicity, didn’t I?” saidLockhart. “Gave you the bug. You got onto the frontpage of the paper with me and you couldn’t wait to doit again.”

“Oh, no, Professor, see —”

“Harry, Harry, Harry,” said Lockhart, reaching outand grasping his shoulder. “I understand. Natural towant a bit more once you’ve had that first taste —and I blame myself for giving you that, because it wasbound to go to your head — but see here, young man,you can’t start flying cars to try and get yourselfnoticed. Just calm down, all right? Plenty of time forall that when you’re older. Yes, yes, I know whatyou’re thinking! ‘It’s all right for him, he’s aninternationally famous wizard already! ’ But when IPage | 101 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

was twelve, I was just as much of a nobody as you arenow. In fact, I’d say I was even more of a nobody! Imean, a few people have heard of you, haven’t they?All that business with He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named!”He glanced at the lightning scar on Harry’s forehead.

“I know, I know — it’s not quite as good as winningWitch Weekly’s Most-Charming-Smile Award fivetimes in a row, as I have — but it’s a start, Harry, it’sa start”

He gave Harry a hearty wink and strode off. Harrystood stunned for a few seconds, then, rememberinghe was supposed to be in the greenhouse, he openedthe door and slid inside.

Professor Sprout was standing behind a trestle benchin the center of the greenhouse. About twenty pairs ofdifferent-colored ear-muffs were lying on the bench.When Harry had taken his place between Ron andHermione, she said, “We’ll be repotting Mandrakestoday. Now, who can tell me the properties of theMandrake?”

To nobody’s surprise, Hermione’s hand was first intothe air.

“Mandrake, or Mandragora, is a powerful restorative,”said Hermione, sounding as usual as though she hadswallowed the textbook. “It is used to return peoplewho have been transfigured or cursed to their originalstate.”

“Excellent. Ten points to Gryffindor,” said ProfessorSprout. “The Mandrake forms an essential part ofmost antidotes. It is also, however, dangerous. Whocan tell me why?”

Hermione’s hand narrowly missed Harry’s glasses asit shot up again.

Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“The cry of the Mandrake is fatal to anyone who hearsit,” she said promptly.

“Precisely. Take another ten points,” said ProfessorSprout. “Now, the Mandrakes we have here are stillvery young.”

She pointed to a row of deep trays as she spoke, andeveryone shuffled forward for a better look. A hundredor so tufty little plants, purplish green in color, weregrowing there in rows. They looked quiteunremarkable to Harry, who didn’t have the slightestidea what Hermione meant by the “cry” of theMandrake.

“Everyone take a pair of earmuffs,” said ProfessorSprout.

There was a scramble as everyone tried to seize a pairthat wasn’t pink and fluffy.

“When I tell you to put them on, make sure your earsare completely covered,” said Professor Sprout. “Whenit is safe to remove them, I will give you the thumbs-up. Right — earmuffs on.”

Harry snapped the earmuffs over his ears. They shutout sound completely. Professor Sprout put the pink,fluffy pair over her own ears, rolled up the sleeves ofher robes, grasped one of the tufty plants firmly, andpulled hard.

Harry let out a gasp of surprise that no one couldhear.

Instead of roots, a small, muddy, and extremely uglybaby popped out of the earth. The leaves weregrowing right out of his head. He had pale green,

Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

mottled skin, and was clearly bawling at the top of hislungs.

Professor Sprout took a large plant pot from underthe table and plunged the Mandrake into it, buryinghim in dark, damp compost until only the tuftedleaves were visible. Professor Sprout dusted off herhands, gave them all the thumbs-up, and removedher own earmuffs.

“As our Mandrakes are only seedlings, their crieswon’t kill yet,” she said calmly as though she’d justdone nothing more exciting than water a begonia.“However, they will knock you out for several hours,and as I’m sure none of you want to miss your firstday back, make sure your earmuffs are securely inplace while you work. I will attract your attentionwhen it is time to pack up.

“Four to a tray — there is a large supply of pots here

— compost in the sacks over there — and be carefulof the Venomous Tentacula, it’s teething.”

She gave a sharp slap to a spiky, dark red plant asshe spoke, making it draw in the long feelers that hadbeen inching sneakily over her shoulder.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione were joined at their tray bya curly-haired Hufflepuff boy Harry knew by sight buthad never spoken to.

“Justin Finch-Fletchley,” he said brightly, shakingHarry by the hand. “Know who you are, of course, thefamous Harry Potter. ... And you’re Hermione Granger

— always top in everything” (Hermione beamed as shehad her hand shaken too) “— and Ron Weasley.Wasn’t that your flying car?”

Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ron didn’t smile. The Howler was obviously still onhis mind.

“That Lockhart’s something, isn’t he?” said Justinhappily as they began filling their plant pots withdragon dung compost. “Awfully brave chap. Have youread his books? I’d have died of fear if I’d beencornered in a telephone booth by a werewolf, but hestayed cool and — zap —just fantastic.

“My name was down for Eton, you know. I can’t tellyou how glad I am I came here instead. Of course,Mother was slightly disappointed, but since I madeher read Lockhart’s books I think she’s begun to seehow useful it’ll be to have a fully trained wizard in thefamily. ...”

After that they didn’t have much chance to talk. Theirearmuffs were back on and they needed toconcentrate on the Mandrakes. Professor Sprout hadmade it look extremely easy, but it wasn’t. TheMandrakes didn’t like coming out of the earth, butdidn’t seem to want to go back into it either. Theysquirmed, kicked, flailed their sharp little fists, andgnashed their teeth; Harry spent ten whole minutestrying to squash a particularly fat one into a pot.

By the end of the class, Harry, like everyone else, wassweaty, aching, and covered in earth. Everyonetraipsed back to the castle for a quick wash and thenthe Gryffindors hurried off to Transfiguration.

Professor McGonagall’s classes were always hardwork, but today was especially difficult. EverythingHarry had learned last year seemed to have leakedout of his head during the summer. He was supposedto be turning a beetle into a button, but all hemanaged to do was give his beetle a lot of exercise asit scuttled over the desktop avoiding his wand.

Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ron was having far worse problems. He had patchedup his wand with some borrowed Spellotape, but itseemed to be damaged beyond repair. It keptcrackling and sparking at odd moments, and everytime Ron tried to transfigure his beetle it engulfedhim in thick gray smoke that smelled of rotten eggs.Unable to see what he was doing, Ron accidentallysquashed his beetle with his elbow and had to ask fora new one. Professor McGonagall wasn’t pleased.

Harry was relieved to hear the lunch bell. His brainfelt like a wrung sponge. Everyone filed out of theclassroom except him and Ron, who was whackinghis wand furiously on the desk.

“Stupid — useless — thing —”

“Write home for another one,” Harry suggested as thewand let off a volley of bangs like a firecracker.

“Oh, yeah, and get another Howler back,” said Ron,stuffing the now hissing wand into his bag. “ ‘It’s yourown fault your wand got snapped —’ ”

They went down to lunch, where Ron’s mood was notimproved by Hermione’s showing them the handful ofperfect coat buttons she had produced inT ransfiguration.

“What’ve we got this afternoon?” said Harry, hastilychanging the subject.

“Defense Against the Dark Arts,” said Hermione atonce.

“Why,” demanded Ron, seizing her schedule, “haveyou outlined all Lockhart’s lessons in little hearts?”

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Hermione snatched the schedule back, blushingfuriously.

They finished lunch and went outside into theovercast courtyard. Hermione sat down on a stonestep and buried her nose in Voyages with Vampiresagain. Harry and Ron stood talking about Quidditchfor several minutes before Harry became aware thathe was being closely watched. Looking up, he saw thevery small, mousy-haired boy he’d seen trying on theSorting Hat last night staring at Harry as thoughtransfixed. He was clutching what looked like anordinary Muggle camera, and the moment Harrylooked at him, he went bright red.

“All right, Harry? I’m — I’m Colin Creevey,” he saidbreathlessly, taking a tentative step forward. “I’m inGryffindor, too. D’you think — would it be all right if— can I have a picture?” he said, raising the camerahopefully.

“A picture?” Harry repeated blankly.

“So I can prove I’ve met you,” said Colin Creeveyeagerly, edging further forward. “I know all about you.Everyone’s told me. About how you survived whenYou-Know-Who tried to kill you and how hedisappeared and everything and how you’ve still got alightning scar on your forehead” (his eyes rakedHarry’s hairline) “and a boy in my dormitory said if Idevelop the film in the right potion, the pictures’llmove.” Colin drew a great shuddering breath ofexcitement and said, “It’s amazing here, isn’t it? Inever knew all the odd stuff I could do was magic till Igot the letter from Hogwarts. My dad’s a milkman, hecouldn’t believe it either. So I’m taking loads ofpictures to send home to him. And it’d be really goodif I had one of you” — he looked imploringly at Harry

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

— “maybe your friend could take it and I could standnext to you? And then, could you sign it?”

“Signed photos? You’re giving out signed photos,Potter?”

Loud and scathing, Draco Malfoy’s voice echoedaround the courtyard. He had stopped right behindColin, flanked, as he always was at Hogwarts, by hislarge and thuggish cronies, Crabbe and Goyle.

“Everyone line up!” Malfoy roared to the crowd. “HarryPotter’s giving out signed photos!”

“No, I’m not,” said Harry angrily, his fists clenching.“Shut up, Malfoy.”

“You’re just jealous,” piped up Colin, whose entirebody was about as thick as Crabbe’s neck.

“Jealous?” said Malfoy, who didn’t need to shoutanymore: Half the courtyard was listening in. “Ofwhat? I don’t want a foul scar right across my head,thanks. I don’t think getting your head cut openmakes you that special, myself.”

Crabbe and Goyle were sniggering stupidly.

“Eat slugs, Malfoy,” said Ron angrily. Crabbe stoppedlaughing and started rubbing his knuckles in amenacing way.

“Be careful, Weasley,” sneered Malfoy. “You don’twant to start any trouble or your mommy’ll have tocome and take you away from school.” He put on ashrill, piercing voice. “If you put another toe out of line

Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

A knot of Slytherin fifth years nearby laughed loudlyat this.

“Weasley would like a signed photo, Potter,” smirkedMalfoy. “It’d be worth more than his family’s wholehouse —”

Ron whipped out his Spellotaped wand, but Hermioneshut Voyages with Vampires with a snap andwhispered, “Look out!”

“What’s all this, what’s all this?” Gilderoy Lockhartwas striding toward them, his turquoise robesswirling behind him. “Who’s giving out signedphotos?”

Harry started to speak but he was cut short asLockhart flung an arm around his shoulders andthundered jovially, “Shouldn’t have asked! We meetagain, Harry!”

Pinned to Lockhart’s side and burning withhumiliation, Harry saw Malfoy slide smirking backinto the crowd.

“Come on then, Mr. Creevey,” said Lockhart, beamingat Colin. “A double portrait, can’t do better than that,and well both sign it for you.”

Colin fumbled for his camera and took the picture asthe bell rang behind them, signaling the start ofafternoon classes.

“Off you go, move along there,” Lockhart called to thecrowd, and he set off back to the castle with Harry,who was wishing he knew a good Vanishing Spell,still clasped to his side.

Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“A word to the wise, Harry,” said Lockhart paternallyas they entered the building through a side door. “Icovered up for you back there with young Creevey —if he was photographing me, too, your schoolmateswon’t think you’re setting yourself up so much. ...”

Deaf to Harry’s stammers, Lockhart swept him downa corridor lined with staring students and up astaircase.

“Let me just say that handing out signed pictures atthis stage of your career isn’t sensible — looks a tadbigheaded, Harry, to be frank. There may well come atime when, like me, you’ll need to keep a stack handywherever you go, but” — he gave a little chortle — “Idon’t think you’re quite there yet.”

They had reached Lockhart’s classroom and he letHarry go at last. Harry yanked his robes straight andheaded for a seat at the very back of the class, wherehe busied himself with piling all seven of Lockhart’sbooks in front of him, so that he could avoid lookingat the real thing.

The rest of the class came clattering in, and Ron andHermione sat down on either side of Harry.

“You could’ve fried an egg on your face,” said Ron.“You’d better hope Creevey doesn’t meet Ginny, orthey’ll be starting a Harry Potter fan club.”

“Shut up,” snapped Harry. The last thing he neededwas for Lockhart to hear the phrase “Harry Potter fanclub.”

When the whole class was seated, Lockhart clearedhis throat loudly and silence fell. He reached forward,picked up Neville Longbottom’s copy of Travels with

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Trolls, and held it up to show his own, winkingportrait on the front.

“Me,” he said, pointing at it and winking as well.“Gilderoy Lockhart, Order of Merlin, Third Class,Honorary Member of the Dark Force Defense League,and five-time winner of Witch Weekly’s Most-Charming-Smile Award — but I don’t talk about that.I didn’t get rid of the Bandon Banshee by smiling ather!”

He waited for them to laugh; a few people smiledweakly.

“I see you’ve all bought a complete set of my books —well done. I thought we’d start today with a little quiz.Nothing to worry about — just to check how wellyou’ve read them, how much you’ve taken in —”

When he had handed out the test papers he returnedto the front of the class and said, “You have thirtyminutes — start — now\”

Harry looked down at his paper and read:

1. What is Gilderoy Lockhart’s favorite color?

2. What is Gilderoy Lockhart’s secret ambition?

3. What, in your opinion, is Gilderoy Lockhart’sgreatest achievement to date?

On and on it went, over three sides of paper, rightdown to:

54. When is Gilderoy Lockhart’s birthday, and whatwould his ideal gift be?

Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Half an hour later, Lockhart collected the papers andrifled through them in front of the class.

“Tut, tut — hardly any of you remembered that myfavorite color is lilac. I say so in Year with the Yeti.

And a few of you need to read Wanderings withWerewolves more carefully — I clearly state inchapter twelve that my ideal birthday gift would beharmony between all magic and non-magic peoples —though I wouldn’t say no to a large bottle of Ogden’sOld Firewhisky!”

He gave them another roguish wink. Ron was nowstaring at Lockhart with an expression of disbelief onhis face; Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, whowere sitting in front, were shaking with silentlaughter. Hermione, on the other hand, was listeningto Lockhart with rapt attention and gave a start whenhe mentioned her name.

"... but Miss Hermione Granger knew my secretambition is to rid the world of evil and market myown range of hair-care potions — good girl! In fact” —he flipped her paper over — “full marks! Where isMiss Hermione Granger?”

Hermione raised a trembling hand.

“Excellent!” beamed Lockhart. “Quite excellent! Taketen points for Gryffindor! And so — to business —”

He bent down behind his desk and lifted a large,covered cage onto it.

“Now — be warned! It is my job to arm you againstthe foulest creatures known to wizardkind! You mayfind yourselves facing your worst fears in this room.Know only that no harm can befall you whilst I amhere. All I ask is that you remain calm.”

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

In spite of himself, Harry leaned around his pile ofbooks for a better look at the cage. Lockhart placed ahand on the cover. Dean and Seamus had stoppedlaughing now. Neville was cowering in his front rowseat.

“I must ask you not to scream,” said Lockhart in alow voice. “It might provoke them.”

As the whole class held its breath, Lockhart whippedoff the cover.

“Yes,” he said dramatically. “Freshly caught Cornishpixies.”

Seamus Finnigan couldn’t control himself. He let outa snort of laughter that even Lockhart couldn’tmistake for a scream of terror.

“Yes?” He smiled at Seamus.

“Well, they’re not — they’re not very — dangerous, arethey?” Seamus choked.

“Don’t be so sure!” said Lockhart, waggling a fingerannoyingly at Seamus. “Devilish tricky little blightersthey can be!”

The pixies were electric blue and about eight incheshigh, with pointed faces and voices so shrill it waslike listening to a lot of budgies arguing. The momentthe cover had been removed, they had startedjabbering and rocketing around, rattling the bars andmaking bizarre faces at the people nearest them.

“Right, then,” Lockhart said loudly. “Let’s see whatyou make of them!” And he opened the cage.

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

It was pandemonium. The pixies shot in everydirection like rockets. Two of them seized Neville bythe ears and lifted him into the air. Several shotstraight through the window, showering the back rowwith broken glass. The rest proceeded to wreck theclassroom more effectively than a rampaging rhino.They grabbed ink bottles and sprayed the class withthem, shredded books and papers, tore pictures fromthe walls, up-ended the waste basket, grabbed bagsand books and threw them out of the smashedwindow; within minutes, half the class was shelteringunder desks and Neville was swinging from the ironchandelier in the ceiling.

“Come on now — round them up, round them up,they’re only pixies,” Lockhart shouted.

He rolled up his sleeves, brandished his wand, andbellowed, “Peskipiksi Pesternomti”

It had absolutely no effect; one of the pixies seized hiswand and threw it out of the window, too. Lockhartgulped and dived under his own desk, narrowlyavoiding being squashed by Neville, who fell a secondlater as the chandelier gave way.

The bell rang and there was a mad rush toward theexit. In the relative calm that followed, Lockhartstraightened up, caught sight of Harry, Ron, andHermione, who were almost at the door, and said,“Well, I’ll ask you three to just nip the rest of themback into their cage.” He swept past them and shutthe door quickly behind him.

“Can you believe him?” roared Ron as one of theremaining pixies bit him painfully on the ear.

“He just wants to give us some hands-on experience,”said Hermione, immobilizing two pixies at once with a

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

clever Freezing Charm and stuffing them back intotheir cage.

“Hands on?” said Harry, who was trying to grab apixie dancing out of reach with its tongue out.“Hermione, he didn’t have a clue what he was doing

“Rubbish,” said Hermione. “You’ve read his books —look at all those amazing things he’s done —”

“He says he’s done,” Ron muttered.

Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



MUDBLOODS AND MURMURS

Harry spent a lot of time over the next few daysdodging out of sight whenever he saw GilderoyLockhart coming down a corridor. Harder to avoidwas Colin Creevey, who seemed to have memorizedHarry’s schedule. Nothing seemed to give Colin abigger thrill than to say, “All right, Harry?” six orseven times a day and hear, “Hello, Colin,” back,however exasperated Harry sounded when he said it.

Hedwig was still angry with Harry about thedisasterous car journey and Ron’s wand was stillmalfunctioning, surpassing itself on Friday morningby shooting out of Ron’s hand in Charms and hittingtiny old Professor Flitwick squarely between the eyes,creating a large, throbbing green boil where it hadstruck. So with one thing and another, Harry wasquite glad to reach the weekend. He, Ron, andHermione were planning to visit Hagrid on Saturdaymorning. Harry, however, was shaken awake severalhours earlier than he would have liked by OliverWood, Captain of the Gryffindor Quidditch team.

Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets-J.K. Rowling

“Whassamatter?” said Harry groggily.

“Quidditch practice!” said Wood. “Come on!”

Harry squinted at the window. There was a thin misthanging across the pink-and-gold sky. Now that hewas awake, he couldn’t understand how he couldhave slept through the racket the birds were making.

“Oliver,” Harry croaked. “It’s the crack of dawn.”

“Exactly,” said Wood. He was a tall and burly sixthyear and, at the moment, his eyes were gleaming witha crazed enthusiasm. “It’s part of our new trainingprogram. Come on, grab your broom, and let’s go,”said Wood heartily. “None of the other teams havestarted training yet; we’re going to be first off themark this year —”

Yawning and shivering slightly, Harry climbed out ofbed and tried to find his Quidditch robes.

“Good man,” said Wood. “Meet you on the field infifteen minutes.”

When he’d found his scarlet team robes and pulled onhis cloak for warmth, Harry scribbled a note to Ronexplaining where he’d gone and went down the spiralstaircase to the common room, his Nimbus TwoThousand on his shoulder. He had just reached theportrait hole when there was a clatter behind him andColin Creevey came dashing down the spiralstaircase, his camera swinging madly around hisneck and something clutched in his hand.

“I heard someone saying your name on the stairs,Harry! Look what I’ve got here! I’ve had it developed, Iwanted to show you —”

Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked bemusedly at the photograph Colin wasbrandishing under his nose.

A moving, black-and-white Lockhart was tugging hardon an arm Harry recognized as his own. He waspleased to see that his photographic self was puttingup a good fight and refusing to be dragged into view.As Harry watched, Lockhart gave up and slumped,panting, against the white edge of the picture.

“Will you sign it?” said Colin eagerly.

“No,” said Harry flatly, glancing around to check thatthe room was really deserted. “Sorry, Colin, I’m in ahurry — Quidditch practice —”

He climbed through the portrait hole.

“Oh, wow! Wait for me! I’ve never watched a Quidditchgame before!”

Colin scrambled through the hole after him.

“It’ll be really boring,” Harry said quickly, but Colinignored him, his face shining with excitement.

“You were the youngest House player in a hundredyears, weren’t you, Harry? Weren’t you?” said Colin,trotting alongside him. “You must be brilliant. I’venever flown. Is it easy? Is that your own broom? Isthat the best one there is?”

Harry didn’t know how to get rid of him. It was likehaving an extremely talkative shadow.

“I don’t really understand Quidditch,” said Colinbreathlessly. “Is it true there are four balls? And twoof them fly around trying to knock people off theirbrooms?”

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Harry heavily, resigned to explaining thecomplicated rules of Quidditch. “They’re calledBludgers. There are two Beaters on each team whocarry clubs to beat the Bludgers away from their side.Fred and George Weasley are the Gryffindor Beaters.”

“And what are the other balls for?” Colin asked,tripping down a couple of steps because he wasgazing open-mouthed at Harry.

“Well, the Quaffle — that’s the biggish red one — isthe one that scores goals. Three Chasers on eachteam throw the Quaffle to each other and try and getit through the goal posts at the end of the pitch —they’re three long poles with hoops on the end.”

“And the fourth ball —”

“— is the Golden Snitch,” said Harry, “and it’s verysmall, very fast, and difficult to catch. But that’s whatthe Seeker’s got to do, because a game of Quidditchdoesn’t end until the Snitch has been caught. Andwhichever team’s Seeker gets the Snitch earns histeam an extra hundred and fifty points.”

“And you’re the Gryffindor Seeker, aren’t you?” saidColin in awe.

“Yes,” said Harry as they left the castle and startedacross the dew-drenched grass. “And there’s theKeeper, too. He guards the goal posts. That’s it,really.”

But Colin didn’t stop questioning Harry all the waydown the sloping lawns to the Quidditch field, andHarry only shook him off when he reached thechanging rooms; Colin called after him in a pipingvoice, “I’ll go and get a good seat, Harry!” and hurriedoff to the stands.

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

The rest of the Gryffindor team were already in thechanging room. Wood was the only person who lookedtruly awake. Fred and George Weasley were sitting,puffy-eyed and tousle-haired, next to fourth yearAlicia Spinnet, who seemed to be nodding off againstthe wall behind her. Her fellow Chasers, Katie Belland Angelina Johnson, were yawning side by sideopposite them.

“There you are, Harry, what kept you?” said Woodbriskly. “Now, I wanted a quick talk with you allbefore we actually get onto the field, because I spentthe summer devising a whole new training program,which I really think will make all the difference. ...”

Wood was holding up a large diagram of a Quidditchfield, on which were drawn many lines, arrows, andcrosses in different-colored inks. He took out hiswand, tapped the board, and the arrows began towiggle over the diagram like caterpillars. As Woodlaunched into a speech about his new tactics, FredWeasley’s head drooped right onto Alicia Spinnet’sshoulder and he began to snore.

The first board took nearly twenty minutes to explain,but there was another board under that, and a thirdunder that one. Harry sank into a stupor as Wooddroned on and on.

“So,” said Wood, at long last, jerking Harry from awistful fantasy about what he could be eating forbreakfast at this very moment up at the castle. “Isthat clear? Any questions?”

“I’ve got a question, Oliver,” said George, who hadwoken with a start. “Why couldn’t you have told us allthis yesterday when we were awake?”

Wood wasn’t pleased.

Page | 120 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Now, listen here, you lot,” he said, glowering at themall. “We should have won the Quidditch Cup last year.We’re easily the best team. But unfortunately —owing to circumstances beyond our control —”

Harry shifted guiltily in his seat. He had beenunconscious in the hospital wing for the final matchof the previous year, meaning that Gryffindor hadbeen a player short and had suffered their worstdefeat in three hundred years.

Wood took a moment to regain control of himself.Their last defeat was clearly still torturing him.

“So this year, we train harder than ever before. ...Okay, let’s go and put our new theories into practice!”Wood shouted, seizing his broomstick and leading theway out of the locker rooms. Stiff-legged and stillyawning, his team followed.

They had been in the locker room so long that thesun was up completely now, although remnants ofmist hung over the grass in the stadium. As Harrywalked onto the field, he saw Ron and Hermionesitting in the stands.

“Aren’t you finished yet?” called Ron incredulously.

“Haven’t even started,” said Harry, looking jealouslyat the toast and marmalade Ron and Hermione hadbrought out of the Great Hall. “Wood’s been teachingus new moves.”

He mounted his broomstick and kicked at theground, soaring up into the air. The cool morning airwhipped his face, waking him far more effectivelythan Wood’s long talk. It felt wonderful to be back onthe Quidditch field. He soared right around thestadium at full speed, racing Fred and George.

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“What’s that funny clicking noise?” called Fred asthey hurtled around the corner.

Harry looked into the stands. Colin was sitting in oneof the highest seats, his camera raised, taking pictureafter picture, the sound strangely magnified in thedeserted stadium.

“Look this way, Harry! This way!” he cried shrilly.“Who’s that?” said Fred.

“No idea,” Harry lied, putting on a spurt of speed thattook him as far away as possible from Colin.

“What’s going on?” said Wood, frowning, as heskimmed through the air toward them. “Why’s thatfirst year taking pictures? I don’t like it. He could be aSlytherin spy, trying to find out about our newtraining program.”

“He’s in Gryffindor,” said Harry quickly.

“And the Slytherins don’t need a spy, Oliver,” saidGeorge.

“What makes you say that?” said Wood testily.

“Because they’re here in person,” said George,pointing.

Several people in green robes were walking onto thefield, broomsticks in their hands.

“I don’t believe it!” Wood hissed in outrage. “I bookedthe field for today! We’ll see about this!”

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Wood shot toward the ground, landing rather harderthan he meant to in his anger, staggering slightly ashe dismounted. Harry, Fred, and George followed.

“Flint!” Wood bellowed at the Slytherin Captain. “Thisis our practice time! We got up specially! You canclear off now!”

Marcus Flint was even larger than Wood. He had alook of trollish cunning on his face as he replied,“Plenty of room for all of us, Wood.”

Angelina, Alicia, and Katie had come over, too. Therewere no girls on the Slytherin team, who stoodshoulder to shoulder, facing the Gryffindors, leeringto a man.

“But I booked the field!” said Wood, positively spittingwith rage. “I booked it!”

“Ah,” said Flint. “But Tve got a specially signed notehere from Professor Snape. % Professor S. Snape, givethe Slytherin team permission to practice today on theQuidditch field owinq to the need to train their newSeeker. ’ ”

“You’ve got a new Seeker?” said Wood, distracted.“Where?”

And from behind the six large figures before themcame a seventh, smaller boy, smirking all over hispale, pointed face. It was Draco Malfoy.

“Aren’t you Lucius Malfoy’s son?” said Fred, lookingat Malfoy with dislike.

“Funny you should mention Draco’s father,” said Flintas the whole Slytherin team smiled still more broadly.

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Let me show you the generous gift he’s made to theSlytherin team.”

All seven of them held out their broomsticks. Sevenhighly polished, brand-new handles and seven sets offine gold lettering spelling the words Nimbus TwoThousand and One gleamed under the Gryffindors’noses in the early morning sun.

“Very latest model. Only came out last month,” saidFlint carelessly, flicking a speck of dust from the endof his own. “I believe it outstrips the old TwoThousand series by a considerable amount. As for theold Cleansweeps” — he smiled nastily at Fred andGeorge, who were both clutching Cleansweep Fives —“sweeps the board with them.”

None of the Gryffindor team could think of anythingto say for a moment. Malfoy was smirking so broadlyhis cold eyes were reduced to slits.

“Oh, look,” said Flint. “A field invasion.”

Ron and Hermione were crossing the grass to seewhat was going on.

“What’s happening?” Ron asked Harry. “Why aren’tyou playing? And what’s he doing here?”

He was looking at Malfoy, taking in his SlytherinQuidditch robes.

“I’m the new Slytherin Seeker, Weasley,” said Malfoy,smugly. “Everyone’s just been admiring the broomsmy father’s bought our team.”

Ron gaped, openmouthed, at the seven superbbroomsticks in front of him.

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Good, aren’t they?” said Malfoy smoothly. “Butperhaps the Gryffindor team will be able to raise somegold and get new brooms, too. You could raffle offthose Cleansweep Fives; I expect a museum wouldbid for them.”

The Slytherin team howled with laughter.

“At least no one on the Gryffindor team had to buytheir way in,” said Hermione sharply. “They got in onpure talent.”

The smug look on Malfoy’s face flickered.

“No one asked your opinion, you filthy littleMudblood,” he spat.

Harry knew at once that Malfoy had said somethingreally bad because there was an instant uproar at hiswords. Flint had to dive in front of Malfoy to stop Fredand George jumping on him, Alicia shrieked, “Howdare you\”, and Ron plunged his hand into his robes,pulled out his wand, yelling, “You’ll pay for that one,Malfoy!” and pointed it furiously under Flint’s arm atMalfoy’s face.

A loud bang echoed around the stadium and a jet ofgreen light shot out of the wrong end of Ron’s wand,hitting him in the stomach and sending him reelingbackward onto the grass.

“Ron! Ron! Are you all right?” squealed Hermione.

Ron opened his mouth to speak, but no words cameout. Instead he gave an almighty belch and severalslugs dribbled out of his mouth onto his lap.

The Slytherin team were paralyzed with laughter.

Flint was doubled up, hanging onto his new

Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

broomstick for support. Malfoy was on all fours,banging the ground with his fist. The Gryffindors weregathered around Ron, who kept belching large,glistening slugs. Nobody seemed to want to touchhim.

“We’d better get him to Hagrid’s, it’s nearest,” saidHarry to Hermione, who nodded bravely, and the pairof them pulled Ron up by the arms.

“What happened, Harry? What happened? Is he ill?But you can cure him, can’t you?” Colin had rundown from his seat and was now dancing alongsidethem as they left the field. Ron gave a huge heave andmore slugs dribbled down his front.

“Oooh,” said Colin, fascinated and raising his camera.“Can you hold him still, Harry?”

“Get out of the way, Colin!” said Harry angrily. He andHermione supported Ron out of the stadium andacross the grounds toward the edge of the forest.

“Nearly there, Ron,” said Hermione as thegamekeeper’s cabin came into view. “You’ll be all rightin a minute — almost there —”

They were within twenty feet of Hagrid’s house whenthe front door opened, but it wasn’t Hagrid whoemerged. Gilderoy Lockhart, wearing robes of palestmauve today, came striding out.

“Quick, behind here,” Harry hissed, dragging Ronbehind a nearby bush. Hermione followed, somewhatreluctantly.

“It’s a simple matter if you know what you’re doing!”Lockhart was saying loudly to Hagrid. “If you needhelp, you know where I am! I’ll let you have a copy of

Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

my book. I’m surprised you haven’t already got one —I’ll sign one tonight and send it over. Well, good-bye!”And he strode away toward the castle.

Harry waited until Lockhart was out of sight, thenpulled Ron out of the bush and up to Hagrid’s frontdoor. They knocked urgently.

Hagrid appeared at once, looking very grumpy, buthis expression brightened when he saw who it was.

“Bin wonderin’ when you’d come ter see me — comein, come in — thought you mighta bin ProfessorLockhart back again —”

Harry and Hermione supported Ron over thethreshold into the one-roomed cabin, which had anenormous bed in one corner, a fire crackling merrilyin the other. Hagrid didn’t seem perturbed by Ron’sslug problem, which Harry hastily explained as helowered Ron into a chair.

“Better out than in,” he said cheerfully, plunking alarge copper basin in front of him. “Get ’em all up,Ron.”

“I don’t think there’s anything to do except wait for itto stop,” said Hermione anxiously, watching Ron bendover the basin. “That’s a difficult curse to work at thebest of times, but with a broken wand —”

Hagrid was bustling around making them tea. Hisboarhound, Fang, was slobbering over Harry.

“What did Lockhart want with you, Hagrid?” Harryasked, scratching Fang’s ears.

“Givin’ me advice on gettin’ kelpies out of a well,”growled Hagrid, moving a half-plucked rooster off his

Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

scrubbed table and setting down the teapot. “Like Idon’ know. An’ bangin’ on about some banshee hebanished. If one word of it was true, I’ll eat my kettle.”

It was most unlike Hagrid to criticize a Hogwartsteacher, and Harry looked at him in surprise.Hermione, however, said in a voice somewhat higherthan usual, “I think you’re being a bit unfair.

Professor Dumbledore obviously thought he was thebest man for the job —”

“He was the on’y man for the job,” said Hagrid,offering them a plate of treacle toffee, while Roncoughed squelchily into his basin. “An’ I mean theon’y one. Gettin’ very difficult ter find anyone fer theDark Arts job. People aren’t too keen ter take it on,see. They’re startin’ ter think it’s jinxed. No one’slasted long fer a while now. So tell me,” said Hagrid,jerking his head at Ron. “Who was he tryin’ tercurse?”

“Malfoy called Hermione something — it must’ve beenreally bad, because everyone went wild.”

“It was bad,” said Ron hoarsely, emerging over thetabletop looking pale and sweaty. “Malfoy called her‘Mudblood,’ Hagrid —”

Ron dived out of sight again as a fresh wave of slugsmade their appearance. Hagrid looked outraged.

“He didn’!” he growled at Hermione.

“He did,” she said. “But I don’t know what it means. Icould tell it was really rude, of course —”

“It’s about the most insulting thing he could think of,”gasped Ron, coming back up. “Mudblood’s a reallyfoul name for someone who is Muggle-born — you

Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

know, non-magic parents. There are some wizards —like Malfoy’s family — who think they’re better thaneveryone else because they’re what people call pure-blood.” He gave a small burp, and a single slug fellinto his outstretched hand. He threw it into the basinand continued, “I mean, the rest of us know it doesn’tmake any difference at all. Look at Neville Longbottom— he’s pure-blood and he can hardly stand acauldron the right way up.”

“An’ they haven’t invented a spell our Hermione can’do,” said Hagrid proudly, making Hermione go abrilliant shade of magenta.

“It’s a disgusting thing to call someone,” said Ron,wiping his sweaty brow with a shaking hand. “Dirtyblood, see. Common blood. It’s ridiculous. Mostwizards these days are half-blood anyway. If wehadn’t married Muggles we’d’ve died out.”

He retched and ducked out of sight again.

“Well, I don’ blame yeh fer tryin’ ter curse him, Ron,”said Hagrid loudly over the thuds of more slugshitting the basin. “Bu’ maybe it was a good thing yerwand backfired. ’Spect Lucius Malfoy would’ve comemarchin’ up ter school if yeh’d cursed his son. Leastyer not in trouble.”

Harry would have pointed out that trouble didn’tcome much worse than having slugs pouring out ofyour mouth, but he couldn’t; Hagrid’s treacle toffeehad cemented his jaws together.

“Harry,” said Hagrid abruptly as though struck by asudden thought. “Gotta bone ter pick with yeh. I’veheard you’ve bin givin’ out signed photos. How come Ihaven’t got one?”

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Furious, Harry wrenched his teeth apart.

“I have not been giving out signed photos,” he saidhotly. “If Lockhart’s still spreading that around —”

But then he saw that Hagrid was laughing.

“I’m on’y jokin’,” he said, patting Harry genially on theback and sending him face first into the table. “I knewyeh hadn’t really. I told Lockhart yeh didn’ need teh.Yer more famous than him without tryin’.”

“Bet he didn’t like that,” said Harry, sitting up andrubbing his chin.

“Don’ think he did,” said Hagrid, his eyes twinkling.“An’ then I told him I’d never read one o’ his books an’he decided ter go. Treacle toffee, Ron?” he added asRon reappeared.

“No thanks,” said Ron weakly. “Better not risk it.”

“Come an’ see what I’ve bin growin’,” said Hagrid asHarry and Hermione finished the last of their tea.

In the small vegetable patch behind Hagrid’s housewere a dozen of the largest pumpkins Harry had everseen. Each was the size of a large boulder.

“Gettin’ on well, aren’t they?” said Hagrid happily.

“Fer the Halloween feast ... should be big enough bythen.”

“What’ve you been feeding them?” said Harry.

Hagrid looked over his shoulder to check that theywere alone.

Page | 130 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Well, I’ve bin givin’ them — you know — a bit o’ help

Harry noticed Hagrid’s flowery pink umbrella leaningagainst the back wall of the cabin. Harry had hadreason to believe before now that this umbrella wasnot all it looked; in fact, he had the strong impressionthat Hagrid’s old school wand was concealed inside it.Hagrid wasn’t supposed to use magic. He had beenexpelled from Hogwarts in his third year, but Harryhad never found out why — any mention of thematter and Hagrid would clear his throat loudly andbecome mysteriously deaf until the subject waschanged.

“An Engorgement Charm, I suppose?” said Hermione,halfway between disapproval and amusement. “Well,you’ve done a good job on them.”

“That’s what yer little sister said,” said Hagrid,nodding at Ron. “Met her jus’yesterday.” Hagridlooked sideways at Harry, his beard twitching. “Saidshe was jus’ lookin’ round the grounds, but I reckonshe was hopin’ she might run inter someone else atmy house.” He winked at Harry. “If yeh ask me, shewouldn’ say no ter a signed —”

“Oh, shut up,” said Harry. Ron snorted with laughterand the ground was sprayed with slugs.

“Watch it!” Hagrid roared, pulling Ron away from hisprecious pumpkins.

It was nearly lunchtime and as Harry had only hadone bit of treacle toffee since dawn, he was keen to goback to school to eat. They said good-bye to Hagridand walked back up to the castle, Ron hiccoughingoccasionally, but only bringing up two very smallslugs.

Page | 131 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

They had barely set foot in the cool entrance hallwhen a voice rang out, “There you are, Potter —Weasley.” Professor McGonagall was walking towardthem, looking stern. “You will both do your detentionsthis evening.”

“What’re we doing, Professor?” said Ron, nervouslysuppressing a burp.

“ You will be polishing the silver in the trophy roomwith Mr. Filch,” said Professor McGonagall. “And nomagic, Weasley — elbow grease.”

Ron gulped. Argus Filch, the caretaker, was loathedby every student in the school.

“And you, Potter, will be helping Professor Lockhartanswer his fan mail,” said Professor McGonagall.

“Oh n — Professor, can’t I go and do the trophy room,too?” said Harry desperately.

“Certainly not,” said Professor McGonagall, raisingher eyebrows. “Professor Lockhart requested youparticularly. Eight o’clock sharp, both of you.”

Harry and Ron slouched into the Great Hall in statesof deepest gloom, Hermione behind them, wearing awell-you-did-break-school-rules sort of expression.Harry didn’t enjoy his shepherd’s pie as much as he’dthought. Both he and Ron felt they’d got the worsedeal.

“Filch’ll have me there all night,” said Ron heavily.

“No magic! There must be about a hundred cups inthat room. I’m no good at Muggle cleaning.”

Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I’d swap anytime,” said Harry hollowly. “I’ve hadloads of practice with the Dursleys. AnsweringLockhart’s fan mail ... he’ll be a nightmare. ...”

Saturday afternoon seemed to melt away, and in whatseemed like no time, it was five minutes to eight, andHarry was dragging his feet along the second-floorcorridor to Lockhart’s office. He gritted his teeth andknocked.

The door flew open at once. Lockhart beamed down athim.

“Ah, here’s the scalawag!” he said. “Come in, Harry,come in —”

Shining brightly on the walls by the light of manycandles were countless framed photographs ofLockhart. He had even signed a few of them. Anotherlarge pile lay on his desk.

“You can address the envelopes!” Lockhart told Harry,as though this was a huge treat. “This first one’s toGladys Gudgeon, bless her — huge fan of mine —”

The minutes snailed by. Harry let Lockhart’s voicewash over him, occasionally saying, “Mmm” and“Right” and “Yeah.” Now and then he caught a phraselike, “Fame’s a fickle friend, Harry,” or “Celebrity is ascelebrity does, remember that.”

The candles burned lower and lower, making the lightdance over the many moving faces of Lockhartwatching him. Harry moved his aching hand overwhat felt like the thousandth envelope, writing outVeronica Smethley’s address. It must be nearly time toleave, Harry thought miserably, please let it be nearlytime. ...

Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

And then he heard something — something quiteapart from the spitting of the dying candles andLockhart’s prattle about his fans.

It was a voice, a voice to chill the bone marrow, avoice of breathtaking, ice-cold venom.

“Come ... come to me. ... Let me rip you. ... Let me tearyou. ... Let me kill you. ...”

Harry gave a huge jump and a large lilac blotappeared on Veronica Smethley’s street.

“What?” he said loudly.

“I know!” said Lockhart. “Six solid months at the topof the best-seller list! Broke all records!”

“No,” said Harry frantically. “That voice!”

“Sorry?” said Lockhart, looking puzzled. “What voice?”

“That — that voice that said — didn’t you hear it?”

Lockhart was looking at Harry in high astonishment.

“What are you talking about, Harry? Perhaps you’regetting a little drowsy? Great Scott — look at the time!“We’ve been here nearly four hours! I’d never havebelieved it — the time’s flown, hasn’t it?”

Harry didn’t answer. He was straining his ears to hearthe voice again, but there was no sound now exceptfor Lockhart telling him he mustn’t expect a treat likethis every time he got detention. Feeling dazed, Harryleft.

It was so late that the Gryffindor common room wasalmost empty. Harry went straight up to the

Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

dormitory. Ron wasn’t back yet. Harry pulled on hispajamas, got into bed, and waited. Half an hour later,Ron arrived, nursing his right arm and bringing astrong smell of polish into the darkened room.

“My muscles have all seized up,” he groaned, sinkingon his bed. “Fourteen times he made me buff up thatQuidditch Cup before he was satisfied. And then Ihad another slug attack all over a Special Award forServices to the School. Took ages to get the slime off.

... How was it with Lockhart?”

Keeping his voice low so as not to wake Neville, Dean,and Seamus, Harry told Ron exactly what he hadheard.

“And Lockhart said he couldn’t hear it?” said Ron.Harry could see him frowning in the moonlight.

“D’you think he was lying? But I don’t get it — evensomeone invisible would’ve had to open the door.”

“I know,” said Harry, lying back in his four-poster andstaring at the canopy above him. “I don’t get it either.”

Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





THE DEATHDAY PARTY

October arrived, spreading a damp chill over thegrounds and into the castle. Madam Pomfrey, thenurse, was kept busy by a sudden spate of coldsamong the staff and students. Her Pepperup Potionworked instantly, though it left the drinker smokingat the ears for several hours afterward. GinnyWeasley, who had been looking pale, was bullied intotaking some by Percy. The steam pouring from underher vivid hair gave the impression that her wholehead was on fire.

Raindrops the size of bullets thundered on the castlewindows for days on end; the lake rose, the flowerbeds turned into muddy streams, and Hagrid’spumpkins swelled to the size of garden sheds. OliverWood’s enthusiasm for regular training sessions,however, was not dampened, which was why Harrywas to be found, late one stormy Saturday afternoona few days before Halloween, returning to GryffindorTower, drenched to the skin and splattered with mud.Even aside from the rain and wind it hadn’t been ahappy practice session. Fred and George, who hadPage | 136 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

been spying on the Slytherin team, had seen forthemselves the speed of those new Nimbus TwoThousand and Ones. They reported that the Slytherinteam was no more than seven greenish blurs,shooting through the air like missiles.

As Harry squelched along the deserted corridor hecame across somebody who looked just aspreoccupied as he was. Nearly Headless Nick, theghost of Gryffindor Tower, was staring morosely out ofa window, muttering under his breath, "... don’t fulfilltheir requirements ... half an inch, if that ...”

“Hello, Nick,” said Harry.

“Hello, hello,” said Nearly Headless Nick, starting andlooking round. He wore a dashing, plumed hat on hislong curly hair, and a tunic with a ruff, whichconcealed the fact that his neck was almostcompletely severed. He was pale as smoke, and Harrycould see right through him to the dark sky andtorrential rain outside.

“You look troubled, young Potter,” said Nick, folding atransparent letter as he spoke and tucking it insidehis doublet.

“So do you,” said Harry.

“Ah,” Nearly Headless Nick waved an elegant hand, “amatter of no importance. ... It’s not as though I reallywanted to join. ... Thought I’d apply, but apparently I‘don’t fulfill requirements’ —”

In spite of his airy tone, there was a look of greatbitterness on his face.

“But you would think, wouldn’t you,” he eruptedsuddenly, pulling the letter back out of his pocket,

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“that getting hit forty-five times in the neck with ablunt axe would qualify you to join the HeadlessHunt?”

“Oh — yes,” said Harry, who was obviously supposedto agree.

“I mean, nobody wishes more than I do that it had allbeen quick and clean, and my head had come offproperly, I mean, it would have saved me a great dealof pain and ridicule. However —” Nearly HeadlessNick shook his letter open and read furiously:

“ ‘We can only accept huntsmen whose heads haveparted company with their bodies. You will appreciatethat it would be impossible otherwise for members toparticipate in hunt activities such as Horseback Head-Juggling and Head Polo. It is with the greatest regret,therefore, that I must inform you that you do not fulfillour requirements. With very best wishes, Sir PatrickDelaney-Podmore.’ ”

Fuming, Nearly Headless Nick stuffed the letter away.

“Half an inch of skin and sinew holding my neck on,Harry! Most people would think that’s good andbeheaded, but oh, no, it’s not enough for Sir ProperlyDecapitated-Podmore. ”

Nearly Headless Nick took several deep breaths andthen said, in a far calmer tone, “So — what’sbothering you? Anything I can do?”

“No,” said Harry. “Not unless you know where we canget seven free Nimbus Two Thousand and Ones forour match against Sly —”

The rest of Harry’s sentence was drowned out by ahigh-pitched mewling from somewhere near his

Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

ankles. He looked down and found himself gazing intoa pair of lamp-like yellow eyes. It was Mrs. Norris, theskeletal gray cat who was used by the caretaker,

Argus Filch, as a sort of deputy in his endless battleagainst students.

“You’d better get out of here, Harry,” said Nickquickly. “Filch isn’t in a good mood — he’s got the fluand some third years accidentally plastered frogbrains all over the ceiling in dungeon five. He’s beencleaning all morning, and if he sees you dripping mudall over the place —”

“Right,” said Harry, backing away from the accusingstare of Mrs. Norris, but not quickly enough. Drawnto the spot by the mysterious power that seemed toconnect him with his foul cat, Argus Filch burstsuddenly through a tapestry to Harry’s right,wheezing and looking wildly about for the rule-breaker. There was a thick tartan scarf bound aroundhis head, and his nose was unusually purple.

“Filth!” he shouted, his jowls aquiver, his eyespopping alarmingly as he pointed at the muddypuddle that had dripped from Harry’s Quidditchrobes. “Mess and muck everywhere! I’ve had enoughof it, I tell you! Follow me, Potter!”

So Harry waved a gloomy good-bye to Nearly HeadlessNick and followed Filch back downstairs, doubling thenumber of muddy footprints on the floor.

Harry had never been inside Filch’s office before; itwas a place most students avoided. The room wasdingy and windowless, lit by a single oil lampdangling from the low ceiling. A faint smell of friedfish lingered about the place. Wooden filing cabinetsstood around the walls; from their labels, Harry couldsee that they contained details of every pupil FilchPage | 139 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

had ever punished. Fred and George Weasley had anentire drawer to themselves. A highly polishedcollection of chains and manacles hung on the wallbehind Filch’s desk. It was common knowledge thathe was always begging Dumbledore to let himsuspend students by their ankles from the ceiling.

Filch grabbed a quill from a pot on his desk andbegan shuffling around looking for parchment.

“Dung,” he muttered furiously, “great sizzling dragonbogies ... frog brains ... rat intestines ... I’ve hadenough of it ... make an example ... where’s the form... yes ...”

He retrieved a large roll of parchment from his deskdrawer and stretched it out in front of him, dippinghis long black quill into the ink pot.

“Name ... Harry Potter. Crime ...”

“It was only a bit of mud!” said Harry.

“It’s only a bit of mud to you, boy, but to me it’s anextra hour scrubbing!” shouted Filch, a drip shiveringunpleasantly at the end of his bulbous nose. “Crime... befouling the castle ... suggested sentence ...”

Dabbing at his streaming nose, Filch squintedunpleasantly at Harry, who waited with bated breathfor his sentence to fall.

But as Filch lowered his quill, there was a greatBANG! on the ceiling of the office, which made the oillamp rattle.

“PEEVES!” Filch roared, flinging down his quill in atransport of rage. “I’ll have you this time, I’ll haveyou!”

Page | 140 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets-J.K. Rowling

And without a backward glance at Harry, Filch ranflat-footed from the office, Mrs. Norris streakingalongside him.

Peeves was the school poltergeist, a grinning, airbornemenace who lived to cause havoc and distress. Harrydidn’t much like Peeves, but couldn’t help feelinggrateful for his timing. Hopefully, whatever Peeveshad done (and it sounded as though he’d wreckedsomething very big this time) would distract Filchfrom Harry.

Thinking that he should probably wait for Filch tocome back, Harry sank into a moth-eaten chair nextto the desk. There was only one thing on it apart fromhis half-completed form: a large, glossy, purpleenvelope with silver lettering on the front. With aquick glance at the door to check that Filch wasn’t onhis way back, Harry picked up the envelope and read:

KWIKSPELL

A Correspondence Course in Beginners’ Magic

Intrigued, Harry flicked the envelope open and pulledout the sheaf of parchment inside. More curly silverwriting on the front page said:

Feel out of step in the world of modern magic? Findyourself making excuses not to perform simple spells?Ever been taunted for your woeful wandwork?

There is an answer!

Kwikspell is an all-new, fail-safe, quick-result, easy-learn course. Hundreds of witches and wizards havebenefited from the Kwikspell method!

Madam Z. Nettles of Topsham writes:

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I had no memory for incantations and my potionswere a family joke! Now, after a Kwikspell course, I amthe center of attention at parties and friends beg for therecipe of my Scintillation Solution!”

Warlock D. J. Prod of Didsbury says:

“My wife used to sneer at my feeble charms, but onemonth into your fabulous Kwikspell course and Isucceeded in turning her into a yak!

Thank you, Kwikspell!”

Fascinated, Harry thumbed through the rest of theenvelope’s contents. Why on earth did Filch want aKwikspell course? Did this mean he wasn’t a properwizard? Harry was just reading “Lesson One: HoldingYour Wand (Some Useful Tips)” when shufflingfootsteps outside told him Filch was coming back.Stuffing the parchment back into the envelope, Harrythrew it back onto the desk just as the door opened.

Filch was looking triumphant.

“That vanishing cabinet was extremely valuable!” hewas saying gleefully to Mrs. Norris. “We’ll have Peevesout this time, my sweet —”

His eyes fell on Harry and then darted to theKwikspell envelope, which, Harry realized too late,was lying two feet away from where it had started.

Filch’s pasty face went brick red. Harry bracedhimself for a tidal wave of fury. Filch hobbled acrossto his desk, snatched up the envelope, and threw itinto a drawer.

“Have you — did you read — ?” he sputtered.

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“No,” Harry lied quickly.

Filch’s knobbly hands were twisting together.

“If I thought you’d read my private — not that it’smine — for a friend — be that as it may — however —

Harry was staring at him, alarmed; Filch had neverlooked madder. His eyes were popping, a tic wasgoing in one of his pouchy cheeks, and the tartanscarf didn’t help.

“Very well — go — and don’t breathe a word — notthat — however, if you didn’t read — go now, I have towrite up Peeves’ report — go —”

Amazed at his luck, Harry sped out of the office, upthe corridor, and back upstairs. To escape fromFilch’s office without punishment was probably somekind of school record.

“Harry! Harry! Did it work?”

Nearly Headless Nick came gliding out of a classroom.Behind him, Harry could see the wreckage of a largeblack-and-gold cabinet that appeared to have beendropped from a great height.

“I persuaded Peeves to crash it right over Filch’soffice,” said Nick eagerly. “Thought it might distracthim —”

“Was that you?” said Harry gratefully. “Yeah, itworked, I didn’t even get detention. Thanks, Nick!”

They set off up the corridor together. Nearly HeadlessNick, Harry noticed, was still holding Sir Patrick’srejection letter.

Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I wish there was something I could do for you aboutthe Headless Hunt,” Harry said.

Nearly Headless Nick stopped in his tracks and Harrywalked right through him. He wished he hadn’t; itwas like stepping through an icy shower.

“But there is something you could do for me,” saidNick excitedly. “Harry — would I be asking too much— but no, you wouldn’t want —”

“What is it?” said Harry.

“Well, this Halloween will be my five hundredthdeathday,” said Nearly Headless Nick, drawinghimself up and looking dignified.

“Oh,” said Harry, not sure whether he should looksorry or happy about this. “Right.”

“I’m holding a party down in one of the roomierdungeons. Friends will be coming from all over thecountry. It would be such an honor if you wouldattend. Mr. Weasley and Miss Granger would be mostwelcome, too, of course — but I daresay you’d rathergo to the school feast?” He watched Harry ontenterhooks.

“No,” said Harry quickly, “I’ll come —”

“My dear boy! Harry Potter, at my deathday party!And” — he hesitated, looking excited — “do you thinkyou could possibly mention to Sir Patrick how veryfrightening and impressive you find me?”

“Of — of course,” said Harry.

Nearly Headless Nick beamed at him.

Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“A deathday party?” said Hermione keenly whenHarry had changed at last and joined her and Ron inthe common room. “I bet there aren’t many livingpeople who can say they’ve been to one of those — it’llbe fascinating!”

“Why would anyone want to celebrate the day theydied?” said Ron, who was halfway through his Potionshomework and grumpy. “Sounds dead depressing tome....”

Rain was still lashing the windows, which were nowinky black, but inside all looked bright and cheerful.The firelight glowed over the countless squashyarmchairs where people sat reading, talking, doinghomework or, in the case of Fred and George Weasley,trying to find out what would happen if you fed aFilibuster firework to a salamander. Fred had“rescued” the brilliant orange, fire-dwelling lizardfrom a Care of Magical Creatures class and it wasnow smoldering gently on a table surrounded by aknot of curious people.

Harry was at the point of telling Ron and Hermioneabout Filch and the Kwikspell course when thesalamander suddenly whizzed into the air, emittingloud sparks and bangs as it whirled wildly round theroom. The sight of Percy bellowing himself hoarse atFred and George, the spectacular display of tangerinestars showering from the salamander’s mouth, and itsescape into the fire, with accompanying explosions,drove both Filch and the Kwikspell envelope fromHarry’s mind.

By the time Halloween arrived, Harry was regrettinghis rash promise to go to the deathday party. The restof the school was happily anticipating their Halloweenfeast; the Great Hall had been decorated with theusual live bats, Hagrid’s vast pumpkins had beenPage | 145 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

carved into lanterns large enough for three men to sitin, and there were rumors that Dumbledore hadbooked a troupe of dancing skeletons for theentertainment.

“A promise is a promise,” Hermione reminded Harrybossily. “You said you’d go to the deathday party.”

So at seven o’clock, Harry, Ron, and Hermione walkedstraight past the doorway to the packed Great Hall,which was glittering invitingly with gold plates andcandles, and directed their steps instead toward thedungeons.

The passageway leading to Nearly Headless Nick’sparty had been lined with candles, too, though theeffect was far from cheerful: These were long, thin,jet-black tapers, all burning bright blue, casting adim, ghostly light even over their own living faces. Thetemperature dropped with every step they took. AsHarry shivered and drew his robes tightly aroundhim, he heard what sounded like a thousandfingernails scraping an enormous blackboard.

“Is that supposed to be music?” Ron whispered. Theyturned a corner and saw Nearly Headless Nickstanding at a doorway hung with black velvet drapes.

“My dear friends,” he said mournfully. “Welcome,welcome ... so pleased you could come. ...”

He swept off his plumed hat and bowed them inside.

It was an incredible sight. The dungeon was full ofhundreds of pearly-white, translucent people, mostlydrifting around a crowded dance floor, waltzing to thedreadful, quavering sound of thirty musical saws,played by an orchestra on a raised, black-drapedplatform. A chandelier overhead blazed midnight-bluePage | 146 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

with a thousand more black candles. Their breathrose in a mist before them; it was like stepping into afreezer.

“Shall we have a look around?” Harry suggested,wanting to warm up his feet.

“Careful not to walk through anyone,” said Ronnervously, and they set off around the edge of thedance floor. They passed a group of gloomy nuns, aragged man wearing chains, and the Fat Friar, acheerful Hufflepuff ghost, who was talking to a knightwith an arrow sticking out of his forehead. Harrywasn’t surprised to see that the Bloody Baron, agaunt, staring Slytherin ghost covered in silverbloodstains, was being given a wide berth by theother ghosts.

“Oh, no,” said Hermione, stopping abruptly. “Turnback, turn back, I don’t want to talk to MoaningMyrtle —”

“Who?” said Harry as they backtracked quickly.

“She haunts one of the toilets in the girls’ bathroomon the first floor,” said Hermione.

“She haunts a toilet?”

“Yes. It’s been out-of-order all year because she keepshaving tantrums and flooding the place. I never wentin there anyway if I could avoid it; it’s awful trying tohave a pee with her wailing at you —”

“Look, food!” said Ron.

On the other side of the dungeon was a long table,also covered in black velvet. They approached iteagerly but next moment had stopped in their tracks,

Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

horrified. The smell was quite disgusting. Large,rotten fish were laid on handsome silver platters;cakes, burned charcoal-black, were heaped onsalvers; there was a great maggoty haggis, a slab ofcheese covered in furry green mold and, in pride ofplace, an enormous gray cake in the shape of atombstone, with tar-like icing forming the words,

SIR NICHOLAS DE MIMSY-PORPINGTONDIED 31 ST OCTOBER, 1492

Harry watched, amazed, as a portly ghost approachedthe table, crouched low, and walked through it, hismouth held wide so that it passed through one of thestinking salmon.

“Can you taste it if you walk through it?” Harry askedhim.

“Almost,” said the ghost sadly, and he drifted away.

“I expect they’ve let it rot to give it a stronger flavor,”said Hermione knowledgeably, pinching her nose andleaning closer to look at the putrid haggis.

“Can we move? I feel sick,” said Ron.

They had barely turned around, however, when alittle man swooped suddenly from under the table andcame to a halt in midair before them.

“Hello, Peeves,” said Harry cautiously.

Unlike the ghosts around them, Peeves the Poltergeistwas the very reverse of pale and transparent. He waswearing a bright orange party hat, a revolving bow tie,and a broad grin on his wide, wicked face.

Page | 148 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Nibbles?” he said sweetly, offering them a bowl ofpeanuts covered in fungus.

“No thanks,” said Hermione.

“Heard you talking about poor Myrtle,” said Peeves,his eyes dancing. “Rude you was about poor Myrtle.”He took a deep breath and bellowed, “OY! MYRTLE!”

“Oh, no, Peeves, don’t tell her what I said, she’ll bereally upset,” Hermione whispered frantically. “I didn’tmean it, I don’t mind her — er, hello, Myrtle.”

The squat ghost of a girl had glided over. She had theglummest face Harry had ever seen, half-hiddenbehind lank hair and thick, pearly spectacles.

“What?” she said sulkily.

“How are you, Myrtle?” said Hermione in a falselybright voice. “It’s nice to see you out of the toilet.”

Myrtle sniffed.

“Miss Granger was just talking about you —” saidPeeves slyly in Myrtle’s ear.

“Just saying — saying — how nice you look tonight,”said Hermione, glaring at Peeves.

Myrtle eyed Hermione suspiciously.

“You’re making fun of me,” she said, silver tearswelling rapidly in her small, see-through eyes.

“No — honestly — didn’t I just say how nice Myrtle’slooking?” said Hermione, nudging Harry and Ronpainfully in the ribs.

Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, yeah —”

“She did —”

“Don’t lie to me,” Myrtle gasped, tears now floodingdown her face, while Peeves chuckled happily over hershoulder. “D’you think I don’t know what people callme behind my back? Fat Myrtle! Ugly Myrtle!Miserable, moaning, moping Myrtle!”

“You’ve forgotten pimply,” Peeves hissed in her ear.

Moaning Myrtle burst into anguished sobs and fledfrom the dungeon. Peeves shot after her, pelting herwith moldy peanuts, yelling, “Pimply\ Pimplyl”

“Oh, dear,” said Hermione sadly.

Nearly Headless Nick now drifted toward themthrough the crowd.

“Enjoying yourselves?”

“Oh, yes,” they lied.

“Not a bad turnout,” said Nearly Headless Nickproudly. “The Wailing Widow came all the way upfrom Kent. ... It’s nearly time for my speech, I’d bettergo and warn the orchestra. ...”

The orchestra, however, stopped playing at that verymoment. They, and everyone else in the dungeon, fellsilent, looking around in excitement, as a huntinghorn sounded.

“Oh, here we go,” said Nearly Headless Nick bitterly.

Through the dungeon wall burst a dozen ghosthorses, each ridden by a headless horseman. The

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

assembly clapped wildly; Harry started to clap, too,but stopped quickly at the sight of Nick’s face.

The horses galloped into the middle of the dance floorand halted, rearing and plunging. At the front of thepack was a large ghost who held his bearded headunder his arm, from which position he was blowingthe horn. The ghost leapt down, lifted his head highin the air so he could see over the crowd (everyonelaughed), and strode over to Nearly Headless Nick,squashing his head back onto his neck.

“Nick!” he roared. “How are you? Head still hanging inthere?”

He gave a hearty guffaw and clapped Nearly HeadlessNick on the shoulder.

“Welcome, Patrick,” said Nick stiffly.

“Live ’uns!” said Sir Patrick, spotting Harry, Ron, andHermione and giving a huge, fake jump ofastonishment, so that his head fell off again (thecrowd howled with laughter).

“Very amusing,” said Nearly Headless Nick darkly.

“Don’t mind Nick!” shouted Sir Patrick’s head fromthe floor. “Still upset we won’t let him join the Hunt!But I mean to say — look at the fellow —”

“I think,” said Harry hurriedly, at a meaningful lookfrom Nick, “Nick’s very — frightening and — er —”

“Ha!” yelled Sir Patrick’s head. “Bet he asked you tosay that!”

“If I could have everyone’s attention, it’s time for myspeech!” said Nearly Headless Nick loudly, striding

Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

toward the podium and climbing into an icy bluespotlight.

“My late lamented lords, ladies, and gentlemen, it ismy great sorrow ...”

But nobody heard much more. Sir Patrick and therest of the Headless Hunt had just started a game ofHead Hockey and the crowd were turning to watch.Nearly Headless Nick tried vainly to recapture hisaudience, but gave up as Sir Patrick’s head wentsailing past him to loud cheers.

Harry was very cold by now, not to mention hungry.

“I can’t stand much more of this,” Ron muttered, histeeth chattering, as the orchestra ground back intoaction and the ghosts swept back onto the dancefloor.

“Let’s go,” Harry agreed.

They backed toward the door, nodding and beamingat anyone who looked at them, and a minute laterwere hurrying back up the passageway full of blackcandles.

“Pudding might not be finished yet,” said Ronhopefully, leading the way toward the steps to theentrance hall.

And then Harry heard it.

"... rip ... tear... kill ...”

It was the same voice, the same cold, murderousvoice he had heard in Lockhart’s office.

Page | 152 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

He stumbled to a halt, clutching at the stone wall,listening with all his might, looking around, squintingup and down the dimly lit passageway.

“Harry, what’re you — ?”

“It’s that voice again — shut up a minute —”

soo hungry ... for so long ...”

“Listen!” said Harry urgently, and Ron and Hermionefroze, watching him.

“... kill... time to kill ...”

The voice was growing fainter. Harry was sure it wasmoving away — moving upward. A mixture of fear andexcitement gripped him as he stared at the darkceiling; how could it be moving upward? Was it aphantom, to whom stone ceilings didn’t matter?

“This way,” he shouted, and he began to run, up thestairs, into the entrance hall. It was no good hoping tohear anything here, the babble of talk from theHalloween feast was echoing out of the Great Hall.Harry sprinted up the marble staircase to the firstfloor, Ron and Hermione clattering behind him.

“Harry, what’re we —”

“SHH!”

Harry strained his ears. Distantly, from the floorabove, and growing fainter still, he heard the voice:“...I smell blood. ...I SMELL BLOOD\”

His stomach lurched —

Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“It’s going to kill someone!” he shouted, and ignoringRon’s and Hermione’s bewildered faces, he ran up thenext flight of steps three at a time, trying to listenover his own pounding footsteps —

Harry hurtled around the whole of the second floor,Ron and Hermione panting behind him, not stoppinguntil they turned a corner into the last, desertedpassage.

“Harry, what was that all about?” said Ron, wipingsweat off his face. “I couldn’t hear anything. ...”

But Hermione gave a sudden gasp, pointing down thecorridor.

“Loo/c!”

Something was shining on the wall ahead. Theyapproached slowly, squinting through the darkness.Foot-high words had been daubed on the wallbetween two windows, shimmering in the light cast bythe flaming torches.

THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS HAS BEEN OPENED.ENEMIES OF THE HEIR, BEWARE.

“What’s that thing — hanging underneath?” said Ron,a slight quiver in his voice.

As they edged nearer, Harry almost slipped — therewas a large puddle of water on the floor; Ron andHermione grabbed him, and they inched toward themessage, eyes fixed on a dark shadow beneath it. Allthree of them realized what it was at once, and leaptbackward with a splash.

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Norris, the caretaker’s cat, was hanging by hertail from the torch bracket. She was stiff as a board,her eyes wide and staring.

For a few seconds, they didn’t move. Then Ron said,“Let’s get out of here.”

“Shouldn’t we try and help —” Harry beganawkwardly.

“Trust me,” said Ron. “We don’t want to be foundhere.”

But it was too late. A rumble, as though of distantthunder, told them that the feast had just ended.From either end of the corridor where they stoodcame the sound of hundreds of feet climbing thestairs, and the loud, happy talk of well-fed people;next moment, students were crashing into thepassage from both ends.

The chatter, the bustle, the noise died suddenly asthe people in front spotted the hanging cat. Harry,Ron, and Hermione stood alone, in the middle of thecorridor, as silence fell among the mass of studentspressing forward to see the grisly sight.

Then someone shouted through the quiet.

“Enemies of the Heir, beware! You’ll be next,Mudbloods!”

It was Draco Malfoy. He had pushed to the front ofthe crowd, his cold eyes alive, his usually bloodlessface flushed, as he grinned at the sight of thehanging, immobile cat.

Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



THE WRITING ON THE WALL

“What’s going on here? What’s going on?”

Attracted no doubt by Malfoy’s shout, Argus Filchcame shouldering his way through the crowd. Thenhe saw Mrs. Norris and fell back, clutching his face inhorror.

“My cat! My cat! What’s happened to Mrs. Norris?” heshrieked.

And his popping eyes fell on Harry.

“You!” he screeched. “You! You’ve murdered my cat!You’ve killed her! I’ll kill you! I’ll —”

“Argus'.”

Dumbledore had arrived on the scene, followed by anumber of other teachers. In seconds, he had sweptpast Harry, Ron, and Hermione and detached Mrs.Norris from the torch bracket.

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Come with me, Argus,” he said to Filch. “You, too,

Mr. Potter, Mr. Weasley, Miss Granger.”

Lockhart stepped forward eagerly.

“My office is nearest, Headmaster — just upstairs —please feel free —”

“Thank you, Gilderoy,” said Dumbledore.

The silent crowd parted to let them pass. Lockhart,looking excited and important, hurried afterDumbledore; so did Professors McGonagall andSnape.

As they entered Lockhart’s darkened office there wasa flurry of movement across the walls; Harry sawseveral of the Lockharts in the pictures dodging out ofsight, their hair in rollers. The real Lockhart lit thecandles on his desk and stood back. Dumbledore laidMrs. Norris on the polished surface and began toexamine her. Harry, Ron, and Hermione exchangedtense looks and sank into chairs outside the pool ofcandlelight, watching.

The tip of Dumbledore’s long, crooked nose wasbarely an inch from Mrs. Norris’s fur. He was lookingat her closely through his half-moon spectacles, hislong fingers gently prodding and poking. ProfessorMcGonagall was bent almost as close, her eyesnarrowed. Snape loomed behind them, half inshadow, wearing a most peculiar expression: It wasas though he was trying hard not to smile. AndLockhart was hovering around all of them, makingsuggestions.

“It was definitely a curse that killed her — probablythe Trans-mogrifian Torture — I’ve seen it used many

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

times, so unlucky I wasn’t there, I know the verycountercurse that would have saved her. ...”

Lockhart’s comments were punctuated by Filch’s dry,racking sobs. He was slumped in a chair by the desk,unable to look at Mrs. Norris, his face in his hands.Much as he detested Filch, Harry couldn’t help feelinga bit sorry for him, though not nearly as sorry as hefelt for himself. If Dumbledore believed Filch, hewould be expelled for sure.

Dumbledore was now muttering strange words underhis breath and tapping Mrs. Norris with his wand butnothing happened: She continued to look as thoughshe had been recently stuffed.

"... I remember something very similar happening inOuagadougou,” said Lockhart, “a series of attacks,the full story’s in my autobiography, I was able toprovide the townsfolk with various amulets, whichcleared the matter up at once. ...”

The photographs of Lockhart on the walls were allnodding in agreement as he talked. One of them hadforgotten to remove his hair net.

At last Dumbledore straightened up.

“She’s not dead, Argus,” he said softly.

Lockhart stopped abruptly in the middle of countingthe number of murders he had prevented.

“Not dead?” choked Filch, looking through his fingersat Mrs. Norris. “But why’s she all — all stiff andfrozen?”

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“She has been Petrified,” said Dumbledore (“Ah! Ithought so!” said Lockhart). “But how, I cannot say.

“Ask him\” shrieked Filch, turning his blotched andtearstained face to Harry.

“No second year could have done this,” saidDumbledore firmly. “It would take Dark Magic of themost advanced —”

“He did it, he did it!” Filch spat, his pouchy facepurpling. “You saw what he wrote on the wall! Hefound — in my office — he knows I’m a — I’m a —”Filch’s face worked horribly. “He knows I’m a Squib!”he finished.

“I never touched Mrs. Norris!” Harry said loudly,uncomfortably aware of everyone looking at him,including all the Lockharts on the walls. “And I don’teven know what a Squib is.”

“Rubbish!” snarled Filch. “He saw my Kwikspellletter!”

“If I might speak, Headmaster,” said Snape from theshadows, and Harry’s sense of foreboding increased;he was sure nothing Snape had to say was going todo him any good.

“Potter and his friends may have simply been in thewrong place at the wrong time,” he said, a slight sneercurling his mouth as though he doubted it. “But wedo have a set of suspicious circumstances here. Whywas he in the upstairs corridor at all? Why wasn’t heat the Halloween feast?”

Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry, Ron and Hermione all launched into anexplanation about the deathday party. "... there werehundreds of ghosts, they’ll tell you we were there —”

“But why not join the feast afterward?” said Snape,his black eyes glittering in the candlelight. “Why goup to that corridor?”

Ron and Hermione looked at Harry.

“Because — because —” Harry said, his heartthumping very fast; something told him it wouldsound very far-fetched if he told them he had been ledthere by a bodiless voice no one but he could hear,“because we were tired and wanted to go to bed,” hesaid.

“Without any supper?” said Snape, a triumphantsmile flickering across his gaunt face. “I didn’t thinkghosts provided food fit for living people at theirparties.”

“We weren’t hungry,” said Ron loudly as his stomachgave a huge rumble.

Snape’s nasty smile widened.

“I suggest, Headmaster, that Potter is not beingentirely truthful,” he said. “It might be a good idea ifhe were deprived of certain privileges until he is readyto tell us the whole story. I personally feel he shouldbe taken off the Gryffindor Quidditch team until he isready to be honest.”

“Really, Severus,” said Professor McGonagall sharply,“I see no reason to stop the boy playing Quidditch.This cat wasn’t hit over the head with a broomstick.There is no evidence at all that Potter has doneanything wrong.”

Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore was giving Harry a searching look. Histwinkling light-blue gaze made Harry feel as thoughhe were being X-rayed.

“Innocent until proven guilty, Severus,” he saidfirmly.

Snape looked furious. So did Filch.

“My cat has been Petrified!” he shrieked, his eyespopping. “I want to see some punishmenti”

“We will be able to cure her, Argus,” said Dumbledorepatiently. “Professer Sprout recently managed toprocure some Mandrakes. As soon as they havereached their full size, I will have a potion made thatwill revive Mrs. Norris.”

“I’ll make it,” Lockhart butted in. “I must have done ita hundred times. I could whip up a MandrakeRestorative Draught in my sleep —”

“Excuse me,” said Snape icily. “But I believe I am thePotions master at this school.”

There was a very awkward pause.

“You may go,” Dumbledore said to Harry, Ron, andHermione.

They went, as quickly as they could without actuallyrunning. When they were a floor up from Lockhart’soffice, they turned into an empty classroom andclosed the door quietly behind them. Harry squintedat his friends’ darkened faces.

“D’you think I should have told them about that voiceI heard?”

Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Ron, without hesitation. “Hearing voices noone else can hear isn’t a good sign, even in thewizarding world.”

Something in Ron’s voice made Harry ask, “You dobelieve me, don’t you?”

“ ’Course I do,” said Ron quickly. “But — you mustadmit it’s weird. ...”

“I know it’s weird,” said Harry. “The whole thing’sweird. What was that writing on the wall about? TheChamber Has Been Opened’. ... What’s that supposedto mean?”

“You know, it rings a sort of bell,” said Ron slowly. “Ithink someone told me a story about a secretchamber at Hogwarts once ... might’ve been Bill. ...”

“And what on earth’s a Squib?” said Harry.

To his surprise, Ron stifled a snigger.

“Well — it’s not funny really — but as it’s Filch,” hesaid. “A Squib is someone who was born into awizarding family but hasn’t got any magic powers.Kind of the opposite of Muggle-born wizards, butSquibs are quite unusual. If Filch’s trying to learnmagic from a Kwikspell course, I reckon he must be aSquib. It would explain a lot. Like why he hatesstudents so much.” Ron gave a satisfied smile. “He’sbitter.”

A clock chimed somewhere.

“Midnight,” said Harry. “We’d better get to bed beforeSnape comes along and tries to frame us forsomething else.”

Page | 162 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

For a few days, the school could talk of little else butthe attack on Mrs. Norris. Filch kept it fresh ineveryone’s minds by pacing the spot where she hadbeen attacked, as though he thought the attackermight come back. Harry had seen him scrubbing themessage on the wall with Mrs. Skower’s All-PurposeMagical Mess Remover, but to no effect; the wordsstill gleamed as brightly as ever on the stone. WhenFilch wasn’t guarding the scene of the crime, he wasskulking red-eyed through the corridors, lunging outat unsuspecting students and trying to put them indetention for things like “breathing loudly” and“looking happy.”

Ginny Weasley seemed very disturbed by Mrs.

Norris’s fate. According to Ron, she was a great catlover.

“But you haven’t really got to know Mrs. Norris,” Rontold her bracingly. “Honestly, we’re much better offwithout her.” Ginny’s lip trembled. “Stuff like thisdoesn’t often happen at Hogwarts,” Ron assured her.“They’ll catch the maniac who did it and have him outof here in no time. I just hope he’s got time to PetrifyFilch before he’s expelled. I’m only joking —” Ronadded hastily as Ginny blanched.

The attack had also had an effect on Hermione. It wasquite usual for Hermione to spend a lot of timereading, but she was now doing almost nothing else.Nor could Harry and Ron get much response from herwhen they asked what she was up to, and not untilthe following Wednesday did they find out.

Harry had been held back in Potions, where Snapehad made him stay behind to scrape tubeworms off

Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

the desks. After a hurried lunch, he went upstairs tomeet Ron in the library, and saw Justin Finch-Fletchley, the Hufflepuff boy from Herbology, comingtoward him. Harry had just opened his mouth to sayhello when Justin caught sight of him, turnedabruptly, and sped off in the opposite direction.

Harry found Ron at the back of the library, measuringhis History of Magic homework. Professor Binns hadasked for a three-foot-long composition on “TheMedieval Assembly of European Wizards.”

“I don’t believe it, I’m still eight inches short. ...” saidRon furiously, letting go of his parchment, whichsprang back into a roll. “And Hermione’s done fourfeet seven inches and her writing’s tiny.”

“Where is she?” asked Harry, grabbing the tapemeasure and unrolling his own homework.

“Somewhere over there,” said Ron, pointing along theshelves. “Looking for another book. I think she’strying to read the whole library before Christmas.”

Harry told Ron about Justin Finch-Fletchley runningaway from him.

“Dunno why you care. I thought he was a bit of anidiot,” said Ron, scribbling away, making his writingas large as possible. “All that junk about Lockhartbeing so great —”

Hermione emerged from between the bookshelves.

She looked irritable and at last seemed ready to talkto them.

“All the copies of Hogwarts, A History have been takenout,” she said, sitting down next to Harry and Ron.“And there’s a two-week waiting list. I wish I hadn’t

Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

left my copy at home, but I couldn’t fit it in my trunkwith all the Lockhart books.”

“Why do you want it?” said Harry.

“The same reason everyone else wants it,” saidHermione, “to read up on the legend of the Chamberof Secrets.”

“What’s that?” said Harry quickly.

“That’s just it. I can’t remember,” said Hermione,biting her lip. “And I can’t find the story anywhereelse —”

“Hermione, let me read your composition,” said Rondesperately, checking his watch.

“No, I won’t,” said Hermione, suddenly severe. “You’vehad ten days to finish it —”

“I only need another two inches, come on —”

The bell rang. Ron and Hermione led the way toHistory of Magic, bickering.

History of Magic was the dullest subject on theirschedule. Professor Binns, who taught it, was theironly ghost teacher, and the most exciting thing thatever happened in his classes was his entering theroom through the blackboard. Ancient and shriveled,many people said he hadn’t noticed he was dead. Hehad simply got up to teach one day and left his bodybehind him in an armchair in front of the staffroomfire; his routine had not varied in the slightest since.

Today was as boring as ever. Professor Binns openedhis notes and began to read in a flat drone like an oldvacuum cleaner until nearly everyone in the class was

Page | 165 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

in a deep stupor, occasionally coming to long enoughto copy down a name or date, then falling asleepagain. He had been speaking for half an hour whensomething happened that had never happened before.Hermione put up her hand.

Professor Binns, glancing up in the middle of a deadlydull lecture on the International Warlock Conventionof 1289, looked amazed.

“Miss — er — ?”

“Granger, Professor. I was wondering if you could tellus anything about the Chamber of Secrets,” saidHermione in a clear voice.

Dean Thomas, who had been sitting with his mouthhanging open, gazing out of the window, jerked out ofhis trance; Lavender Brown’s head came up off herarms and Neville Longbottom’s elbow slipped off hisdesk.

Professor Binns blinked.

“My subject is History of Magic,” he said in his dry,wheezy voice. “I deal with, facts, Miss Granger, notmyths and legends.” He cleared his throat with asmall noise like chalk snapping and continued, “InSeptember of that year, a subcommittee of Sardiniansorcerers —”

He stuttered to a halt. Hermione’s hand was wavingin the air again.

“Miss Grant?”

“Please, sir, don’t legends always have a basis infact?”

Page | 166 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Professor Binns was looking at her in suchamazement, Harry was sure no student had everinterrupted him before, alive or dead.

“Well,” said Professor Binns slowly, “yes, one couldargue that, I suppose.” He peered at Hermione asthough he had never seen a student properly before.“However, the legend of which you speak is such avery sensational, even ludicrous tale —”

But the whole class was now hanging on ProfessorBinns’s every word. He looked dimly at them all, everyface turned to his. Harry could tell he was completelythrown by such an unusual show of interest.

“Oh, very well,” he said slowly. “Let me see ... theChamber of Secrets ...

“You all know, of course, that Hogwarts was foundedover a thousand years ago — the precise date isuncertain — by the four greatest witches and wizardsof the age. The four school Houses are named afterthem: Godric Gryffindor, Helga Hufflepuff, RowenaRavenclaw, and Salazar Slytherin. They built thiscastle together, far from prying Muggle eyes, for it wasan age when magic was feared by common people,and witches and wizards suffered much persecution.”

He paused, gazed blearily around the room, andcontinued.

“For a few years, the founders worked in harmonytogether, seeking out youngsters who showed signs ofmagic and bringing them to the castle to be educated.But then disagreements sprang up between them. Arift began to grow between Slytherin and the others.Slytherin wished to be more selective about thestudents admitted to Hogwarts. He believed thatmagical learning should be kept within all-magicPage | 167 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

families. He disliked taking students of Muggleparentage, believing them to be untrustworthy. Aftera while, there was a serious argument on the subjectbetween Slytherin and Gryffindor, and Slytherin leftthe school.”

Professor Binns paused again, pursing his lips,looking like a wrinkled old tortoise.

“Reliable historical sources tell us this much,” hesaid. “But these honest facts have been obscured bythe fanciful legend of the Chamber of Secrets. Thestory goes that Slytherin had built a hidden chamberin the castle, of which the other founders knewnothing.

“Slytherin, according to the legend, sealed theChamber of Secrets so that none would be able toopen it until his own true heir arrived at the school.The heir alone would be able to unseal the Chamberof Secrets, unleash the horror within, and use it topurge the school of all who were unworthy to studymagic.”

There was silence as he finished telling the story, butit wasn’t the usual, sleepy silence that filled ProfessorBinns’s classes. There was unease in the air aseveryone continued to watch him, hoping for more.Professor Binns looked faintly annoyed.

“The whole thing is arrant nonsense, of course,” hesaid. “Naturally, the school has been searched forevidence of such a chamber, many times, by the mostlearned witches and wizards. It does not exist. A taletold to frighten the gullible.”

Hermione’s hand was back in the air.

Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Sir — what exactly do you mean by the ‘horrorwithin’ the Chamber?”

“That is believed to be some sort of monster, whichthe Heir of Slytherin alone can control,” said ProfessorBinns in his dry, reedy voice.

The class exchanged nervous looks.

“I tell you, the thing does not exist,” said ProfessorBinns, shuffling his notes. “There is no Chamber andno monster.”

“But, sir,” said Seamus Finnigan, “if the Chamber canonly be opened by Slytherin’s true heir, no one elsewould be able to find it, would they?”

“Nonsense, O’Flaherty,” said Professor Binns in anaggravated tone. “If a long succession of Hogwartsheadmasters and headmistresses haven’t found thething —”

“But, Professor,” piped up Parvati Patil, “you’dprobably have to use Dark Magic to open it —”

“Just because a wizard doesn’t use Dark Magicdoesn’t mean he can’t, Miss Pennyfeather,” snappedProfessor Binns. “I repeat, if the likes of Dumbledore

“But maybe you’ve got to be related to Slytherin, soDumbledore couldn’t —” began Dean Thomas, butProfessor Binns had had enough.

“That will do,” he said sharply. “It is a myth! It doesnot exist! There is not a shred of evidence thatSlytherin ever built so much as a secret broomcupboard! I regret telling you such a foolish story! We

Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

will return, if you please, to history, to solid,believable, verifiable facti”

And within five minutes, the class had sunk back intoits usual torpor.

“I always knew Salazar Slytherin was a twisted oldloony,” Ron told Harry and Hermione as they foughttheir way through the teeming corridors at the end ofthe lesson to drop off their bags before dinner. “But Inever knew he started all this pure-blood stuff. Iwouldn’t be in his House if you paid me. Honestly, ifthe Sorting Hat had tried to put me in Slytherin, I’d’vegot the train straight back home. ...”

Hermione nodded fervently, but Harry didn’t sayanything. His stomach had just droppedunpleasantly.

Harry had never told Ron and Hermione that theSorting Hat had seriously considered putting him inSlytherin. He could remember, as though it wereyesterday, the small voice that had spoken in his earwhen he’d placed the hat on his head a year before:You could be great, you know, it’s all here in yourhead, and Slytherin would help you on the way togreatness, no doubt about that. ...

But Harry, who had already heard of SlytherinHouse’s reputation for turning out Dark wizards, hadthought desperately, Not Slytherin! and the hat hadsaid, Oh, well, if you’re sure ... better be Gryffindor. ...

As they were shunted along in the throng, ColinCreevey went past.

“Hiya, Harry!”

“Hullo, Colin,” said Harry automatically.

Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Harry — Harry — a boy in my class has been sayingyou’re —”

But Colin was so small he couldn’t fight against thetide of people bearing him toward the Great Hall; theyheard him squeak, “See you, Harry!” and he wasgone.

“What’s a boy in his class saying about you?”Hermione wondered.

“That I’m Slytherin’s heir, I expect,” said Harry, hisstomach dropping another inch or so as he suddenlyremembered the way Justin Finch-Fletchley had runaway from him at lunchtime.

“People here’ll believe anything,” said Ron in disgust.

The crowd thinned and they were able to climb thenext staircase without difficulty.

“D’you really think there’s a Chamber of Secrets?”

Ron asked Hermione.

“I don’t know,” she said, frowning. “Dumbledorecouldn’t cure Mrs. Norris, and that makes me thinkthat whatever attacked her might not be — well —human.”

As she spoke, they turned a corner and foundthemselves at the end of the very corridor where theattack had happened. They stopped and looked. Thescene was just as it had been that night, except thatthere was no stiff cat hanging from the torch bracket,and an empty chair stood against the wall bearing themessage “The Chamber of Secrets Has Been Opened.”

“That’s where Filch has been keeping guard,” Ronmuttered.

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

They looked at each other. The corridor was deserted.

“Can’t hurt to have a poke around,” said Harry,dropping his bag and getting to his hands and kneesso that he could crawl along, searching for clues.

“Scorch marks!” he said. “Here — and here —”

“Come and look at this!” said Hermione. “This isfunny. ...”

Harry got up and crossed to the window next to themessage on the wall. Hermione was pointing at thetopmost pane, where around twenty spiders werescuttling, apparently fighting to get through a smallcrack. A long, silvery thread was dangling like a rope,as though they had all climbed it in their hurry to getoutside.

“Have you ever seen spiders act like that?” saidHermione wonderingly.

“No,” said Harry, “have you, Ron? Ron?”

He looked over his shoulder. Ron was standing wellback and seemed to be fighting the impulse to run.

“What’s up?” said Harry.

“I — don’t — like — spiders,” said Ron tensely.

“I never knew that,” said Hermione, looking at Ron insurprise. “You’ve used spiders in Potions loads oftimes. ...”

“I don’t mind them dead,” said Ron, who was carefullylooking anywhere but at the window. “I just don’t likethe way they move. ...”

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Hermione giggled.

“It’s not funny,” said Ron, fiercely. “If you must know,when I was three, Fred turned my — my teddy bearinto a great big filthy spider because I broke his toybroomstick. ... You wouldn’t like them either if you’dbeen holding your bear and suddenly it had too manylegs and ...”

He broke off, shuddering. Hermione was obviouslystill trying not to laugh. Feeling they had better get offthe subject, Harry said, “Remember all that water onthe floor? Where did that come from? Someone’smopped it up.”

“It was about here,” said Ron, recovering himself towalk a few paces past Filch’s chair and pointing.

“Level with this door.”

He reached for the brass doorknob but suddenlywithdrew his hand as though he’d been burned.

“What’s the matter?” said Harry.

“Can’t go in there,” said Ron gruffly. “That’s a girls’toilet.”

“Oh, Ron, there won’t be anyone in there,” saidHermione, standing up and coming over. “That’sMoaning Myrtle’s place. Come on, let’s have a look.”

And ignoring the large OUT OF ORDER sign, sheopened the door.

It was the gloomiest, most depressing bathroom Harryhad ever set foot in. Under a large, cracked, andspotted mirror were a row of chipped sinks. The floorwas damp and reflected the dull light given off by thestubs of a few candles, burning low in their holders;Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

the wooden doors to the stalls were flaking andscratched and one of them was dangling off itshinges.

Hermione put her fingers to her lips and set offtoward the end stall. When she reached it she said,“Hello, Myrtle, how are you?”

Harry and Ron went to look. Moaning Myrtle wasfloating above the tank of the toilet, picking a spot onher chin.

“This is a girls’ bathroom,” she said, eyeing Ron andHarry suspiciously. “They’re not girls.”

“No,” Hermione agreed. “I just wanted to show themhow — er — nice it is in here.”

She waved vaguely at the dirty old mirror and thedamp floor.

“Ask her if she saw anything,” Harry mouthed atHermione.

“What are you whispering?” said Myrtle, staring athim.

“Nothing,” said Harry quickly. “We wanted to ask —”

“I wish people would stop talking behind my back!”said Myrtle, in a voice choked with tears. “I do havefeelings, you know, even if I am dead —”

“Myrtle, no one wants to upset you,” said Hermione.“Harry only —”

“No one wants to upset me! That’s a good one!”howled Myrtle. “My life was nothing but misery at thisplace and now people come along ruining my death!”

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“We wanted to ask you if you’ve seen anything funnylately,” said Hermione quickly. “Because a cat wasattacked right outside your front door on Halloween.”

“Did you see anyone near here that night?” saidHarry.

“I wasn’t paying attention,” said Myrtle dramatically.“Peeves upset me so much I came in here and tried tokill myself. Then, of course, I remembered that I’m —that I’m —”

“Already dead,” said Ron helpfully.

Myrtle gave a tragic sob, rose up in the air, turnedover, and dived headfirst into the toilet, splashingwater all over them and vanishing from sight,although from the direction of her muffled sobs, shehad come to rest somewhere in the U-bend.

Harry and Ron stood with their mouths open, butHermione shrugged wearily and said, “Honestly, thatwas almost cheerful for Myrtle. ... Come on, let’s go.”

Harry had barely closed the door on Myrtle’s gurglingsobs when a loud voice made all three of them jump.

“RON!”

Percy Weasley had stopped dead at the head of thestairs, prefect badge agleam, an expression ofcomplete shock on his face.

“That’s a girls’ bathroom!” he gasped. “What were you— ?”

“Just having a look around,” Ron shrugged. “Clues,you know —”

Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Percy swelled in a manner that reminded Harryforcefully of Mrs. Weasley.

“Get — away — from — there —” Percy said, stridingtoward them and starting to bustle them along,flapping his arms. “Don’t you care what this lookslike? Coming back here while everyone’s at dinner —”

“Why shouldn’t we be here?” said Ron hotly, stoppingshort and glaring at Percy. “Listen, we never laid afinger on that cat!”

“That’s what I told Ginny,” said Percy fiercely, “butshe still seems to think you’re going to be expelled,

I’ve never seen her so upset, crying her eyes out, youmight think of her, all the first years are thoroughlyoverexcited by this business —”

“ You don’t care about Ginny,” said Ron, whose earswere now reddening. “You’re just worried I’m going tomess up your chances of being Head Boy —”

“Five points from Gryffindor!” Percy said tersely,fingering his prefect badge. “And I hope it teaches youa lesson! No more detective work, or I’ll write toMum!”

And he strode off, the back of his neck as red asRon’s ears.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione chose seats as far aspossible from Percy in the common room that night.Ron was still in a very bad temper and kept blottinghis Charms homework. When he reached absently forhis wand to remove the smudges, it ignited theparchment. Fuming almost as much as hishomework, Ron slammed The Standard Book ofPage | 176 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Spells, Grade 2 shut. To Harry’s surprise, Hermionefollowed suit.

“Who can it be, though?” she said in a quiet voice, asthough continuing a conversation they had just beenhaving. “Who’d want to frighten all the Squibs andMuggle-borns out of Hogwarts?”

“Let’s think,” said Ron in mock puzzlement. “Who dowe know who thinks Muggle-borns are scum?”

He looked at Hermione. Hermione looked back,unconvinced.

“If you’re talking about Malfoy —”

“Of course I am!” said Ron. “You heard him — ‘You’llbe next, MudbloodsV — come on, you’ve only got tolook at his foul rat face to know it’s him —”

“Malfoy, the Heir of Slytherin?” said Hermioneskeptically.

“Look at his family,” said Harry, closing his books,too. “The whole lot of them have been in Slytherin;he’s always boasting about it. They could easily beSlytherin’s descendants. His father’s definitely evilenough.”

“They could’ve had the key to the Chamber of Secretsfor centuries!” said Ron. “Handing it down, father toson. ...”

“Well,” said Hermione cautiously, “I suppose it’spossible. ...”

“But how do we prove it?” said Harry darkly.

Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“There might be a way,” said Hermione slowly,dropping her voice still further with a quick glanceacross the room at Percy. “Of course, it would bedifficult. And dangerous, very dangerous. We’d bebreaking about fifty school rules, I expect —”

“If, in a month or so, you feel like explaining, you willlet us know, won’t you?” said Ron irritably.

“All right,” said Hermione coldly. “What we’d need todo is to get inside the Slytherin common room andask Malfoy a few questions without him realizing it’sus.”

“But that’s impossible,” Harry said as Ron laughed.

“No, it’s not,” said Hermione. “All we’d need would besome Polyjuice Potion.”

“What’s that?” said Ron and Harry together.

“Snape mentioned it in class a few weeks ago —”

“D’you think we’ve got nothing better to do in Potionsthan listen to Snape?” muttered Ron.

“It transforms you into somebody else. Think about it!We could change into three of the Slytherins. No onewould know it was us. Malfoy would probably tell usanything. He’s probably boasting about it in theSlytherin common room right now, if only we couldhear him.”

“This Polyjuice stuff sounds a bit dodgy to me,” saidRon, frowning. “What if we were stuck looking likethree of the Slytherins forever?”

“It wears off after a while,” said Hermione, waving herhand impatiently. “But getting hold of the recipe will

Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

be very difficult. Snape said it was in a book calledMoste Potente Potions and it’s bound to be in theRestricted Section of the library.”

There was only one way to get out a book from theRestricted Section: You needed a signed note ofpermission from a teacher.

“Hard to see why we’d want the book, really,” saidRon, “if we weren’t going to try and make one of thepotions.”

“I think,” said Hermione, “that if we made it sound asthough we were just interested in the theory, wemight stand a chance. ...”

“Oh, come on, no teacher’s going to fall for that,” saidRon. “They’d have to be really thick. ...”

Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



THE ROGUE BLUDGER

Since the disastrous episode of the pixies, ProfessorLockhart had not brought live creatures to class.Instead, he read passages from his books to them,and sometimes reenacted some of the more dramaticbits. He usually picked Harry to help him with thesereconstructions; so far, Harry had been forced to playa simple Transylvanian villager whom Lockhart hadcured of a Babbling Curse, a yeti with a head cold,and a vampire who had been unable to eat anythingexcept lettuce since Lockhart had dealt with him.

Harry was hauled to the front of the class during theirvery next Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson, thistime acting a werewolf. If he hadn’t had a very goodreason for keeping Lockhart in a good mood, he wouldhave refused to do it.

“Nice loud howl, Harry — exactly — and then, if you’llbelieve it, I pounced — like this — slammed him tothe floor — thus — with one hand, I managed to holdhim down — with my other, I put my wand to histhroat — I then screwed up my remaining strengthPage | 180 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets-J.K. Rowling

and performed the immensely complex HomorphusCharm — he let out a piteous moan — go on, Harry —higher than that — good — the fur vanished — thefangs shrank — and he turned back into a man.Simple, yet effective — and another village willremember me forever as the hero who delivered themfrom the monthly terror of werewolf attacks.”

The bell rang and Lockhart got to his feet.

“Homework — compose a poem about my defeat ofthe Wagga Wagga Werewolf! Signed copies of MagicalMe to the author of the best one!”

The class began to leave. Harry returned to the backof the room, where Ron and Hermione were waiting.

“Ready?” Harry muttered.

“Wait till everyone’s gone,” said Hermione nervously.“All right ...”

She approached Lockhart’s desk, a piece of paperclutched tightly in her hand, Harry and Ron rightbehind her.

“Er — Professor Lockhart?” Hermione stammered. “Iwanted to — to get this book out of the library. Justfor background reading.” She held out the piece ofpaper, her hand shaking slightly. “But the thing is,it’s in the Restricted Section of the library, so I need ateacher to sign for it — I’m sure it would help meunderstand what you say in Gadding with Ghoulsabout slow-acting venoms —”

“Ah, Gadding with GhoulsV’ said Lockhart, taking thenote from Hermione and smiling widely at her.“Possibly my very favorite book. You enjoyed it?”

Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, yes,” said Hermione eagerly. “So clever, the wayyou trapped that last one with the tea-strainer —”

“Well, I’m sure no one will mind me giving the beststudent of the year a little extra help,” said Lockhartwarmly, and he pulled out an enormous peacockquill. “Yes, nice, isn’t it?” he said, misreading therevolted look on Ron’s face. “I usually save it for booksignings.”

He scrawled an enormous loopy signature on the noteand handed it back to Hermione.

“So, Harry,” said Lockhart, while Hermione folded thenote with fumbling fingers and slipped it into her bag.“Tomorrow’s the first Quidditch match of the season, Ibelieve? Gryffindor against Slytherin, is it not? I hearyou’re a useful player. I was a Seeker, too. I wasasked to try for the National Squad, but preferred todedicate my life to the eradication of the Dark Forces.Still, if ever you feel the need for a little privatetraining, don’t hesitate to ask. Always happy to passon my expertise to less able players. ...”

Harry made an indistinct noise in his throat and thenhurried off after Ron and Hermione.

“I don’t believe it,” he said as the three of themexamined the signature on the note. “He didn’t evenlook at the book we wanted.”

“That’s because he’s a brainless git,” said Ron. “Butwho cares, we’ve got what we needed —”

“He is not a brainless git,” said Hermione shrilly asthey half ran toward the library.

“Just because he said you were the best student ofthe year —”

Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

They dropped their voices as they entered the muffledstillness of the library. Madam Pince, the librarian,was a thin, irritable woman who looked like anunderfed vulture.

“Moste Potente Potions?” she repeated suspiciously,trying to take the note from Hermione; but Hermionewouldn’t let go.

“I was wondering if I could keep it,” she saidbreathlessly.

“Oh, come on,” said Ron, wrenching it from her graspand thrusting it at Madam Pince. “We’ll get youanother autograph. Lockhart’ll sign anything if itstands still long enough.”

Madam Pince held the note up to the light, as thoughdetermined to detect a forgery, but it passed the test.She stalked away between the lofty shelves andreturned several minutes later carrying a large andmoldy-looking book. Hermione put it carefully intoher bag and they left, trying not to walk too quickly orlook too guilty.

Five minutes later, they were barricaded in MoaningMyrtle’s out-of-order bathroom once again. Hermionehad overridden Ron’s objections by pointing out thatit was the last place anyone in their right mindswould go, so they were guaranteed some privacy.Moaning Myrtle was crying noisily in her stall, butthey were ignoring her, and she them.

Hermione opened Moste Potente Potions carefully, andthe three of them bent over the damp-spotted pages.

It was clear from a glance why it belonged in theRestricted Section. Some of the potions had effectsalmost too gruesome to think about, and there weresome very unpleasant illustrations, which included aPage | 183 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

man who seemed to have been turned inside out anda witch sprouting several extra pairs of arms out ofher head.

“Here it is,” said Hermione excitedly as she found thepage headed The Polyjuice Potion. It was decoratedwith drawings of people halfway through transforminginto other people. Harry sincerely hoped the artisthad imagined the looks of intense pain on their faces.

“This is the most complicated potion I’ve ever seen,”said Hermione as they scanned the recipe. “Lacewingflies, leeches, fluxweed, and knotgrass,” shemurmured, running her finger down the list ofingredients. “Well, they’re easy enough, they’re in thestudent store-cupboard, we can help ourselves. ...Oooh, look, powdered horn of a bicorn — don’t knowwhere we’re going to get that — shredded skin of aboomslang — thatll be tricky, too — and of course abit of whoever we want to change into.”

“Excuse me?” said Ron sharply. “What d’you mean, abit of whoever we’re changing into? I’m drinkingnothing with Crabbe’s toenails in it —”

Hermione continued as though she hadn’t heard him.

“We don’t have to worry about that yet, though,because we add those bits last. ...”

Ron turned, speechless, to Harry, who had anotherworry.

“D’you realize how much we’re going to have to steal,Hermione? Shredded skin of a boomslang, that’sdefinitely not in the students’ cupboard. What’re wegoing to do, break into Snape’s private stores? I don’tknow if this is a good idea. ...”

Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Hermione shut the book with a snap.

“Well, if you two are going to chicken out, fine,” shesaid. There were bright pink patches on her cheeksand her eyes were brighter than usual. “I don’t wantto break rules, you know. / think threatening Muggle-borns is far worse than brewing up a difficult potion.But if you don’t want to find out if it’s Malfoy, I’ll gostraight to Madam Pince now and hand the book backin —”

“I never thought I’d see the day when you’d bepersuading us to break rules,” said Ron. “All right,we’ll do it. But not toenails, okay?”

“How long will it take to make, anyway?” said Harryas Hermione, looking happier, opened the book again.

“Well, since the fluxweed has got to be picked at thefull moon and the lacewings have got to be stewed fortwenty-one days ... I’d say it’d be ready in about amonth, if we can get all the ingredients.”

“A month?” said Ron. “Malfoy could have attackedhalf the Muggle-borns in the school by then!” ButHermione’s eyes narrowed dangerously again, and headded swiftly, “But it’s the best plan we’ve got, so fullsteam ahead, I say.”

However, while Hermione was checking that the coastwas clear for them to leave the bathroom, Ronmuttered to Harry, “It’ll be a lot less hassle if you canjust knock Malfoy off his broom tomorrow.”

Harry woke early on Saturday morning and lay for awhile thinking about the coming Quidditch match. Hewas nervous, mainly at the thought of what Woodwould say if Gryffindor lost, but also at the idea offacing a team mounted on the fastest racing broomsPage | 185 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

gold could buy. He had never wanted to beatSlytherin so badly. After half an hour of lying therewith his insides churning, he got up, dressed, andwent down to breakfast early, where he found the restof the Gryffindor team huddled at the long, emptytable, all looking uptight and not speaking much.

As eleven o’clock approached, the whole schoolstarted to make its way down to the Quidditchstadium. It was a muggy sort of day with a hint ofthunder in the air. Ron and Hermione came hurryingover to wish Harry good luck as he entered the lockerrooms. The team pulled on their scarlet Gryffindorrobes, then sat down to listen to Wood’s usual pre-match pep talk.

“Slytherin has better brooms than us,” he began. “Nopoint denying it. But we’ve got better people on ourbrooms. We’ve trained harder than they have, we’vebeen flying in all weathers —” (“Too true,” mutteredGeorge Weasley. “I haven’t been properly dry sinceAugust”) “— and we’re going to make them rue theday they let that little bit of slime, Malfoy, buy hisway onto their team.”

Chest heaving with emotion, Wood turned to Harry.

“It’ll be down to you, Harry, to show them that aSeeker has to have something more than a richfather. Get to that Snitch before Malfoy or die trying,Harry, because we’ve got to win today, we’ve got to.”

“So no pressure, Harry,” said Fred, winking at him.

As they walked out onto the field, a roar of noisegreeted them; mainly cheers, because Ravenclaw andHufflepuff were anxious to see Slytherin beaten, butthe Slytherins in the crowd made their boos andhisses heard, too. Madam Hooch, the QuidditchPage | 186 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

teacher, asked Flint and Wood to shake hands, whichthey did, giving each other threatening stares andgripping rather harder than was necessary.

“On my whistle,” said Madam Hooch. “Three ... two ...one ...”

With a roar from the crowd to speed them upward,the fourteen players rose toward the leaden sky.

Harry flew higher than any of them, squinting aroundfor the Snitch.

“All right there, Scarhead?” yelled Malfoy, shootingunderneath him as though to show off the speed ofhis broom.

Harry had no time to reply. At that very moment, aheavy black Bludger came pelting toward him; heavoided it so narrowly that he felt it ruffle his hair asit passed.

“Close one, Harry!” said George, streaking past himwith his club in his hand, ready to knock the Bludgerback toward a Slytherin. Harry saw George give theBludger a powerful whack in the direction of AdrianPucey, but the Bludger changed direction in midairand shot straight for Harry again.

Harry dropped quickly to avoid it, and Georgemanaged to hit it hard toward Malfoy. Once again, theBludger swerved like a boomerang and shot at Harry’shead.

Harry put on a burst of speed and zoomed toward theother end of the field. He could hear the Bludgerwhistling along behind him. What was going on?Bludgers never concentrated on one player like this; itwas their job to try and unseat as many people aspossible. ...

Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Fred Weasley was waiting for the Bludger at the otherend. Harry ducked as Fred swung at the Bludger withall his might; the Bludger was knocked off course.

“Gotcha!” Fred yelled happily, but he was wrong; asthough it was magnetically attracted to Harry, theBludger pelted after him once more and Harry wasforced to fly off at full speed.

It had started to rain; Harry felt heavy drops fall ontohis face, splattering onto his glasses. He didn’t have aclue what was going on in the rest of the game untilhe heard Lee Jordan, who was commentating, say,“Slytherin lead, sixty points to zero —”

The Slytherins’ superior brooms were clearly doingtheir jobs, and meanwhile the mad Bludger was doingall it could to knock Harry out of the air. Fred andGeorge were now flying so close to him on either sidethat Harry could see nothing at all except their flailingarms and had no chance to look for the Snitch, letalone catch it.

“Someone’s — tampered — with — this — Bludger —”Fred grunted, swinging his bat with all his might at itas it launched a new attack on Harry.

“We need time out,” said George, trying to signal toWood and stop the Bludger breaking Harry’s nose atthe same time.

Wood had obviously got the message. Madam Hooch’swhistle rang out and Harry, Fred, and George divedfor the ground, still trying to avoid the mad Bludger.

“What’s going on?” said Wood as the Gryffindor teamhuddled together, while Slytherins in the crowdjeered. “We’re being flattened. Fred, George, where

Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

were you when that Bludger stopped Angelinascoring?”

“We were twenty feet above her, stopping the otherBludger from murdering Harry, Oliver,” said Georgeangrily. “Someone’s fixed it — it won’t leave Harryalone. It hasn’t gone for anyone else all game. TheSlytherins must have done something to it.”

“But the Bludgers have been locked in MadamHooch’s office since our last practice, and there wasnothing wrong with them then. ...” said Wood,anxiously.

Madam Hooch was walking toward them. Over hershoulder, Harry could see the Slytherin team jeeringand pointing in his direction.

“Listen,” said Harry as she came nearer and nearer,“with you two flying around me all the time the onlyway I’m going to catch the Snitch is if it flies up mysleeve. Go back to the rest of the team and let me dealwith the rogue one.”

“Don’t be thick,” said Fred. “It’ll take your head off.”

Wood was looking from Harry to the Weasleys.

“Oliver, this is insane,” said Alicia Spinnet angrily.“You can’t let Harry deal with that thing on his own.Let’s ask for an inquiry —”

“If we stop now, we’ll have to forfeit the match!” saidHarry. “And we’re not losing to Slytherin just becauseof a crazy Bludger! Come on, Oliver, tell them to leaveme alone!”

Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“This is all your fault,” George said angrily to Wood. “‘Get the Snitch or die trying,’ what a stupid thing totell him—”

Madam Hooch had joined them.

“Ready to resume play?” she asked Wood.

Wood looked at the determined look on Harry’s face.

“All right,” he said. “Fred, George, you heard Harry —leave him alone and let him deal with the Bludger onhis own.”

The rain was falling more heavily now. On MadamHooch’s whistle, Harry kicked hard into the air andheard the telltale whoosh of the Bludger behind him.Higher and higher Harry climbed; he looped andswooped, spiraled, zigzagged, and rolled. Slightlydizzy, he nevertheless kept his eyes wide open, rainwas speckling his glasses and ran up his nostrils ashe hung upside down, avoiding another fierce divefrom the Bludger. He could hear laughter from thecrowd; he knew he must look very stupid, but therogue Bludger was heavy and couldn’t changedirection as quickly as Harry could; he began a kindof roller-coaster ride around the edges of the stadium,squinting through the silver sheets of rain to theGryffindor goal posts, where Adrian Pucey was tryingto get past Wood —

A whistling in Harry’s ear told him the Bludger hadjust missed him again; he turned right over and spedin the opposite direction.

“Training for the ballet, Potter?” yelled Malfoy asHarry was forced to do a stupid kind of twirl in midairto dodge the Bludger, and he fled, the Bludger trailinga few feet behind him; and then, glaring back at

Page | 190 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy in hatred, he saw it — the Golden Snitch. Itwas hovering inches above Malfoy’s left ear — andMalfoy, busy laughing at Harry, hadn’t seen it.

For an agonizing moment, Harry hung in midair, notdaring to speed toward Malfoy in case he looked upand saw the Snitch.

WHAM.

He had stayed still a second too long. The Bludgerhad hit him at last, smashed into his elbow, andHarry felt his arm break. Dimly, dazed by the searingpain in his arm, he slid sideways on his rain-drenched broom, one knee still crooked over it, hisright arm dangling useless at his side — the Bludgercame pelting back for a second attack, this timeaiming at his face — Harry swerved out of the way,one idea firmly lodged in his numb brain: get toMalfoy.

Through a haze of rain and pain he dived for theshimmering, sneering face below him and saw its eyeswiden with fear: Malfoy thought Harry was attackinghim.

“What the —” he gasped, careening out of Harry’sway.

Harry took his remaining hand off his broom andmade a wild snatch; he felt his fingers close on thecold Snitch but was now only gripping the broom withhis legs, and there was a yell from the crowd below ashe headed straight for the ground, trying hard not topass out.

With a splattering thud he hit the mud and rolled offhis broom. His arm was hanging at a very strangeangle; riddled with pain, he heard, as though from a

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

distance, a good deal of whistling and shouting. Hefocused on the Snitch clutched in his good hand.

“Aha,” he said vaguely. “We’ve won.”

And he fainted.

He came around, rain falling on his face, still lying onthe field, with someone leaning over him. He saw aglitter of teeth.

“Oh, no, not you,” he moaned.

“Doesn’t know what he’s saying,” said Lockhart loudlyto the anxious crowd of Gryffindors pressing aroundthem. “Not to worry, Harry. I’m about to fix yourarm.”

“iVo!” said Harry. “I’ll keep it like this, thanks. ...”

He tried to sit up, but the pain was terrible. He hearda familiar clicking noise nearby.

“I don’t want a photo of this, Colin,” he said loudly.

“Lie back, Harry,” said Lockhart soothingly. “It’s asimple charm I’ve used countless times —”

“Why can’t I just go to the hospital wing?” said Harrythrough clenched teeth.

“He should really, Professor,” said a muddy Wood,who couldn’t help grinning even though his Seekerwas injured. “Great capture, Harry, reallyspectacular, your best yet, I’d say —”

Through the thicket of legs around him, Harryspotted Fred and George Weasley, wrestling the rogue

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Bludger into a box. It was still putting up a terrificfight.

“Stand back,” said Lockhart, who was rolling up hisjade-green sleeves.

“No — don’t —” said Harry weakly, but Lockhart wastwirling his wand and a second later had directed itstraight at Harry’s arm.

A strange and unpleasant sensation started at Harry’sshoulder and spread all the way down to hisfingertips. It felt as though his arm was beingdeflated. He didn’t dare look at what was happening.He had shut his eyes, his face turned away from hisarm, but his worst fears were realized as the peopleabove him gasped and Colin Creevey began clickingaway madly. His arm didn’t hurt anymore — nor didit feel remotely like an arm.

“Ah,” said Lockhart. “Yes. Well, that can sometimeshappen. But the point is, the bones are no longerbroken. That’s the thing to bear in mind. So, Harry,just toddle up to the hospital wing — ah, Mr.

Weasley, Miss Granger, would you escort him? — andMadam Pomfrey will be able to — er — tidy you up abit.”

As Harry got to his feet, he felt strangely lopsided.Taking a deep breath he looked down at his rightside. What he saw nearly made him pass out again.

Poking out of the end of his robes was what lookedlike a thick, flesh-colored rubber glove. He tried tomove his fingers. Nothing happened.

Lockhart hadn’t mended Harry’s bones. He hadremoved them.

Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Madam Pomfrey wasn’t at all pleased.

“You should have come straight to me!” she raged,holding up the sad, limp remainder of what, half anhour before, had been a working arm. “I can mendbones in a second — but growing them back —”

“You will be able to, won’t you?” said Harrydesperately.

“I’ll be able to, certainly, but it will be painful,” saidMadam Pomfrey grimly, throwing Harry a pair ofpajamas. “You’ll have to stay the night. ...”

Hermione waited outside the curtain drawn aroundHarry’s bed while Ron helped him into his pajamas. Ittook a while to stuff the rubbery, boneless arm into asleeve.

“How can you stick up for Lockhart now, Hermione,eh?” Ron called through the curtain as he pulledHarry’s limp fingers through the cuff. “If Harry hadwanted deboning he would have asked.”

“Anyone can make a mistake,” said Hermione. “And itdoesn’t hurt anymore, does it, Harry?”

“No,” said Harry, getting into bed. “But it doesn’t doanything else either.”

As he swung himself onto the bed, his arm flappedpointlessly.

Hermione and Madam Pomfrey came around thecurtain. Madam Pomfrey was holding a large bottle ofsomething labeled Skele-Gro.

Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“You’re in for a rough night,” she said, pouring out asteaming beakerful and handing it to him. “Regrowingbones is a nasty business.”

So was taking the Skele-Gro. It burned Harry’s mouthand throat as it went down, making him cough andsplutter. Still tut-tutting about dangerous sports andinept teachers, Madam Pomfrey retreated, leaving Ronand Hermione to help Harry gulp down some water.

“We won, though,” said Ron, a grin breaking acrosshis face. “That was some catch you made. Malfoy’sface ... he looked ready to kill. ...”

“I want to know how he fixed that Bludger,” saidHermione darkly.

“We can add that to the list of questions we’ll ask himwhen we’ve taken the Polyjuice Potion,” said Harry,sinking back onto his pillows. “I hope it tastes betterthan this stuff. ...”

“If it’s got bits of Slytherins in it? You’ve got to bejoking,” said Ron.

The door of the hospital wing burst open at thatmoment. Filthy and soaking wet, the rest of theGryffindor team had arrived to see Harry.

“Unbelievable flying, Harry,” said George. “I’ve justseen Marcus Flint yelling at Malfoy. Something abouthaving the Snitch on top of his head and not noticing.Malfoy didn’t seem too happy.”

They had brought cakes, sweets, and bottles ofpumpkin juice; they gathered around Harry’s bed andwere just getting started on what promised to be agood party when Madam Pomfrey came storming over,

Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

shouting, “This boy needs rest, he’s got thirty-threebones to regrow! Out! OUT!”

And Harry was left alone, with nothing to distract himfrom the stabbing pains in his limp arm.

Hours and hours later, Harry woke quite suddenly inthe pitch blackness and gave a small yelp of pain: Hisarm now felt full of large splinters. For a second, hethought that was what had woken him. Then, with athrill of horror, he realized that someone wassponging his forehead in the dark.

“Get off!” he said loudly, and then, “Dobby\”

The house-elf’s goggling tennis ball eyes were peeringat Harry through the darkness. A single tear wasrunning down his long, pointed nose.

“Harry Potter came back to school,” he whisperedmiserably. “Dobby warned and warned Harry Potter.Ah sir, why didn’t you heed Dobby? Why didn’t HarryPotter go back home when he missed the train?”

Harry heaved himself up on his pillows and pushedDobby’s sponge away.

“What’re you doing here?” he said. “And how did youknow I missed the train?”

Dobby’s lip trembled and Harry was seized by asudden suspicion.

“It was you!” he said slowly. “You stopped the barrierfrom letting us through!”

“Indeed yes, sir,” said Dobby, nodding his headvigorously, ears flapping. “Dobby hid and watched forHarry Potter and sealed the gateway and Dobby had

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

to iron his hands afterward” — he showed Harry tenlong, bandaged fingers — “but Dobby didn’t care, sir,for he thought Harry Potter was safe, and never didDobby dream that Harry Potter would get to schoolanother way!”

He was rocking backward and forward, shaking hisugly head.

“Dobby was so shocked when he heard Harry Potterwas back at Hogwarts, he let his master’s dinnerburn! Such a flogging Dobby never had, sir. ...”

Harry slumped back onto his pillows.

“You nearly got Ron and me expelled,” he saidfiercely. “You’d better get lost before my bones comeback, Dobby, or I might strangle you.”

Dobby smiled weakly.

“Dobby is used to death threats, sir. Dobby gets themfive times a day at home.”

He blew his nose on a corner of the filthy pillowcasehe wore, looking so pathetic that Harry felt his angerebb away in spite of himself.

“Why d’you wear that thing, Dobby?” he askedcuriously.

“This, sir?” said Dobby, plucking at the pillowcase. “Tis a mark of the house-elf’s enslavement, sir. Dobbycan only be freed if his masters present him withclothes, sir. The family is careful not to pass Dobbyeven a sock, sir, for then he would be free to leavetheir house forever.”

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Dobby mopped his bulging eyes and said suddenly,“Harry Potter must go home! Dobby thought hisBludger would be enough to make —”

“Your Bludger?” said Harry, anger rising once more.“What d’you mean, your Bludger? You made thatBludger try and kill me?”

“Not kill you, sir, never kill you!” said Dobby,shocked. “Dobby wants to save Harry Potter’s life!Better sent home, grievously injured, than remainhere, sir! Dobby only wanted Harry Potter hurtenough to be sent home!”

“Oh, is that all?” said Harry angrily. “I don’t supposeyou’re going to tell me why you wanted me sent homein pieces?”

“Ah, if Harry Potter only knew!” Dobby groaned, moretears dripping onto his ragged pillowcase. “If he knewwhat he means to us, to the lowly, the enslaved, wedregs of the magical world! Dobby remembers how itwas when He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named was at theheight of his powers, sir! We house-elves were treatedlike vermin, sir! Of course, Dobby is still treated likethat, sir,” he admitted, drying his face on thepillowcase. “But mostly, sir, life has improved for mykind since you triumphed over He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named. Harry Potter survived, and the Dark Lord’spower was broken, and it was a new dawn, sir, andHarry Potter shone like a beacon of hope for those ofus who thought the Dark days would never end, sir.

... And now, at Hogwarts, terrible things are tohappen, are perhaps happening already, and Dobbycannot let Harry Potter stay here now that history isto repeat itself, now that the Chamber of Secrets isopen once more —”

Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Dobby froze, horrors truck, then grabbed Harry’swater jug from his bedside table and cracked it overhis own head, toppling out of sight. A second later, hecrawled back onto the bed, cross-eyed, muttering,“Bad Dobby, very bad Dobby ...”

“So there is a Chamber of Secrets?” Harry whispered.“And — did you say it’s been opened before? Tell me,Dobby!”

He seized the elf’s bony wrist as Dobby’s hand inchedtoward the water jug. “But I’m not Muggle-born —how can I be in danger from the Chamber?”

“Ah, sir, ask no more, ask no more of poor Dobby,”stammered the elf, his eyes huge in the dark. “Darkdeeds are planned in this place, but Harry Pottermust not be here when they happen — go home,

Harry Potter, go home. Harry Potter must not meddlein this, sir, ’tis too dangerous —”

“Who is it, Dobby?” Harry said, keeping a firm hold onDobby’s wrist to stop him from hitting himself withthe water jug again. “Who’s opened it? Who opened itlast time?”

“Dobby can’t, sir, Dobby can’t, Dobby mustn’t tell!”squealed the elf. “Go home, Harry Potter, go home!”

“I’m not going anywhere!” said Harry fiercely. “One ofmy best friends is Muggle-born; she’ll be first in line ifthe Chamber really has been opened —”

“Harry Potter risks his own life for his friends!”moaned Dobby in a kind of miserable ecstasy. “Sonoble! So valiant! But he must save himself, he must,Harry Potter must not —”

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Dobby suddenly froze, his bat ears quivering. Harryheard it, too. There were footsteps coming down thepassageway outside.

“Dobby must go!” breathed the elf, terrified. Therewas a loud crack, and Harry’s fist was suddenlyclenched on thin air. He slumped back into bed, hiseyes on the dark doorway to the hospital wing as thefootsteps drew nearer.

Next moment, Dumbledore was backing into thedormitory, wearing a long woolly dressing gown and anightcap. He was carrying one end of what looked likea statue. Professor McGonagall appeared a secondlater, carrying its feet. Together, they heaved it onto abed.

“Get Madam Pomfrey,” whispered Dumbledore, andProfessor McGonagall hurried past the end of Harry’sbed out of sight. Harry lay quite still, pretending to beasleep. He heard urgent voices, and then ProfessorMcGonagall swept back into view, closely followed byMadam Pomfrey, who was pulling a cardigan on overher nightdress. He heard a sharp intake of breath.

“What happened?” Madam Pomfrey whispered toDumbledore, bending over the statue on the bed.

“Another attack,” said Dumbledore. “Minerva foundhim on the stairs.”

“There was a bunch of grapes next to him,” saidProfessor McGonagall. “We think he was trying tosneak up here to visit Potter.”

Harry’s stomach gave a horrible lurch. Slowly andcarefully, he raised himself a few inches so he couldlook at the statue on the bed. A ray of moonlight layacross its staring face.

Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

It was Colin Creevey. His eyes were wide and hishands were stuck up in front of him, holding hiscamera.

“Petrified?” whispered Madam Pomfrey.

“Yes,” said Professor McGonagall. “But I shudder tothink ... If Albus hadn’t been on the way downstairsfor hot chocolate — who knows what might have —”

The three of them stared down at Colin. ThenDumbledore leaned forward and wrenched thecamera out of Colin’s rigid grip.

“You don’t think he managed to get a picture of hisattacker?” said Professor McGonagall eagerly.

Dumbledore didn’t answer. He opened the back of thecamera.

“Good gracious!” said Madam Pomfrey.

A jet of steam had hissed out of the camera. Harry,three beds away, caught the acrid smell of burntplastic.

“Melted,” said Madam Pomfrey wonderingly. “Allmelted ...”

“What does this mean, Albus?” Professor McGonagallasked urgently.

“It means,” said Dumbledore, “that the Chamber ofSecrets is indeed open again.”

Madam Pomfrey clapped a hand to her mouth.Professor McGonagall stared at Dumbledore.

“But, Albus ... surely ... who?”

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“The question is not who,” said Dumbledore, his eyeson Colin. “The question is, how. ...”

And from what Harry could see of ProfessorMcGonagall’s shadowy face, she didn’t understandthis any better than he did.

Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





THE DUELING CLUB

Harry woke up on Sunday morning to find thedormitory blazing with winter sunlight and his armreboned but very stiff. He sat up quickly and lookedover at Colin’s bed, but it had been blocked from viewby the high curtains Harry had changed behindyesterday. Seeing that he was awake, Madam Pomfreycame bustling over with a breakfast tray and thenbegan bending and stretching his arm and fingers.

“All in order,” she said as he clumsily fed himselfporridge left-handed. “When you’ve finished eating,you may leave.”

Harry dressed as quickly as he could and hurried offto Gryffindor Tower, desperate to tell Ron andHermione about Colin and Dobby, but they weren’tthere. Harry left to look for them, wondering wherethey could have got to and feeling slightly hurt thatthey weren’t interested in whether he had his bonesback or not.

Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

As Harry passed the library, Percy Weasley strolledout of it, looking in far better spirits than last timethey’d met.

“Oh, hello, Harry,” he said. “Excellent flyingyesterday, really excellent. Gryffindor has just takenthe lead for the House Cup — you earned fifty points!”

“You haven’t seen Ron or Hermione, have you?” saidHarry.

“No, I haven’t,” said Percy, his smile fading. “I hopeRon’s not in another girls’ toilet ...”

Harry forced a laugh, watched Percy walk out of sight,and then headed straight for Moaning Myrtle’sbathroom. He couldn’t see why Ron and Hermionewould be in there again, but after making sure thatneither Filch nor any prefects were around, he openedthe door and heard their voices coming from a lockedstall.

“It’s me,” he said, closing the door behind him. Therewas a clunk, a splash, and a gasp from within thestall and he saw Hermione’s eye peering through thekeyhole.

“Harry\” she said. “You gave us such a fright — comein — how’s your arm?”

“Fine,” said Harry, squeezing into the stall. An oldcauldron was perched on the toilet, and a cracklingfrom under the rim told Harry they had lit a firebeneath it. Conjuring up portable, waterproof fireswas a speciality of Hermione’s.

“We’d’ve come to meet you, but we decided to getstarted on the Polyjuice Potion,” Ron explained as

Page | 204 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry, with difficulty, locked the stall again. “We’vedecided this is the safest place to hide it.”

Harry started to tell them about Colin, but Hermioneinterrupted.

“We already know — we heard Professor McGonagalltelling Professor Flitwick this morning. That’s why wedecided we’d better get going —”

“The sooner we get a confession out of Malfoy, thebetter,” snarled Ron. “D’you know what I think? Hewas in such a foul temper after the Quidditch match,he took it out on Colin.”

“There’s something else,” said Harry, watchingHermione tearing bundles of knotgrass and throwingthem into the potion. “Dobby came to visit me in themiddle of the night.”

Ron and Hermione looked up, amazed. Harry toldthem everything Dobby had told him — or hadn’t toldhim. Hermione and Ron listened with their mouthsopen.

“The Chamber of Secrets has been opened before?”Hermione said.

“This settles it,” said Ron in a triumphant voice.“Lucius Malfoy must’ve opened the Chamber when hewas at school here and now he’s told dear old Dracohow to do it. It’s obvious. Wish Dobby’d told you whatkind of monster’s in there, though. I want to knowhow come nobody’s noticed it sneaking around theschool.”

“Maybe it can make itself invisible,” said Hermione,prodding leeches to the bottom of the cauldron. “Ormaybe it can disguise itself — pretend to be a suit of

Page | 205 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

armor or something — I’ve read about ChameleonGhouls —”

“You read too much, Hermione,” said Ron, pouringdead lacewings on top of the leeches. He crumpled upthe empty lacewing bag and looked at Harry.

“So Dobby stopped us from getting on the train andbroke your arm. ...” He shook his head. “You knowwhat, Harry? If he doesn’t stop trying to save your lifehe’s going to kill you.”

k k k

The news that Colin Creevey had been attacked andwas now lying as though dead in the hospital winghad spread through the entire school by Mondaymorning. The air was suddenly thick with rumor andsuspicion. The first years were now moving aroundthe castle in tight-knit groups, as though scared theywould be attacked if they ventured forth alone.

Ginny Weasley, who sat next to Colin Creevey inCharms, was distraught, but Harry felt that Fred andGeorge were going the wrong way about cheering herup. They were taking turns covering themselves withfur or boils and jumping out at her from behindstatues. They only stopped when Percy, apoplecticwith rage, told them he was going to write to Mrs.Weasley and tell her Ginny was having nightmares.

Meanwhile, hidden from the teachers, a roaring tradein talismans, amulets, and other protective deviceswas sweeping the school. Neville Longbottom boughta large, evil-smelling green onion, a pointed purplecrystal, and a rotting newt tail before the otherGryffindor boys pointed out that he was in no danger;

Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

he was a pureblood, and therefore unlikely to beattacked.

“They went for Filch first,” Neville said, his round facefearful. “And everyone knows I’m almost a Squib.”

In the second week of December ProfessorMcGonagall came around as usual, collecting namesof those who would be staying at school forChristmas. Harry, Ron, and Hermione signed her list;they had heard that Malfoy was staying, which struckthem as very suspicious. The holidays would be theperfect time to use the Polyjuice Potion and try toworm a confession out of him.

Unfortunately, the potion was only half finished. Theystill needed the bicorn horn and the boomslang skin,and the only place they were going to get them wasfrom Snape’s private stores. Harry privately felt he’drather face Slytherin’s legendary monster than letSnape catch him robbing his office.

“What we need,” said Hermione briskly as Thursdayafternoon’s double Potions lesson loomed nearer, “is adiversion. Then one of us can sneak into Snape’soffice and take what we need.”

Harry and Ron looked at her nervously.

“I think I’d better do the actual stealing,” Hermionecontinued in a matter-of-fact tone. “You two will beexpelled if you get into any more trouble, and I’ve gota clean record. So all you need to do is cause enoughmayhem to keep Snape busy for five minutes or so.”

Harry smiled feebly. Deliberately causing mayhem inSnape’s Potions class was about as safe as poking asleeping dragon in the eye.

Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Potions lessons took place in one of the largedungeons. Thursday afternoon’s lesson proceeded inthe usual way. Twenty cauldrons stood steamingbetween the wooden desks, on which stood brassscales and jars of ingredients. Snape prowled throughthe fumes, making waspish remarks about theGryffindors’work while the Slytherins sniggeredappreciatively. Draco Malfoy, who was Snape’sfavorite student, kept flicking puffer-fish eyes at Ronand Harry, who knew that if they retaliated theywould get detention faster than you could say“Unfair.”

Harry’s Swelling Solution was far too runny, but hehad his mind on more important things. He waswaiting for Hermione’s signal, and he hardly listenedas Snape paused to sneer at his watery potion. WhenSnape turned and walked off to bully Neville,Hermione caught Harry’s eye and nodded.

Harry ducked swiftly down behind his cauldron,pulled one of Fred’s Filibuster fireworks out of hispocket, and gave it a quick prod with his wand. Thefirework began to fizz and sputter. Knowing he hadonly seconds, Harry straightened up, took aim, andlobbed it into the air; it landed right on target inGoyle’s cauldron.

Goyle’s potion exploded, showering the whole class.People shrieked as splashes of the Swelling Solutionhit them. Malfoy got a faceful and his nose began toswell like a balloon; Goyle blundered around, hishands over his eyes, which had expanded to the sizeof a dinner plate — Snape was trying to restore calmand find out what had happened. Through theconfusion, Harry saw Hermione slip quietly intoSnape’s office.

Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Silence! SILENCE!” Snape roared. “Anyone who hasbeen splashed, come here for a Deflating Draught —when I find out who did this —”

Harry tried not to laugh as he watched Malfoy hurryforward, his head drooping with the weight of a noselike a small melon. As half the class lumbered up toSnape’s desk, some weighted down with arms likeclubs, others unable to talk through gigantic puffed-up lips, Harry saw Hermione slide back into thedungeon, the front of her robes bulging.

When everyone had taken a swig of antidote and thevarious swellings had subsided, Snape swept over toGoyle’s cauldron and scooped out the twisted blackremains of the firework. There was a sudden hush.

“If I ever find out who threw this,” Snape whispered, “Ishall make sure that person is expelled.”

Harry arranged his face into what he hoped was apuzzled expression. Snape was looking right at him,and the bell that rang ten minutes later could nothave been more welcome.

“He knew it was me,” Harry told Ron and Hermione asthey hurried back to Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom. “Icould tell.”

Hermione threw the new ingredients into the cauldronand began to stir feverishly.

“It’ll be ready in two weeks,” she said happily.

“Snape can’t prove it was you,” said Ron reassuringlyto Harry. “What can he do?”

“Knowing Snape, something foul,” said Harry as thepotion frothed and bubbled.

Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

A week later, Harry, Ron, and Hermione were walkingacross the entrance hall when they saw a small knotof people gathered around the notice board, reading apiece of parchment that had just been pinned up.Seamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas beckoned themover, looking excited.

“They’re starting a Dueling Club!” said Seamus. “Firstmeeting tonight! I wouldn’t mind dueling lessons;they might come in handy one of these days. ...”

“What, you reckon Slytherin’s monster can duel?”said Ron, but he, too, read the sign with interest.

“Could be useful,” he said to Harry and Hermione asthey went into dinner. “Shall we go?”

Harry and Hermione were all for it, so at eight o’clockthat evening they hurried back to the Great Hall. Thelong dining tables had vanished and a golden stagehad appeared along one wall, lit by thousands ofcandles floating overhead. The ceiling was velvetyblack once more and most of the school seemed to bepacked beneath it, all carrying their wands andlooking excited.

“I wonder who’ll be teaching us?” said Hermione asthey edged into the chattering crowd. “Someone toldme Flitwick was a dueling champion when he wasyoung — maybe it’ll be him.”

“As long as it’s not —” Harry began, but he ended ona groan: Gilderoy Lockhart was walking onto thestage, resplendent in robes of deep plum andaccompanied by none other than Snape, wearing hisusual black.

Page | 210 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Lockhart waved an arm for silence and called,

“Gather round, gather round! Can everyone see me?Can you all hear me? Excellent!

“Now, Professor Dumbledore has granted mepermission to start this little dueling club, to trainyou all in case you ever need to defend yourselves as Imyself have done on countless occasions — for fulldetails, see my published works.

“Let me introduce my assistant, Professor Snape,”said Lockhart, flashing a wide smile. “He tells me heknows a tiny little bit about dueling himself and hassportingly agreed to help me with a shortdemonstration before we begin. Now, I don’t want anyof you youngsters to worry — you’ll still have yourPotions master when I’m through with him, neverfear!”

“Wouldn’t it be good if they finished each other off?”Ron muttered in Harry’s ear.

Snape’s upper lip was curling. Harry wondered whyLockhart was still smiling; if Snape had been lookingat him like that he’d have been running as fast as hecould in the opposite direction.

Lockhart and Snape turned to face each other andbowed; at least, Lockhart did, with much twirling ofhis hands, whereas Snape jerked his head irritably.Then they raised their wands like swords in front ofthem.

“As you see, we are holding our wands in theaccepted combative position,” Lockhart told the silentcrowd. “On the count of three, we will cast our firstspells. Neither of us will be aiming to kill, of course.”

Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I wouldn’t bet on that,” Harry murmured, watchingSnape baring his teeth.

“One — two — three —”

Both of them swung their wands above their headsand pointed them at their opponent; Snape cried:

“ExpelliarmusV’ There was a dazzling flash of scarletlight and Lockhart was blasted off his feet: He flewbackward off the stage, smashed into the wall, andslid down it to sprawl on the floor.

Malfoy and some of the other Slytherins cheered.Hermione was dancing on tiptoes. “Do you think he’sall right?” she squealed through her fingers.

“Who cares?” said Harry and Ron together.

Lockhart was getting unsteadily to his feet. His hathad fallen off and his wavy hair was standing on end.

“Well, there you have it!” he said, tottering back ontothe platform. “That was a Disarming Charm — as yousee, I’ve lost my wand — ah, thank you, Miss Brown— yes, an excellent idea to show them that, ProfessorSnape, but if you don’t mind my saying so, it was veryobvious what you were about to do. If I had wanted tostop you it would have been only too easy — however,

I felt it would be instructive to let them see ...”

Snape was looking murderous. Possibly Lockhart hadnoticed, because he said, “Enough demonstrating! I’mgoing to come amongst you now and put you all intopairs. Professor Snape, if you’d like to help me —”

They moved through the crowd, matching uppartners. Lockhart teamed Neville with Justin Finch-Fletchley, but Snape reached Harry and Ron first.

Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Time to split up the dream team, I think,” hesneered. “Weasley, you can partner Finnigan. Potter

Harry moved automatically toward Hermione.

“I don’t think so,” said Snape, smiling coldly. “Mr.Malfoy, come over here. Let’s see what you make ofthe famous Potter. And you, Miss Granger — you canpartner Miss Bulstrode.”

Malfoy strutted over, smirking. Behind him walked aSlytherin girl who reminded Harry of a picture he’dseen in Holidays with Hags. She was large and squareand her heavy jaw jutted aggressively. Hermione gaveher a weak smile that she did not return.

“Face your partners!” called Lockhart, back on theplatform. “And bow!”

Harry and Malfoy barely inclined their heads, nottaking their eyes off each other.

“Wands at the ready!” shouted Lockhart. “When Icount to three, cast your charms to disarm youropponents — only to disarm them — we don’t wantany accidents — one ... two ... three —”

Harry swung his wand high, but Malfoy had alreadystarted on “two”: His spell hit Harry so hard he felt asthough he’d been hit over the head with a saucepan.He stumbled, but everything still seemed to beworking, and wasting no more time, Harry pointed hiswand straight at Malfoy and shouted, “Rictusempral”

A jet of silver light hit Malfoy in the stomach and hedoubled up, wheezing.

Page | 213 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I said disarm only\” Lockhart shouted in alarm overthe heads of the battling crowd, as Malfoy sank to hisknees; Harry had hit him with a Tickling Charm, andhe could barely move for laughing. Harry hung back,with a vague feeling it would be unsporting to bewitchMalfoy while he was on the floor, but this was amistake; gasping for breath, Malfoy pointed his wandat Harry’s knees, choked, “Tarantallegral” and thenext second Harry’s legs began to jerk around out ofhis control in a kind of quickstep.

“Stop! Stop!” screamed Lockhart, but Snape tookcharge.

“Finite Incantatem\” he shouted; Harry’s feet stoppeddancing, Malfoy stopped laughing, and they were ableto look up.

A haze of greenish smoke was hovering over thescene. Both Neville and Justin were lying on the floor,panting; Ron was holding up an ashen-faced Seamus,apologizing for whatever his broken wand had done;but Hermione and Millicent Bulstrode were stillmoving; Millicent had Hermione in a headlock andHermione was whimpering in pain; both their wandslay forgotten on the floor. Harry leapt forward andpulled Millicent off. It was difficult: She was a lotbigger than he was.

“Dear, dear,” said Lockhart, skittering through thecrowd, looking at the aftermath of the duels. “Up yougo, Macmillan. ... Careful there, Miss Fawcett. ...Pinch it hard, it’ll stop bleeding in a second, Boot —

“I think I’d better teach you how to block unfriendlyspells,” said Lockhart, standing flustered in the midstof the hall. He glanced at Snape, whose black eyesglinted, and looked quickly away. “Let’s have a

Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

volunteer pair — Longbottom and Finch-Fletchley,how about you —”

“A bad idea, Professor Lockhart,” said Snape, glidingover like a large and malevolent bat. “Longbottomcauses devastation with the simplest spells. We’ll besending what’s left of Finch-Fletchley up to thehospital wing in a matchbox.” Neville’s round, pinkface went pinker. “How about Malfoy and Potter?”said Snape with a twisted smile.

“Excellent idea!” said Lockhart, gesturing Harry andMalfoy into the middle of the hall as the crowd backedaway to give them room.

“Now, Harry,” said Lockhart. “When Draco points hiswand at you, you do this.”

He raised his own wand, attempted a complicatedsort of wiggling action, and dropped it. Snape smirkedas Lockhart quickly picked it up, saying, “Whoops —my wand is a little overexcited —”

Snape moved closer to Malfoy, bent down, andwhispered something in his ear. Malfoy smirked, too.Harry looked up nervously at Lockhart and said,“Professor, could you show me that blocking thingagain?”

“Scared?” muttered Malfoy, so that Lockhart couldn’thear him.

“You wish,” said Harry out of the corner of his mouth.

Lockhart cuffed Harry merrily on the shoulder. “Justdo what I did, Harry!”

“What, drop my wand?”

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

But Lockhart wasn’t listening.

“Three — two — one — go!” he shouted.

Malfoy raised his wand quickly and bellowed,

“ Serpensortial”

The end of his wand exploded. Harry watched, aghast,as a long black snake shot out of it, fell heavily ontothe floor between them, and raised itself, ready tostrike. There were screams as the crowd backedswiftly away, clearing the floor.

“Don’t move, Potter,” said Snape lazily, clearlyenjoying the sight of Harry standing motionless, eyeto eye with the angry snake. “I’ll get rid of it. ...”

“Allow me!” shouted Lockhart. He brandished hiswand at the snake and there was a loud bang; thesnake, instead of vanishing, flew ten feet into the airand fell back to the floor with a loud smack. Enraged,hissing furiously, it slithered straight toward JustinFinch-Fletchley and raised itself again, fangs exposed,poised to strike.

Harry wasn’t sure what made him do it. He wasn’teven aware of deciding to do it. All he knew was thathis legs were carrying him forward as though he wason casters and that he had shouted stupidly at thesnake, “Leave him alone!” And miraculously —inexplicably — the snake slumped to the floor, docileas a thick, black garden hose, its eyes now on Harry.Harry felt the fear drain out of him. He knew thesnake wouldn’t attack anyone now, though how heknew it, he couldn’t have explained.

He looked up at Justin, grinning, expecting to seeJustin looking relieved, or puzzled, or even grateful —but certainly not angry and scared.

Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“What do you think you’re playing at?” he shouted,and before Harry could say anything, Justin hadturned and stormed out of the hall.

Snape stepped forward, waved his wand, and thesnake vanished in a small puff of black smoke.

Snape, too, was looking at Harry in an unexpectedway: It was a shrewd and calculating look, and Harrydidn’t like it. He was also dimly aware of an ominousmuttering all around the walls. Then he felt a tuggingon the back of his robes.

“Come on,” said Ron’s voice in his ear. “Move — comeon—”

Ron steered him out of the hall, Hermione hurryingalongside them. As they went through the doors, thepeople on either side drew away as though they werefrightened of catching something. Harry didn’t have aclue what was going on, and neither Ron norHermione explained anything until they had draggedhim all the way up to the empty Gryffindor commonroom. Then Ron pushed Harry into an armchair andsaid, “You’re a Parselmouth. Why didn’t you tell us?”

“I’m a what?” said Harry.

“A Parselmouth.!” said Ron. “You can talk to snakes!”

“I know,” said Harry. “I mean, that’s only the secondtime I’ve ever done it. I accidentally set a boaconstrictor on my cousin Dudley at the zoo once —long story — but it was telling me it had never seenBrazil and I sort of set it free without meaning to —that was before I knew I was a wizard —”

“A boa constrictor told you it had never seen Brazil?”Ron repeated faintly.

Page | 217 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“So?” said Harry. “I bet loads of people here can do it.”

“Oh, no they can’t,” said Ron. “It’s not a very commongift. Harry, this is bad.”

“What’s bad?” said Harry, starting to feel quite angry.“What’s wrong with everyone? Listen, if I hadn’t toldthat snake not to attack Justin —”

“Oh, that’s what you said to it?”

“What d’you mean? You were there — you heard me

“I heard you speaking Parseltongue,” said Ron.

“Snake language. You could have been sayinganything — no wonder Justin panicked, you soundedlike you were egging the snake on or something — itwas creepy, you know —”

Harry gaped at him.

“I spoke a different language? But — I didn’t realize —how can I speak a language without knowing I canspeak it?”

Ron shook his head. Both he and Hermione werelooking as though someone had died. Harry couldn’tsee what was so terrible.

“D’you want to tell me what’s wrong with stopping amassive snake biting off Justin’s head?” he said.“What does it matter how I did it as long as Justindoesn’t have to join the Headless Hunt?”

“It matters,” said Hermione, speaking at last in ahushed voice, “because being able to talk to snakeswas what Salazar Slytherin was famous for. That’swhy the symbol of Slytherin House is a serpent.”

Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s mouth fell open.

“Exactly,” said Ron. “And now the whole school’sgoing to think you’re his great-great-great-great-grandson or something —”

“But I’m not,” said Harry, with a panic he couldn’tquite explain.

“You’ll find that hard to prove,” said Hermione. “Helived about a thousand years ago; for all we know,you could be.”

•k k k

Harry lay awake for hours that night. Through a gapin the curtains around his four-poster he watchedsnow starting to drift past the tower window andwondered ...

Could he be a descendant of Salazar Slytherin? Hedidn’t know anything about his father’s family, afterall. The Dursleys had always forbidden questionsabout his wizarding relatives.

Quietly, Harry tried to say something in Parseltongue.The words wouldn’t come. It seemed he had to beface-to-face with a snake to do it.

But I’m in Gryffindor, Harry thought. The Sorting Hatwouldn’t have put me in here if I had Slytherin blood.

Ah, said a nasty little voice in his brain, but theSorting Hat wanted to put you in Slytherin, don’t youremember?

Harry turned over. He’d see Justin the next day inHerbology and he’d explain that he’d been calling the

Page | 219 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

snake off, not egging it on, which (he thought angrily,pummeling his pillow) any fool should have realized.

By next morning, however, the snow that had begunin the night had turned into a blizzard so thick thatthe last Herbology lesson of the term was canceled:Professor Sprout wanted to fit socks and scarves onthe Mandrakes, a tricky operation she would entrustto no one else, now that it was so important for theMandrakes to grow quickly and revive Mrs. Norris andColin Creevey.

Harry fretted about this next to the fire in theGryffindor common room, while Ron and Hermioneused their time off to play a game of wizard chess.

“For heaven’s sake, Harry,” said Hermione,exasperated, as one of Ron’s bishops wrestled herknight off his horse and dragged him off the board.

“Go and find Justin if it’s so important to you.”

So Harry got up and left through the portrait hole,wondering where Justin might be.

The castle was darker than it usually was in daytimebecause of the thick, swirling gray snow at everywindow. Shivering, Harry walked past classroomswhere lessons were taking place, catching snatches ofwhat was happening within. Professor McGonagallwas shouting at someone who, by the sound of it, hadturned his friend into a badger. Resisting the urge totake a look, Harry walked on by, thinking that Justinmight be using his free time to catch up on somework, and deciding to check the library first.

A group of the Hufflepuffs who should have been inHerbology were indeed sitting at the back of thelibrary, but they didn’t seem to be working. Betweenthe long lines of high bookshelves, Harry could see

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

that their heads were close together and they werehaving what looked like an absorbing conversation.He couldn’t see whether Justin was among them. Hewas walking toward them when something of whatthey were saying met his ears, and he paused tolisten, hidden in the Invisibility section.

“So anyway,” a stout boy was saying, “I told Justin tohide up in our dormitory. I mean to say, if Potter’smarked him down as his next victim, it’s best if hekeeps a low profile for a while. Of course, Justin’sbeen waiting for something like this to happen eversince he let slip to Potter he was Muggle-born. Justinactually told him he’d been down for Eton. That’s notthe kind of thing you bandy about with Slytherin’sheir on the loose, is it?”

“You definitely think it is Potter, then, Ernie?” said agirl with blonde pigtails anxiously.

“Hannah,” said the stout boy solemnly, “he’s aParselmouth. Everyone knows that’s the mark of aDark wizard. Have you ever heard of a decent onewho could talk to snakes? They called Slytherinhimself Serpent-tongue.”

There was some heavy murmuring at this, and Erniewent on, “Remember what was written on the wall?Enemies of the Heir, Beware. Potter had some sort ofrun-in with Filch. Next thing we know, Filch’s cat’sattacked. That first year, Creevey, was annoyingPotter at the Quidditch match, taking pictures of himwhile he was lying in the mud. Next thing we know —Creevey’s been attacked.”

“He always seems so nice, though,” said Hannahuncertainly, “and, well, he’s the one who made You-Know-Who disappear. He can’t be all bad, can he?”

Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ernie lowered his voice mysteriously, the Hufflepuffsbent closer, and Harry edged nearer so that he couldcatch Ernie’s words.

“No one knows how he survived that attack by You-Know-Who. I mean to say, he was only a baby when ithappened. He should have been blasted intosmithereens. Only a really powerful Dark wizardcould have survived a curse like that.” He dropped hisvoice until it was barely more than a whisper, andsaid, “That’s probably why You-Know-Who wanted tokill him in the first place. Didn’t want another DarkLord competing with him. I wonder what other powersPotter’s been hiding?”

Harry couldn’t take anymore. Clearing his throatloudly, he stepped out from behind the bookshelves.

If he hadn’t been feeling so angry, he would havefound the sight that greeted him funny: Every one ofthe Hufflepuffs looked as though they had beenPetrified by the sight of him, and the color wasdraining out of Ernie’s face.

“Hello,” said Harry. “I’m looking for Justin Finch-Fletchley.”

The Hufflepuffs’ worst fears had clearly beenconfirmed. They all looked fearfully at Ernie.

“What do you want with him?” said Ernie in aquavering voice.

“I wanted to tell him what really happened with thatsnake at the Dueling Club,” said Harry.

Ernie bit his white lips and then, taking a deepbreath, said, “We were all there. We saw whathappened.”

Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Then you noticed that after I spoke to it, the snakebacked off?” said Harry.

“All I saw,” said Ernie stubbornly, though he wastrembling as he spoke, “was you speakingParseltongue and chasing the snake toward Justin.”

“I didn’t chase it at him!” Harry said, his voiceshaking with anger. “It didn’t even touch him!”

“It was a very near miss,” said Ernie. “And in caseyou’re getting ideas,” he added hastily, “I might tellyou that you can trace my family back through ninegenerations of witches and warlocks and my blood’sas pure as anyone’s, so —”

“I don’t care what sort of blood you’ve got!” said Harryfiercely. “Why would I want to attack Muggle-borns?”

“I’ve heard you hate those Muggles you live with,” saidErnie swiftly.

“It’s not possible to live with the Dursleys and nothate them,” said Harry. “I’d like to see you try it.”

He turned on his heel and stormed out of the library,earning himself a reproving glare from Madam Pince,who was polishing the gilded cover of a largespellbook.

Harry blundered up the corridor, barely noticingwhere he was going, he was in such a fury. The resultwas that he walked into something very large andsolid, which knocked him backward onto the floor.

“Oh, hello, Hagrid,” Harry said, looking up.

Hagrid’s face was entirely hidden by a woolly, snow-covered balaclava, but it couldn’t possibly be anyone

Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

else, as he filled most of the corridor in his moleskinovercoat. A dead rooster was hanging from one of hismassive, gloved hands.

“All righ’, Harry?” he said, pulling up the balaclava sohe could speak. “Why aren’t yeh in class?”

“Canceled,” said Harry, getting up. “What’re you doingin here?”

Hagrid held up the limp rooster.

“Second one killed this term,” he explained. “It’seither foxes or a Blood-Suckin’ Bugbear, an’ I needthe headmaster’s permission ter put a charm aroundthe hen coop.”

He peered more closely at Harry from under his thick,snow-flecked eyebrows.

“Yeh sure yeh’re all righ’? Yeh look all hot an’bothered —”

Harry couldn’t bring himself to repeat what Ernie andthe rest of the Hufflepuffs had been saying about him.

“It’s nothing,” he said. “I’d better get going, Hagrid, it’sTransfiguration next and I’ve got to pick up mybooks.”

He walked off, his mind still full of what Ernie hadsaid about him.

“Justin’s been waiting for something like this tohappen ever since he let slip to Potter he was Muggle-born. ...”

Harry stamped up the stairs and turned alonganother corridor, which was particularly dark; the

Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

torches had been extinguished by a strong, icy draftthat was blowing through a loose windowpane. Hewas halfway down the passage when he trippedheadlong over something lying on the floor.

He turned to squint at what he’d fallen over and feltas though his stomach had dissolved.

Justin Finch-Fletchley was lying on the floor, rigidand cold, a look of shock frozen on his face, his eyesstaring blankly at the ceiling. And that wasn’t all.

Next to him was another figure, the strangest sightHarry had ever seen.

It was Nearly Headless Nick, no longer pearly-whiteand transparent, but black and smoky, floatingimmobile and horizontal, six inches off the floor. Hishead was half off and his face wore an expression ofshock identical to Justin’s.

Harry got to his feet, his breathing fast and shallow,his heart doing a kind of drumroll against his ribs. Helooked wildly up and down the deserted corridor andsaw a line of spiders scuttling as fast as they couldaway from the bodies. The only sounds were themuffled voices of teachers from the classes on eitherside.

He could run, and no one would ever know he hadbeen there. But he couldn’t just leave them lyinghere. ... He had to get help. ... Would anyone believehe hadn’t had anything to do with this?

As he stood there, panicking, a door right next to himopened with a bang. Peeves the Poltergeist cameshooting out.

Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Why, it’s potty wee Potter!” cackled Peeves, knockingHarry’s glasses askew as he bounced past him.“What’s Potter up to? Why’s Potter lurking —”

Peeves stopped, halfway through a midair somersault.Upside down, he spotted Justin and Nearly HeadlessNick. He flipped the right way up, filled his lungs and,before Harry could stop him, screamed, “ATTACK!ATTACK! ANOTHER ATTACK! NO MORTAL ORGHOST IS SAFE! RUN FOR YOUR LIVES!ATTAAAACK!”

Crash — crash — crash — door after door flew openalong the corridor and people flooded out. For severallong minutes, there was a scene of such confusionthat Justin was in danger of being squashed andpeople kept standing in Nearly Headless Nick. Harryfound himself pinned against the wall as the teachersshouted for quiet. Professor McGonagall camerunning, followed by her own class, one of whom stillhad black-and-white-striped hair. She used her wandto set off a loud bang, which restored silence, andordered everyone back into their classes. No soonerhad the scene cleared somewhat than Ernie theHufflepuff arrived, panting, on the scene.

“Caught in the act!” Ernie yelled, his face stark white,pointing his finger dramatically at Harry.

“That will do, Macmillan!” said Professor McGonagallsharply.

Peeves was bobbing overhead, now grinning wickedly,surveying the scene; Peeves always loved chaos. Asthe teachers bent over Justin and Nearly HeadlessNick, examining them, Peeves broke into song:

“Oh, Potter, you rotter, oh, what have you done,

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

You’re killing off students, you think it’s good fun —”

“That’s enough, Peeves!” barked ProfessorMcGonagall, and Peeves zoomed away backward, withhis tongue out at Harry.

Justin was carried up to the hospital wing byProfessor Flitwick and Professor Sinistra of theAstronomy department, but nobody seemed to knowwhat to do for Nearly Headless Nick. In the end,Professor McGonagall conjured a large fan out of thinair, which she gave to Ernie with instructions to waftNearly Headless Nick up the stairs. This Ernie did,fanning Nick along like a silent black hovercraft. Thisleft Harry and Professor McGonagall alone together.

“This way, Potter,” she said.

“Professor,” said Harry at once, “I swear I didn’t —”

“This is out of my hands, Potter,” said ProfessorMcGonagall curtly.

They marched in silence around a corner and shestopped before a large and extremely ugly stonegargoyle.

“Lemon drop!” she said. This was evidently apassword, because the gargoyle sprang suddenly tolife and hopped aside as the wall behind him split intwo. Even full of dread for what was coming, Harrycouldn’t fail to be amazed. Behind the wall was aspiral staircase that was moving smoothly upward,like an escalator. As he and Professor McGonagallstepped onto it, Harry heard the wall thud closedbehind them. They rose upward in circles, higher andhigher, until at last, slightly dizzy, Harry saw agleaming oak door ahead, with a brass knocker in theshape of a griffin.

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

He knew now where he was being taken. This must bewhere Dumbledore lived.

Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



THE POLY JUICE POTION

They stepped off the stone staircase at the top, andProfessor McGonagall rapped on the door. It openedsilently and they entered. Professor McGonagall toldHarry to wait and left him there, alone.

Harry looked around. One thing was certain: of all theteachers’ offices Harry had visited so far this year,Dumbledore’s was by far the most interesting. If hehadn’t been scared out of his wits that he was aboutto be thrown out of school, he would have been verypleased to have a chance to look around it.

It was a large and beautiful circular room, full offunny little noises. A number of curious silverinstruments stood on spindle-legged tables, whirringand emitting little puffs of smoke. The walls werecovered with portraits of old headmasters andheadmistresses, all of whom were snoozing gently intheir frames. There was also an enormous, claw-footed desk, and, sitting on a shelf behind it, ashabby, tattered wizard’s hat — the Sorting Hat

Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry hesitated. He cast a wary eye around thesleeping witches and wizards on the walls. Surely itcouldn’t hurt if he took the hat down and tried it onagain? Just to see ... just to make sure it had put himin the right House —

He walked quietly around the desk, lifted the hat fromits shelf, and lowered it slowly onto his head. It wasmuch too large and slipped down over his eyes, justas it had done the last time he’d put it on. Harrystared at the black inside of the hat, waiting. Then asmall voice said in his ear, “Bee in your bonnet, HarryPotter?”

“Er, yes,” Harry muttered. “Er — sorry to bother you— I wanted to ask —”

“You’ve been wondering whether I put you in the rightHouse,” said the hat smartly. “Yes ... you wereparticularly difficult to place. But I stand by what Isaid before” — Harry’s heart leapt — “you would havedone well in Slytherin —”

Harry’s stomach plummeted. He grabbed the point ofthe hat and pulled it off. It hung limply in his hand,grubby and faded. Harry pushed it back onto itsshelf, feeling sick.

“You’re wrong,” he said aloud to the still and silenthat. It didn’t move. Harry backed away, watching it.Then a strange, gagging noise behind him made himwheel around.

He wasn’t alone after all. Standing on a golden perchbehind the door was a decrepit-looking bird thatresembled a half-plucked turkey. Harry stared at itand the bird looked balefully back, making its gaggingnoise again. Harry thought it looked very ill. Its eyes

Page | 230 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

were dull and, even as Harry watched, a couple morefeathers fell out of its tail.

Harry was just thinking that all he needed was forDumbledore’s pet bird to die while he was alone inthe office with it, when the bird burst into flames.

Harry yelled in shock and backed away into the desk.He looked feverishly around in case there was a glassof water somewhere but couldn’t see one; the bird,meanwhile, had become a fireball; it gave one loudshriek and next second there was nothing but asmoldering pile of ash on the floor.

The office door opened. Dumbledore came in, lookingvery somber.

“Professor,” Harry gasped. “Your bird — I couldn’t doanything — he just caught fire —”

To Harry’s astonishment, Dumbledore smiled.

“About time, too,” he said. “He’s been looking dreadfulfor days; I’ve been telling him to get a move on.”

He chuckled at the stunned look on Harry’s face.

“Fawkes is a phoenix, Harry. Phoenixes burst intoflame when it is time for them to die and are rebornfrom the ashes. Watch him ...”

Harry looked down in time to see a tiny, wrinkled,newborn bird poke its head out of the ashes. It wasquite as ugly as the old one.

“It’s a shame you had to see him on a Burning Day,”said Dumbledore, seating himself behind his desk.“He’s really very handsome most of the time,wonderful red and gold plumage. Fascinating

Page | 231 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

creatures, phoenixes. They can carry immenselyheavy loads, their tears have healing powers, andthey make highly faithful pets.”

In the shock of Fawkes catching fire, Harry hadforgotten what he was there for, but it all came backto him as Dumbledore settled himself in the highchair behind the desk and fixed Harry with hispenetrating, light-blue stare.

Before Dumbledore could speak another word,however, the door of the office flew open with analmighty bang and Hagrid burst in, a wild look in hiseyes, his balaclava perched on top of his shaggy blackhead and the dead rooster still swinging from hishand.

“It wasn’ Harry, Professor Dumbledore!” said Hagridurgently. “I was talkin’ ter him seconds before thatkid was found, he never had time, sir —”

Dumbledore tried to say something, but Hagrid wentranting on, waving the rooster around in hisagitation, sending feathers everywhere.

“— it can’t’ve bin him, I’ll swear it in front o’ theMinistry o’ Magic if I have to —”

“Hagrid, I —”

“— yeh’ve got the wrong boy, sir, I know Harry never

“Hagridl” said Dumbledore loudly. “I do not think thatHarry attacked those people.”

“Oh,” said Hagrid, the rooster falling limply at hisside. “Right. I’ll wait outside then, Headmaster.”

Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

And he stomped out looking embarrassed.

“You don’t think it was me, Professor?” Harryrepeated hopefully as Dumbledore brushed roosterfeathers off his desk.

“No, Harry, I don’t,” said Dumbledore, though his facewas somber again. “But I still want to talk to you.”

Harry waited nervously while Dumbledore consideredhim, the tips of his long fingers together.

“I must ask you, Harry, whether there is anythingyou’d like to tell me,” he said gently. “Anything at all.”

Harry didn’t know what to say. He thought of Malfoyshouting, “You’ll be next, Mudbloods!” and of thePolyjuice Potion simmering away in Moaning Myrtle’sbathroom. Then he thought of the disembodied voicehe had heard twice and remembered what Ron hadsaid: “Hearing voices no one else can hear isn’t a goodsign, even in the wizarding world.” He thought, too,about what everyone was saying about him, and hisgrowing dread that he was somehow connected withSalazar Slytherin. ...

“No,” said Harry. “There isn’t anything, Professor. ...”

The double attack on Justin and Nearly HeadlessNick turned what had hitherto been nervousness intoreal panic. Curiously, it was Nearly Headless Nick’sfate that seemed to worry people most. What couldpossibly do that to a ghost? people asked each other;what terrible power could harm someone who wasalready dead? There was almost a stampede to bookseats on the Hogwarts Express so that students couldgo home for Christmas.

Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“At this rate, well be the only ones left,” Ron toldHarry and Hermione. “Us, Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle.What a jolly holiday it’s going to be.”

Crabbe and Goyle, who always did whatever Malfoydid, had signed up to stay over the holidays, too. ButHarry was glad that most people were leaving. He wastired of people skirting around him in the corridors,as though he were about to sprout fangs or spitpoison; tired of all the muttering, pointing, andhissing as he passed.

Fred and George, however, found all this very funny.They went out of their way to march ahead of Harrydown the corridors, shouting, “Make way for the Heirof Slytherin, seriously evil wizard coming through. ...”

Percy was deeply disapproving of this behavior.

“It is not a laughing matter,” he said coldly.

“Oh, get out of the way, Percy,” said Fred. “Harry’s ina hurry.”

“Yeah, he’s off to the Chamber of Secrets for a cup oftea with his fanged servant,” said George, chortling.

Ginny didn’t find it amusing either.

“Oh, don’t,” she wailed every time Fred asked Harryloudly who he was planning to attack next, or whenGeorge pretended to ward Harry off with a large cloveof garlic when they met.

Harry didn’t mind; it made him feel better that Fredand George, at least, thought the idea of his beingSlytherin’s heir was quite ludicrous. But their anticsseemed to be aggravating Draco Malfoy, who lookedincreasingly sour each time he saw them at it.

Page | 234 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“It’s because he’s bursting to say it’s really him,” saidRon knowingly. “You know how he hates anyonebeating him at anything, and you’re getting all thecredit for his dirty work.”

“Not for long,” said Hermione in a satisfied tone. “ThePolyjuice Potion’s nearly ready. We’ll be getting thetruth out of him any day now.”

At last the term ended, and a silence deep as thesnow on the grounds descended on the castle. Harryfound it peaceful, rather than gloomy, and enjoyedthe fact that he, Hermione, and the Weasleys had therun of Gryffindor Tower, which meant they could playExploding Snap loudly without bothering anyone, andpractice dueling in private. Fred, George, and Ginnyhad chosen to stay at school rather than visit Bill inEgypt with Mr. and Mrs. Weasley. Percy, whodisapproved of what he termed their childishbehavior, didn’t spend much time in the Gryffindorcommon room. He had already told them pompouslythat he was only staying over Christmas because itwas his duty as a prefect to support the teachersduring this troubled time.

Christmas morning dawned, cold and white. Harryand Ron, the only ones left in their dormitory, werewoken very early by Hermione, who burst in, fullydressed and carrying presents for them both.

“Wake up,” she said loudly, pulling back the curtainsat the window.

“Hermione — you’re not supposed to be in here —”said Ron, shielding his eyes against the light.

“Merry Christmas to you, too,” said Hermione,throwing him his present. “I’ve been up for nearly an

Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

hour, adding more lace-wings to the potion. It’sready.”

Harry sat up, suddenly wide awake.

“Are you sure?”

“Positive,” said Hermione, shirting Scabbers the rat sothat she could sit down on the end of Ron’s four-poster. “If we’re going to do it, I say it should betonight.”

At that moment, Hedwig swooped into the room,carrying a very small package in her beak.

“Hello,” said Harry happily as she landed on his bed.“Are you speaking to me again?”

She nibbled his ear in an affectionate sort of way,which was a far better present than the one that shehad brought him, which turned out to be from theDursleys. They had sent Harry a toothpick and a notetelling him to find out whether he’d be able to stay atHogwarts for the summer vacation, too.

The rest of Harry’s Christmas presents were far moresatisfactory. Hagrid had sent him a large tin of treacletoffee, which Harry decided to soften by the fire beforeeating; Ron had given him a book called Flying withthe Cannons, a book of interesting facts about hisfavorite Quidditch team, and Hermione had boughthim a luxury eagle-feather quill. Harry opened thelast present to find a new, hand-knitted sweater fromMrs. Weasley and a large plum cake. He read her cardwith a fresh surge of guilt, thinking about Mr.Weasley’s car (which hadn’t been seen since its crashwith the Whomping Willow), and the bout of rule-breaking he and Ron were planning next.

Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

No one, not even someone dreading taking PolyjuicePotion later, could fail to enjoy Christmas dinner atHogwarts.

The Great Hall looked magnificent. Not only werethere a dozen frost-covered Christmas trees and thickstreamers of holly and mistletoe crisscrossing theceiling, but enchanted snow was falling, warm anddry, from the ceiling. Dumbledore led them in a few ofhis favorite carols, Hagrid booming more and moreloudly with every goblet of eggnog he consumed.

Percy, who hadn’t noticed that Fred had bewitchedhis prefect badge so that it now read “Pin-head,” keptasking them all what they were sniggering at. Harrydidn’t even care that Draco Malfoy was making loud,snide remarks about his new sweater from theSlytherin table. With a bit of luck, Malfoy would begetting his comeuppance in a few hours’ time.

Harry and Ron had barely finished their thirdhelpings of Christmas pudding when Hermioneushered them out of the hall to finalize their plans forthe evening.

“We still need a bit of the people you’re changinginto,” said Hermione matter-of-factly, as though shewere sending them to the supermarket for laundrydetergent. “And obviously, it’ll be best if you can getsomething of Crabbe’s and Goyle’s; they’re Malfoy’sbest friends, he’ll tell them anything. And we alsoneed to make sure the real Crabbe and Goyle can’tburst in on us while we’re interrogating him.

“I’ve got it all worked out,” she went on smoothly,ignoring Harry’s and Ron’s stupefied faces. She heldup two plump chocolate cakes. “I’ve filled these with asimple Sleeping Draught. All you have to do is makesure Crabbe and Goyle find them. You know howgreedy they are, they’re bound to eat them. OncePage | 237 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

they’re asleep, pull out a few of their hairs and hidethem in a broom closet.”

Harry and Ron looked incredulously at each other.

“Hermione, I don’t think —”

“That could go seriously wrong —”

But Hermione had a steely glint in her eye not unlikethe one Professor McGonagall sometimes had.

“The potion will be useless without Crabbe’s andGoyle’s hair,” she said sternly. “You do want toinvestigate Malfoy, don’t you?”

“Oh, all right, all right,” said Harry. “But what aboutyou? Whose hair are you ripping out?”

“I’ve already got mine!” said Hermione brightly,pulling a tiny bottle out of her pocket and showingthem the single hair inside it. “Remember MillicentBulstrode wrestling with me at the Dueling Club? Sheleft this on my robes when she was trying to strangleme! And she’s gone home for Christmas — so I’ll justhave to tell the Slytherins I’ve decided to come back.”

When Hermione had bustled off to check on thePolyjuice Potion again, Ron turned to Harry with adoom-laden expression.

“Have you ever heard of a plan where so many thingscould go wrong?”

But to Harry’s and Ron’s utter amazement, stage oneof the operation went just as smoothly as Hermionehad said. They lurked in the deserted entrance hallafter Christmas tea, waiting for Crabbe and Goylewho had remained alone at the Slytherin table,

Page | 238 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

shoveling down fourth helpings of trifle. Harry hadperched the chocolate cakes on the end of thebanisters. When they spotted Crabbe and Goylecoming out of the Great Hall, Harry and Ron hidquickly behind a suit of armor next to the front door.

“How thick can you get?” Ron whispered ecstaticallyas Crabbe gleefully pointed out the cakes to Goyleand grabbed them. Grinning stupidly, they stuffed thecakes whole into their large mouths. For a moment,both of them chewed greedily, looks of triumph ontheir faces. Then, without the smallest change ofexpression, they both keeled over backward onto thefloor.

By far the hardest part was hiding them in the closetacross the hall. Once they were safely stowed amongthe buckets and mops, Harry yanked out a couple ofthe bristles that covered Goyle’s forehead and Ronpulled out several of Crabbe’s hairs. They also stoletheir shoes, because their own were far too small forCrabbe- and Goyle-size feet. Then, still stunned atwhat they had just done, they sprinted up to MoaningMyrtle’s bathroom.

They could hardly see for the thick black smokeissuing from the stall in which Hermione was stirringthe cauldron. Pulling their robes up over their faces,Harry and Ron knocked softly on the door.

“Hermione?”

They heard the scrape of the lock and Hermioneemerged, shiny-faced and looking anxious. Behindher they heard the gloop gloop of the bubbling,glutinous potion. Three glass tumblers stood ready onthe toilet seat.

“Did you get them?” Hermione asked breathlessly.

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry showed her Goyle’s hair.

“Good. And I sneaked these spare robes out of thelaundry,” Hermione said, holding up a small sack.“You’ll need bigger sizes once you’re Crabbe andGoyle.”

The three of them stared into the cauldron. Close up,the potion looked like thick, dark mud, bubblingsluggishly.

“I’m sure I’ve done everything right,” said Hermione,nervously rereading the splotched page of MostePotente Potions. “It looks like the book says it should... once we’ve drunk it, we’ll have exactly an hourbefore we change back into ourselves.”

“Now what?” Ron whispered.

“We separate it into three glasses and add the hairs.”

Hermione ladled large dollops of the potion into eachof the glasses. Then, her hand trembling, she shookMillicent Bulstrode’s hair out of its bottle into the firstglass.

The potion hissed loudly like a boiling kettle andfrothed madly. A second later, it had turned a sicksort of yellow.

“Urgh — essence of Millicent Bulstrode,” said Ron,eyeing it with loathing. “Bet it tastes disgusting.”

“Add yours, then,” said Hermione.

Harry dropped Goyle’s hair into the middle glass andRon put Crabbe’s into the last one. Both glasseshissed and frothed: Goyle’s turned the khaki color ofa booger, Crabbe’s a dark, murky brown.

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Hang on,” said Harry as Ron and Hermione reachedfor their glasses. “We’d better not all drink them inhere. ... Once we turn into Crabbe and Goyle we won’tfit. And Millicent Bulstrode’s no pixie.”

“Good thinking,” said Ron, unlocking the door. “We’lltake separate stalls.”

Careful not to spill a drop of his Polyjuice Potion,Harry slipped into the middle stall.

“Ready?” he called.

“Ready,” came Ron’s and Hermione’s voices.

“One — two — three —”

Pinching his nose, Harry drank the potion down intwo large gulps. It tasted like overcooked cabbage.

Immediately, his insides started writhing as thoughhe’d just swallowed live snakes — doubled up, hewondered whether he was going to be sick — then aburning sensation spread rapidly from his stomach tothe very ends of his fingers and toes — next, bringinghim gasping to all fours, came a horrible meltingfeeling, as the skin all over his body bubbled like hotwax — and before his eyes, his hands began to grow,the fingers thickened, the nails broadened, theknuckles were bulging like bolts — his shouldersstretched painfully and a prickling on his foreheadtold him that hair was creeping down toward hiseyebrows — his robes ripped as his chest expandedlike a barrel bursting its hoops — his feet were agonyin shoes four sizes too small —

As suddenly as it had started, everything stopped.Harry lay facedown on the stone-cold floor, listeningto Myrtle gurgling morosely in the end toilet. With

Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

difficulty, he kicked off his shoes and stood up. Sothis was what it felt like, being Goyle. His large handtrembling, he pulled off his old robes, which werehanging a foot above his ankles, pulled on the spareones, and laced up Goyle’s boatlike shoes. He reachedup to brush his hair out of his eyes and met only theshort growth of wiry bristles, low on his forehead.Then he realized that his glasses were clouding hiseyes because Goyle obviously didn’t need them — hetook them off and called, “Are you two okay?” Goyle’slow rasp of a voice issued from his mouth.

“Yeah,” came the deep grunt of Crabbe from his right.

Harry unlocked his door and stepped in front of thecracked mirror. Goyle stared back at him out of dull,deepset eyes. Harry scratched his ear. So did Goyle.

Ron’s door opened. They stared at each other. Exceptthat he looked pale and shocked, Ron wasindistinguishable from Crabbe, from the pudding-bowl haircut to the long, gorilla arms.

“This is unbelievable,” said Ron, approaching themirror and prodding Crabbe’s flat nose.

“Unbelievable.”

“We’d better get going,” said Harry, loosening thewatch that was cutting into Goyle’s thick wrist. “We’vestill got to find out where the Slytherin common roomis. I only hope we can find someone to follow ...”

Ron, who had been gazing at Harry, said, “You don’tknow how bizarre it is to see Goyle thinking.” Hebanged on Hermione’s door. “C’mon, we need to go —”

A high-pitched voice answered him.

Page | 242 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I — I don’t think I’m going to come after all. You goon without me.”

“Hermione, we know Millicent Bulstrode’s ugly, noone’s going to know it’s you —”

“No — really — I don’t think I’ll come. You two hurryup, you’re wasting time —”

Harry looked at Ron, bewildered.

“That looks more like Goyle,” said Ron. “That’s how helooks every time a teacher asks him a question.”

“Hermione, are you okay?” said Harry through thedoor.

“Fine — I’m fine — go on —”

Harry looked at his watch. Five of their precious sixtyminutes had already passed.

“Well meet you back here, all right?” he said.

Harry and Ron opened the door of the bathroomcarefully, checked that the coast was clear, and setoff.

“Don’t swing your arms like that,” Harry muttered toRon.

“Eh?”

“Crabbe holds them sort of stiff. ...”

“How’s this?”

“Yeah, that’s better. ...”

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

They went down the marble staircase. All they needednow was a Slytherin that they could follow to theSlytherin common room, but there was nobodyaround.

“Any ideas?” muttered Harry.

“The Slytherins always come up to breakfast fromover there,” said Ron, nodding at the entrance to thedungeons. The words had barely left his mouth whena girl with long, curly hair emerged from the entrance.

“Excuse me,” said Ron, hurrying up to her. “We’veforgotten the way to our common room.”

“I beg your pardon?” said the girl stiffly. “Our commonroom? I’m a Ravenclaw.”

She walked away, looking suspiciously back at them.

Harry and Ron hurried down the stone steps into thedarkness, their footsteps echoing particularly loudlyas Crabbe’s and Goyle’s huge feet hit the floor, feelingthat this wasn’t going to be as easy as they hadhoped.

The labyrinthine passages were deserted. They walkeddeeper and deeper under the school, constantlychecking their watches to see how much time theyhad left. After a quarter of an hour, just when theywere getting desperate, they heard a suddenmovement ahead.

“Ha!” said Ron excitedly. “There’s one of them now!”

The figure was emerging from a side room. As theyhurried nearer, however, their hearts sank. It wasn’t aSlytherin, it was Percy.

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“What’re you doing down here?” said Ron in surprise.Percy looked affronted.

“That,” he said stiffly, “is none of your business. It’sCrabbe, isn’t it?”

“Wh — oh, yeah,” said Ron.

“Well, get off to your dormitories,” said Percy sternly.“It’s not safe to go wandering around dark corridorsthese days.”

“You are,” Ron pointed out.

“I,” said Percy, drawing himself up, “am a prefect.Nothing’s about to attack me.”

A voice suddenly echoed behind Harry and Ron.

Draco Malfoy was strolling toward them, and for thefirst time in his life, Harry was pleased to see him.

“There you are,” he drawled, looking at them. “Haveyou two been pigging out in the Great Hall all thistime? I’ve been looking for you; I want to show yousomething really funny.”

Malfoy glanced witheringly at Percy.

“And what’re you doing down here, Weasley?” hesneered.

Percy looked outraged.

“You want to show a bit more respect to a schoolprefect!” he said. “I don’t like your attitude!”

Malfoy sneered and motioned for Harry and Ron tofollow him. Harry almost said something apologetic to

Page | 245 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Percy but caught himself just in time. He and Ronhurried after Malfoy, who said as they turned into thenext passage, “That Peter Weasley —”

“Percy,” Ron corrected him automatically.

“Whatever,” said Malfoy. “I’ve noticed him sneakingaround a lot lately. And I bet I know what he’s up to.He thinks he’s going to catch Slytherin’s heir single-handed.”

He gave a short, derisive laugh. Harry and Ronexchanged excited looks.

Malfoy paused by a stretch of bare, damp stone wall.“What’s the new password again?” he said to Harry.“Er —” said Harry.

“Oh, yeah — pure-blood\” said Malfoy, not listening,and a stone door concealed in the wall slid open.Malfoy marched through it, and Harry and Ronfollowed him.

The Slytherin common room was a long, lowunderground room with rough stone walls and ceilingfrom which round, greenish lamps were hanging onchains. A fire was crackling under an elaboratelycarved mantelpiece ahead of them, and severalSlytherins were silhouetted around it in high-backedchairs.

“Wait here,” said Malfoy to Harry and Ron, motioningthem to a pair of empty chairs set back from the fire.“I’ll go and get it — my father’s just sent it to me —”

Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Wondering what Malfoy was going to show them,Harry and Ron sat down, doing their best to look athome.

Malfoy came back a minute later, holding what lookedlike a newspaper clipping. He thrust it under Ron’snose.

“That’ll give you a laugh,” he said.

Harry saw Ron's eyes widen in shock. He read theclipping quickly, gave a very forced laugh, andhanded it to Harry.

It had been clipped out of the Daily Prophet, and itsaid:

INQUIRY AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC

Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of MuggleArtifacts Office, was today fined fifty Galleons forbewitching a Muggle car.

Mr. Lucius Malfoy, a governor of Hogwarts School ofWitchcraft and Wizardry, where the enchanted carcrashed earlier this year, called today for Mr.Weasley’s resignation.

“Weasley has brought the Ministry into disrepute,”

Mr. Malfoy told our reporter. “He is clearly unfit todraw up our laws and his ridiculous MuggleProtection Act should be scrapped immediately.”

Mr. Weasley was unavailable for comment, althoughhis wife told reporters to clear off or she’d set thefamily ghoul on them.

Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Well?” said Malfoy impatiently as Harry handed theclipping back to him. “Don’t you think it’s funny?”

“Ha, ha,” said Harry bleakly.

“Arthur Weasley loves Muggles so much he shouldsnap his wand in half and go and join them,” saidMalfoy scornfully. “You’d never know the Weasleyswere purebloods, the way they behave.”

Ron’s — or rather, Crabbe’s — face was contortedwith fury.

“What’s up with you, Crabbe?” snapped Malfoy.“Stomachache,” Ron grunted.

“Well, go up to the hospital wing and give all thoseMudbloods a kick from me,” said Malfoy, snickering.“You know, I’m surprised the Daily Prophet hasn’treported all these attacks yet,” he went onthoughtfully. “I suppose Dumbledore’s trying to hushit all up. He’ll be sacked if it doesn’t stop soon.Father’s always said old Dumbledore’s the worst thingthat’s ever happened to this place. He loves Muggle-borns. A decent headmaster would never’ve let slimelike that Creevey in.”

Malfoy started taking pictures with an imaginarycamera and did a cruel but accurate impression ofColin: “ ‘Potter, can I have your picture, Potter? Can Ihave your autograph? Can I lick your shoes, please,Potter?’”

He dropped his hands and looked at Harry and Ron.“What’s the matter with you two?”

Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Far too late, Harry and Ron forced themselves tolaugh, but Malfoy seemed satisfied; perhaps Crabbeand Goyle were always slow on the uptake.

“Saint Potter, the Mudbloods’ friend,” said Malfoyslowly. “He’s another one with no proper wizardfeeling, or he wouldn’t go around with that jumped-upGranger Mudblood. And people think he’s Slytherin’sheir!”

Harry and Ron waited with bated breath: Malfoy wassurely seconds away from telling them it was him —but then —

“I wish I knew who it is,” said Malfoy petulantly. “Icould help them.”

Ron’s jaw dropped so that Crabbe looked even moreclueless than usual. Fortunately, Malfoy didn’t notice,and Harry, thinking fast, said, “You must have someidea who’s behind it all. ...”

“You know I haven’t, Goyle, how many times do I haveto tell you?” snapped Malfoy. “And Father won’t tellme anything about the last time the Chamber wasopened either. Of course, it was fifty years ago, so itwas before his time, but he knows all about it, and hesays that it was all kept quiet and it’ll look suspiciousif I know too much about it. But I know one thing —last time the Chamber of Secrets was opened, aMudblood died. So I bet it’s a matter of time beforeone of them’s killed this time. ... I hope it’s Granger,”he said with relish.

Ron was clenching Crabbe’s gigantic fists. Feelingthat it would be a bit of a giveaway if Ron punchedMalfoy, Harry shot him a warning look and said,“D’you know if the person who opened the Chamberlast time was caught?”

Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, yeah ... whoever it was was expelled,” saidMalfoy. “They’re probably still in Azkaban.”

“Azkaban?” said Harry, puzzled.

“Azkaban — the wizard prison, Goyle,” said Malfoy,looking at him in disbelief. “Honestly, if you were anyslower, you’d be going backward.”

He shifted restlessly in his chair and said, “Fathersays to keep my head down and let the Heir ofSlytherin get on with it. He says the school needsridding of all the Mudblood filth, but not to get mixedup in it. Of course, he’s got a lot on his plate at themoment. You know the Ministry of Magic raided ourmanor last week?”

Harry tried to force Goyle’s dull face into a look ofconcern.

“Yeah ...” said Malfoy. “Luckily, they didn’t find much.Father’s got some very valuable Dark Arts stuff. Butluckily, we’ve got our own secret chamber under thedrawing-room floor —”

“Ho!” said Ron.

Malfoy looked at him. So did Harry. Ron blushed.

Even his hair was turning red. His nose was alsoslowly lengthening — their hour was up, Ron wasturning back into himself, and from the look of horrorhe was suddenly giving Harry, he must be, too.

They both jumped to their feet.

“Medicine for my stomach,” Ron grunted, and withoutfurther ado they sprinted the length of the Slytherincommon room, hurled themselves at the stone wall,and dashed up the passage, hoping against hope that

Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy hadn’t noticed anything. Harry could feel hisfeet slipping around in Goyle’s huge shoes and had tohoist up his robes as he shrank; they crashed up thesteps into the dark entrance hall, which was full of amuffled pounding coming from the closet wherethey’d locked Crabbe and Goyle. Leaving their shoesoutside the closet door, they sprinted in their socksup the marble staircase toward Moaning Myrtle’sbathroom.

“Well, it wasn’t a complete waste of time,” Ronpanted, closing the bathroom door behind them. “Iknow we still haven’t found out who’s doing theattacks, but I’m going to write to Dad tomorrow andtell him to check under the Malfoys’ drawing room.”

Harry checked his face in the cracked mirror. He wasback to normal. He put his glasses on as Ronhammered on the door of Hermione’s stall.

“Hermione, come out, we’ve got loads to tell you —”

“Go away!” Hermione squeaked.

Harry and Ron looked at each other.

“What’s the matter?” said Ron. “You must be back tonormal by now, we are —”

But Moaning Myrtle glided suddenly through the stalldoor. Harry had never seen her looking so happy.

“Ooooooh, wait till you see,” she said. “It’s awful—”

They heard the lock slide back and Hermioneemerged, sobbing, her robes pulled up over her head.

“What’s up?” said Ron uncertainly. “Have you still gotMillicent’s nose or something?”

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Hermione let her robes fall and Ron backed into thesink.

Her face was covered in black fur. Her eyes hadturned yellow and there were long, pointed earspoking through her hair.

“It was a c-cat hair!” she howled. “M-MillicentBulstrode m-must have a cat! And the p-potion isn’tsupposed to be used for animal transformations!”

“Uh-oh,” said Ron.

“You’ll be teased something dreadful,” said Myrtlehappily.

“It’s okay, Hermione,” said Harry quickly. “We’ll takeyou up to the hospital wing. Madam Pomfrey neverasks too many questions. ...”

It took a long time to persuade Hermione to leave thebathroom. Moaning Myrtle sped them on their waywith a hearty guffaw. “Wait till everyone finds outyou’ve got a tail\”

Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling



* V



THE VERY SECRET DIARY

Hermione remained in the hospital wing for severalweeks. There was a flurry of rumor about herdisappearance when the rest of the school arrivedback from their Christmas holidays, because ofcourse everyone thought that she had been attacked.So many students filed past the hospital wing tryingto catch a glimpse of her that Madam Pomfrey tookout her curtains again and placed them aroundHermione’s bed, to spare her the shame of being seenwith a furry face.

Harry and Ron went to visit her every evening. Whenthe new term started, they brought her each day’shomework.

“If I’d sprouted whiskers, I’d take a break from work,”said Ron, tipping a stack of books onto Hermione’sbedside table one evening.

“Don’t be silly, Ron, I’ve got to keep up,” saidHermione briskly. Her spirits were greatly improvedby the fact that all the hair had gone from her face

Page | 253 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

and her eyes were turning slowly back to brown. “Idon’t suppose you’ve got any new leads?” she addedin a whisper, so that Madam Pomfrey couldn’t hearher.

“Nothing,” said Harry gloomily.

“I was so sure it was Malfoy,” said Ron, for about thehundredth time.

“What’s that?” asked Harry, pointing to somethinggold sticking out from under Hermione’s pillow.

“Just a get well card,” said Hermione hastily, trying topoke it out of sight, but Ron was too quick for her. Hepulled it out, flicked it open, and read aloud:

“To Miss Granger, wishing you a speedy recovery, fromyour concerned teacher, Professor Gilderoy Lockhart,Order of Merlin, Third Class, Honorary Member of theDark Force Defense League, and five-time winner ofWitch Weekly’s Most-Charming-Smile Award.”

Ron looked up at Hermione, disgusted.

“You sleep with this under your pillow?”

But Hermione was spared answering by MadamPomfrey sweeping over with her evening dose ofmedicine.

“Is Lockhart the smarmiest bloke you’ve ever met, orwhat?” Ron said to Harry as they left the infirmaryand started up the stairs toward Gryffindor Tower.Snape had given them so much homework, Harrythought he was likely to be in the sixth year before hefinished it. Ron was just saying he wished he hadasked Hermione how many rat tails you weresupposed to add to a Hair-Raising Potion when anPage | 254 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

angry outburst from the floor above reached theirears.

“That’s Filch,” Harry muttered as they hurried up thestairs and paused, out of sight, listening hard.

“You don’t think someone else’s been attacked?” saidRon tensely.

They stood still, their heads inclined toward Filch’svoice, which sounded quite hysterical.

“— even more work for me! Mopping all night, like Ihaven’t got enough to do! No, this is the final straw, I’mgoing to Dumbledore —”

His footsteps receded along the out-of-sight corridorand they heard a distant door slam.

They poked their heads around the corner. Filch hadclearly been manning his usual lookout post: Theywere once again on the spot where Mrs. Norris hadbeen attacked. They saw at a glance what Filch hadbeen shouting about. A great flood of water stretchedover half the corridor, and it looked as though it wasstill seeping from under the door of Moaning Myrtle’sbathroom. Now that Filch had stopped shouting, theycould hear Myrtle’s wails echoing off the bathroomwalls.

“Now what’s up with her?” said Ron.

“Let’s go and see,” said Harry, and holding their robesover their ankles they stepped through the great washof water to the door bearing its OUT OF ORDER sign,ignored it as always, and entered.

Moaning Myrtle was crying, if possible, louder andharder than ever before. She seemed to be hiding

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

down her usual toilet. It was dark in the bathroombecause the candles had been extinguished in thegreat rush of water that had left both walls and floorsoaking wet.

“What’s up, Myrtle?” said Harry.

“Who’s that?” glugged Myrtle miserably. “Come tothrow something else at me?”

Harry waded across to her stall and said, “Why wouldI throw something at you?”

“Don’t ask me,” Myrtle shouted, emerging with a waveof yet more water, which splashed onto the alreadysopping floor. “Here I am, minding my own business,and someone thinks it’s funny to throw a book at me.

“But it can’t hurt you if someone throws something atyou,” said Harry, reasonably. “I mean, it’d just goright through you, wouldn’t it?”

He had said the wrong thing. Myrtle puffed herself upand shrieked, “Let’s all throw books at Myrtle,because she can’t feel it! Ten points if you can get itthrough her stomach! Fifty points if it goes throughher head! Well, ha, ha, ha! What a lovely game, I don’tthink!”

“Who threw it at you, anyway?” asked Harry.

“Idon’t know. ... I was just sitting in the U-bend,thinking about death, and it fell right through the topof my head,” said Myrtle, glaring at them. “It’s overthere, it got washed out. ...”

Harry and Ron looked under the sink where Myrtlewas pointing. A small, thin book lay there. It had a

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

shabby black cover and was as wet as everything elsein the bathroom. Harry stepped forward to pick it up,but Ron suddenly flung out an arm to hold him back.

“What?” said Harry.

“Are you cra2y?” said Ron. “It could be dangerous.”

“Dangerous?” said Harry, laughing. “Come off it, howcould it be dangerous?”

“You’d be surprised,” said Ron, who was lookingapprehensively at the book. “Some of the books theMinistry’s confiscated — Dad’s told me — there wasone that burned your eyes out. And everyone whoread Sonnets of a Sorcerer spoke in limericks for therest of their lives. And some old witch in Bath had abook that you could never stop reading! You just hadto wander around with your nose in it, trying to doeverything one-handed. And —”

“All right, I’ve got the point,” said Harry.

The little book lay on the floor, nondescript andsoggy.

“Well, we won’t find out unless we look at it,” he said,and he ducked around Ron and picked it up off thefloor.

Harry saw at once that it was a diary, and the fadedyear on the cover told him it was fifty years old. Heopened it eagerly. On the first page he could justmake out the name “T. M. Riddle” in smudged ink.

“Hang on,” said Ron, who had approached cautiouslyand was looking over Harry’s shoulder. “I know thatname. ... T. M. Riddle got an award for specialservices to the school fifty years ago.”

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“How on earth d’you know that?” said Harry inamazement.

“Because Filch made me polish his shield about fiftytimes in detention,” said Ron resentfully. “That wasthe one I burped slugs all over. If you’d wiped slimeoff a name for an hour, you’d remember it, too.”

Harry peeled the wet pages apart. They werecompletely blank. There wasn’t the faintest trace ofwriting on any of them, not even Auntie Mabel’sbirthday, or dentist, half-past three.

“He never wrote in it,” said Harry, disappointed.

“I wonder why someone wanted to flush it away?” saidRon curiously.

Harry turned to the back cover of the book and sawthe printed name of a variety store on Vauxhall Road,London.

“He must’ve been Muggle-born,” said Harrythoughtfully. “To have bought a diary from VauxhallRoad. ...”

“Well, it’s not much use to you,” said Ron. Hedropped his voice. “Fifty points if you can get itthrough Myrtle’s nose.”

Harry, however, pocketed it.

Hermione left the hospital wing, de-whiskered, tail-less, and fur-free, at the beginning of February. Onher first evening back in Gryffindor Tower, Harryshowed her T. M. Riddle’s diary and told her the storyof how they had found it.

Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Oooh, it might have hidden powers,” said Hermioneenthusiastically, taking the diary and looking at itclosely.

“If it has, it’s hiding them very well,” said Ron. “Maybeit’s shy. I don’t know why you don’t chuck it, Harry.”

“I wish I knew why someone did try to chuck it,” saidHarry. “I wouldn’t mind knowing how Riddle got anaward for special services to Hogwarts either.”

“Could’ve been anything,” said Ron. “Maybe he gotthirty O.W.L.s or saved a teacher from the giantsquid. Maybe he murdered Myrtle; that would’ve doneeveryone a favor. ...”

But Harry could tell from the arrested look onHermione’s face that she was thinking what he wasthinking.

“What?” said Ron, looking from one to the other.

“Well, the Chamber of Secrets was opened fifty yearsago, wasn’t it?” he said. “That’s what Malfoy said.”

“Yeah ...” said Ron slowly.

“And this diary is fifty years old,” said Hermione,tapping it excitedly.

“So?”

“Oh, Ron, wake up,” snapped Hermione. “We knowthe person who opened the Chamber last time wasexpelled fifty years ago. We know T. M. Riddle got anaward for special services to the school fifty yearsago. Well, what if Riddle got his special award forcatching the Heir of Slytherin? His diary wouldprobably tell us everything — where the Chamber is,Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

and how to open it, and what sort of creature lives init — the person who’s behind the attacks this timewouldn’t want that lying around, would they?”

“That’s a brilliant theory, Hermione,” said Ron, “withjust one tiny little flaw. There’s nothing written in hisdiary.”

But Hermione was pulling her wand out of her bag.

“It might be invisible ink!” she whispered.

She tapped the diary three times and said,“Aparecium\”

Nothing happened. Undaunted, Hermione shoved herhand back into her bag and pulled out what appearedto be a bright red eraser.

“It’s a Revealer, I got it in Diagon Alley,” she said.

She rubbed hard on January first. Nothing happened.

“I’m telling you, there’s nothing to find in there,” saidRon. “Riddle just got a diary for Christmas andcouldn’t be bothered filling it in.”

Harry couldn’t explain, even to himself, why he didn’tjust throw Riddle’s diary away. The fact was that eventhough he knew the diary was blank, he keptabsentmindedly picking it up and turning the pages,as though it were a story he wanted to finish. Andwhile Harry was sure he had never heard the name T.M. Riddle before, it still seemed to mean something tohim, almost as though Riddle was a friend he’d hadwhen he was very small, and had half-forgotten. Butthis was absurd. He’d never had friends beforeHogwarts, Dudley had made sure of that.

Page | 260 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Nevertheless, Harry was determined to find out moreabout Riddle, so next day at break, he headed for thetrophy room to examine Riddle’s special award,accompanied by an interested Hermione and athoroughly unconvinced Ron, who told them he’dseen enough of the trophy room to last him a lifetime.

Riddle’s burnished gold shield was tucked away in acorner cabinet. It didn’t carry details of why it hadbeen given to him (“Good thing, too, or it’d be evenbigger and I’d still be polishing it,” said Ron).

However, they did find Riddle’s name on an old Medalfor Magical Merit, and on a list of old Head Boys.

“He sounds like Percy,” said Ron, wrinkling his nosein disgust. “Prefect, Head Boy ... probably top of everyclass —”

“You say that like it’s a bad thing,” said Hermione in aslightly hurt voice.

The sun had now begun to shine weakly on Hogwartsagain. Inside the castle, the mood had grown morehopeful. There had been no more attacks since thoseon Justin and Nearly Headless Nick, and MadamPomfrey was pleased to report that the Mandrakeswere becoming moody and secretive, meaning thatthey were fast leaving childhood.

“The moment their acne clears up, they’ll be ready forrepotting again,” Harry heard her telling Filch kindlyone afternoon. “And after that, it won’t be long untilwe’re cutting them up and stewing them. You’ll haveMrs. Norris back in no time.”

Perhaps the Heir of Slytherin had lost his or hernerve, thought Harry. It must be getting riskier andriskier to open the Chamber of Secrets, with theschool so alert and suspicious. Perhaps the monster,

Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

whatever it was, was even now settling itself down tohibernate for another fifty years. ...

Ernie Macmillan of Hufflepuff didn’t take this cheerfulview. He was still convinced that Harry was the guiltyone, that he had “given himself away” at the DuelingClub. Peeves wasn’t helping matters; he kept poppingup in the crowded corridors singing “Oh, Potter, yourotter ...” now with a dance routine to match.

Gilderoy Lockhart seemed to think he himself hadmade the attacks stop. Harry overheard him tellingProfessor McGonagall so while the Gryffindors werelining up for Transfiguration.

“I don’t think there’ll be any more trouble, Minerva,”he said, tapping his nose knowingly and winking. “Ithink the Chamber has been locked for good thistime. The culprit must have known it was only amatter of time before I caught him. Rather sensible tostop now, before I came down hard on him.

“You know, what the school needs now is a morale-booster. Wash away the memories of last term! I won’tsay any more just now, but I think I know just thething. ...”

He tapped his nose again and strode off.

Lockhart’s idea of a morale-booster became clear atbreakfast time on February fourteenth. Harry hadn’thad much sleep because of a late-running Quidditchpractice the night before, and he hurried down to theGreat Hall, slightly late. He thought, for a moment,that he’d walked through the wrong doors.

The walls were all covered with large, lurid pinkflowers. Worse still, heart-shaped confetti was fallingfrom the pale blue ceiling. Harry went over to the

Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Gryffindor table, where Ron was sitting lookingsickened, and Hermione seemed to have beenovercome with giggles.

“What’s going on?” Harry asked them, sitting downand wiping confetti off his bacon.

Ron pointed to the teachers’ table, apparently toodisgusted to speak. Lockhart, wearing lurid pinkrobes to match the decorations, was waving forsilence. The teachers on either side of him werelooking stony-faced. From where he sat, Harry couldsee a muscle going in Professor McGonagall’s cheek.Snape looked as though someone had just fed him alarge beaker of Skele-Gro.

“Happy Valentine’s Day!” Lockhart shouted. “And mayI thank the forty-six people who have so far sent mecards! Yes, I have taken the liberty of arranging thislittle surprise for you all — and it doesn’t end here!”

Lockhart clapped his hands and through the doors tothe entrance hall marched a dozen surly-lookingdwarfs. Not just any dwarfs, however. Lockhart hadthem all wearing golden wings and carrying harps.

“My friendly, card-carrying cupids!” beamed Lockhart.“They will be roving around the school todaydelivering your valentines! And the fun doesn’t stophere! I’m sure my colleagues will want to enter intothe spirit of the occasion! Why not ask ProfessorSnape to show you how to whip up a Love Potion! Andwhile you’re at it, Professor Flitwick knows moreabout Entrancing Enchantments than any wizard I’veever met, the sly old dog!”

Professor Flitwick buried his face in his hands. Snapewas looking as though the first person to ask him fora Love Potion would be force-fed poison.

Page | 263 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Please, Hermione, tell me you weren’t one of theforty-six,” said Ron as they left the Great Hall for theirfirst lesson. Hermione suddenly became veryinterested in searching her bag for her schedule anddidn’t answer.

All day long, the dwarfs kept barging into theirclasses to deliver valentines, to the annoyance of theteachers, and late that afternoon as the Gryffindorswere walking upstairs for Charms, one of the dwarfscaught up with Harry.

“Oy, you! ’Arry Potter!” shouted a particularly grim-looking dwarf, elbowing people out of the way to get toHarry.

Hot all over at the thought of being given a valentinein front of a line of first years, which happened toinclude Ginny Weasley, Harry tried to escape. Thedwarf, however, cut his way through the crowd bykicking people’s shins, and reached him before he’dgone two paces.

“I’ve got a musical message to deliver to ’Arry Potter inperson,” he said, twanging his harp in a threateningsort of way.

“Not here,” Harry hissed, trying to escape.

“Stay stilll” grunted the dwarf, grabbing hold ofHarry’s bag and pulling him back.

“Let me go!” Harry snarled, tugging.

With a loud ripping noise, his bag split in two. Hisbooks, wand, parchment, and quill spilled onto thefloor and his ink bottle smashed over everything.

Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry scrambled around, trying to pick it all upbefore the dwarf started singing, causing something ofa holdup in the corridor.

“What’s going on here?” came the cold, drawling voiceof Draco Malfoy. Harry started stuffing everythingfeverishly into his ripped bag, desperate to get awaybefore Malfoy could hear his musical valentine.

“What’s all this commotion?” said another familiarvoice as Percy Weasley arrived.

Losing his head, Harry tried to make a run for it, butthe dwarf seized him around the knees and broughthim crashing to the floor.

“Right,” he said, sitting on Harry’s ankles. “Here isyour singing valentine:

His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad,

His hair is as dark as a blackboard.

I wish he was mine, he’s really divine,

The hero who conquered the Dark Lord.”

Harry would have given all the gold in Gringotts toevaporate on the spot. Trying valiantly to laugh alongwith everyone else, he got up, his feet numb from theweight of the dwarf, as Percy Weasley did his best todisperse the crowd, some of whom were crying withmirth.

“Off you go, off you go, the bell rang five minutes ago,off to class, now,” he said, shooing some of theyounger students away. “And you, Malfoy —”

Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry, glancing over, saw Malfoy stoop and snatch upsomething. Leering, he showed it to Crabbe andGoyle, and Harry realized that he’d got Riddle’s diary.

“Give that back,” said Harry quietly.

“Wonder what Potter’s written in this?” said Malfoy,who obviously hadn’t noticed the year on the coverand thought he had Harry’s own diary. A hush fellover the onlookers. Ginny was staring from the diaryto Harry, looking terrified.

“Hand it over, Malfoy,” said Percy sternly.

“When I’ve had a look,” said Malfoy, waving the diarytauntingly at Harry.

Percy said, “As a school prefect —” but Harry had losthis temper. He pulled out his wand and shouted,

“ExpelliarmusV’ and just as Snape had disarmedLockhart, so Malfoy found the diary shooting out ofhis hand into the air. Ron, grinning broadly, caughtit.

“Harry!” said Percy loudly. “No magic in the corridors.I’ll have to report this, you know!”

But Harry didn’t care, he was one-up on Malfoy, andthat was worth five points from Gryffindor any day.Malfoy was looking furious, and as Ginny passed himto enter her classroom, he yelled spitefully after her,

“I don’t think Potter liked your valentine much!”

Ginny covered her face with her hands and ran intoclass. Snarling, Ron pulled out his wand, too, butHarry pulled him away. Ron didn’t need to spend thewhole of Charms belching slugs.

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

It wasn’t until they had reached Professor Flitwick’sclass that Harry noticed something rather odd aboutRiddle’s diary. All his other books were drenched inscarlet ink. The diary, however, was as clean as it hadbeen before the ink bottle had smashed all over it. Hetried to point this out to Ron, but Ron was havingtrouble with his wand again; large purple bubbleswere blossoming out of the end, and he wasn’t muchinterested in anything else.

Jc Jc Jc

Harry went to bed before anyone else in hisdormitory that night. This was partly because hedidn’t think he could stand Fred and George singing,“His eyes are as green as a fresh pickled toad” onemore time, and partly because he wanted to examineRiddle’s diary again, and knew that Ron thought hewas wasting his time.

Harry sat on his four-poster and flicked through theblank pages, not one of which had a trace of scarletink on it. Then he pulled a new bottle out of hisbedside cabinet, dipped his quill into it, and droppeda blot onto the first page of the diary.

The ink shone brightly on the paper for a second andthen, as though it was being sucked into the page,vanished. Excited, Harry loaded up his quill a secondtime and wrote, “My name is Harry Potter.”

The words shone momentarily on the page and they,too, sank without trace. Then, at last, somethinghappened.

Oozing back out of the page, in his very own ink,came words Harry had never written.

Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Hello, Harry Potter. My name is Tom Riddle. How didyou come by my diary?”

These words, too, faded away, but not before Harryhad started to scribble back.

“Someone tried to flush it down a toilet.”

He waited eagerly for Riddle’s reply.

“Lucky that I recorded my memories in some morelasting way than ink. But I always knew that therewould be those who would not want this diary read.”

“What do you mean?” Harry scrawled, blotting thepage in his excitement.

“I mean that this diary holds memories of terriblethings. Things that were covered up. Things thathappened at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft andWizardry.”

“That’s where I am now,” Harry wrote quickly. “I’m atHogwarts, and horrible stuff’s been happening. Doyou know anything about the Chamber of Secrets?”

His heart was hammering. Riddle’s reply camequickly, his writing becoming untidier, as though hewas hurrying to tell all he knew.

“Of course I know about the Chamber of Secrets. In myday, they told us it was a legend, that it did not exist.But this was a lie. In my fifth year, the Chamber wasopened and the monster attacked several students,finally killing one. I caught the person who’d openedthe Chamber and he was expelled. But theheadmaster, Professor Dippet, ashamed that such athing had happened at Hogwarts, forbade me to tellthe truth. A story was given out that the girl had diedPage | 268 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

in a freak accident They gave me a nice, shiny,engraved trophy for my trouble and warned me to keepmy mouth shut But I knew it could happen again. Themonster lived on, and the one who had the power torelease it was not imprisoned.”

Harry nearly upset his ink bottle in his hurry to writeback.

“It’s happening again now. There have been threeattacks and no one seems to know who’s behindthem. Who was it last time?”

“I can show you, if you like,” came Riddle’s reply. “Youdon’t have to take my word for it. I can take you insidemy memory of the night when I caught him.”

Harry hesitated, his quill suspended over the diary.What did Riddle mean? How could he be taken insidesomebody else’s memory? He glanced nervously at thedoor to the dormitory, which was growing dark. Whenhe looked back at the diary, he saw fresh wordsforming.

“Let me show you.”

Harry paused for a fraction of a second and thenwrote two letters.

“OK.”

The pages of the diary began to blow as thoughcaught in a high wind, stopping halfway through themonth of June. Mouth hanging open, Harry saw thatthe little square for June thirteenth seemed to haveturned into a minuscule television screen. His handstrembling slightly, he raised the book to press his eyeagainst the little window, and before he knew whatwas happening, he was tilting forward; the windowPage | 269 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

was widening, he felt his body leave his bed, and hewas pitched headfirst through the opening in thepage, into a whirl of color and shadow.

He felt his feet hit solid ground, and stood, shaking,as the blurred shapes around him came suddenlyinto focus.

He knew immediately where he was. This circularroom with the sleeping portraits was Dumbledore’soffice — but it wasn’t Dumbledore who was sittingbehind the desk. A wizened, frail-looking wizard, baldexcept for a few wisps of white hair, was reading aletter by candlelight. Harry had never seen this manbefore.

“I’m sorry,” he said shakily. “I didn’t mean to butt in

But the wizard didn’t look up. He continued to read,frowning slightly. Harry drew nearer to his desk andstammered, “Er — I’ll just go, shall I?”

Still the wizard ignored him. He didn’t seem even tohave heard him. Thinking that the wizard might bedeaf, Harry raised his voice.

“Sorry I disturbed you. I’ll go now,” he half-shouted.

The wizard folded up the letter with a sigh, stood up,walked past Harry without glancing at him, and wentto draw the curtains at his window.

The sky outside the window was ruby-red; it seemedto be sunset. The wizard went back to the desk, satdown, and twiddled his thumbs, watching the door.

Harry looked around the office. No Fawkes thephoenix — no whirring silver contraptions. This was

Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Hogwarts as Riddle had known it, meaning that thisunknown wizard was headmaster, not Dumbledore,and he, Harry, was little more than a phantom,completely invisible to the people of fifty years ago.

There was a knock on the office door.

“Enter,” said the old wizard in a feeble voice.

A boy of about sixteen entered, taking off his pointedhat. A silver prefect’s badge was glinting on his chest.He was much taller than Harry, but he, too, had jet-black hair.

“Ah, Riddle,” said the headmaster.

“You wanted to see me, Professor Dippet?” saidRiddle. He looked nervous.

“Sit down,” said Dippet. “I’ve just been reading theletter you sent me.”

“Oh,” said Riddle. He sat down, gripping his handstogether very tightly.

“My dear boy,” said Dippet kindly, “I cannot possiblylet you stay at school over the summer. Surely youwant to go home for the holidays?”

“No,” said Riddle at once. “I’d much rather stay atHogwarts than go back to that — to that —”

“You live in a Muggle orphanage during the holidays, Ibelieve?” said Dippet curiously.

“Yes, sir,” said Riddle, reddening slightly.

“You are Muggle-born?”

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Half-blood, sir,” said Riddle. “Muggle father, witchmother.”

“And are both your parents — ?”

“My mother died just after I was born, sir. They toldme at the orphanage she lived just long enough toname me — Tom after my father, Marvolo after mygrandfather.”

Dippet clucked his tongue sympathetically.

“The thing is, Tom,” he sighed, “special arrangementsmight have been made for you, but in the currentcircumstances. ...”

“You mean all these attacks, sir?” said Riddle, andHarry’s heart leapt, and he moved closer, scared ofmissing anything.

“Precisely,” said the headmaster. “My dear boy, youmust see how foolish it would be of me to allow you toremain at the castle when term ends. Particularly inlight of the recent tragedy ... the death of that poorlittle girl. ... You will be safer by far at yourorphanage. As a matter of fact, the Ministry of Magicis even now talking about closing the school. We areno nearer locating the — er — source of all thisunpleasantness. ...”

Riddle’s eyes had widened.

“Sir — if the person was caught — if it all stopped —”

“What do you mean?” said Dippet with a squeak inhis voice, sitting up in his chair. “Riddle, do you meanyou know something about these attacks?”

“No, sir,” said Riddle quickly.

Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

But Harry was sure it was the same sort of “no” thathe himself had given Dumbledore.

Dippet sank back, looking faintly disappointed.

“You may go, Tom. ...”

Riddle slid off his chair and slouched out of the room.Harry followed him.

Down the moving spiral staircase they went, emergingnext to the gargoyle in the darkening corridor. Riddlestopped, and so did Harry, watching him. Harry couldtell that Riddle was doing some serious thinking. Hewas biting his lip, his forehead furrowed.

Then, as though he had suddenly reached a decision,he hurried off, Harry gliding noiselessly behind him.They didn’t see another person until they reached theentrance hall, when a tall wizard with long, sweepingauburn hair and a beard called to Riddle from themarble staircase.

“What are you doing, wandering around this late,Tom?”

Harry gaped at the wizard. He was none other than afifty-year-younger Dumbledore.

“I had to see the headmaster, sir,” said Riddle.

“Well, hurry off to bed,” said Dumbledore, givingRiddle exactly the kind of penetrating stare Harryknew so well. “Best not to roam the corridors thesedays. Not since ...”

He sighed heavily, bade Riddle good night, and strodeoff. Riddle watched him walk out of sight and then,

Page | 273 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

moving quickly, headed straight down the stone stepsto the dungeons, with Harry in hot pursuit.

But to Harry’s disappointment, Riddle led him notinto a hidden passageway or a secret tunnel but tothe very dungeon in which Harry had Potions withSnape. The torches hadn’t been lit, and when Riddlepushed the door almost closed, Harry could only justsee him, standing stock-still by the door, watchingthe passage outside.

It felt to Harry that they were there for at least anhour. All he could see was the figure of Riddle at thedoor, staring through the crack, waiting like a statue.And just when Harry had stopped feeling expectantand tense and started wishing he could return to thepresent, he heard something move beyond the door.

Someone was creeping along the passage. He heardwhoever it was pass the dungeon where he and Riddlewere hidden. Riddle, quiet as a shadow, edgedthrough the door and followed, Harry tiptoeing behindhim, forgetting that he couldn’t be heard.

For perhaps five minutes they followed the footsteps,until Riddle stopped suddenly, his head inclined inthe direction of new noises. Harry heard a door creakopen, and then someone speaking in a hoarsewhisper.

“C’mon ... gotta get yeh outta here. ... C’mon now ...in the box ...”

There was something familiar about that voice. ...

Riddle suddenly jumped around the corner. Harrystepped out behind him. He could see the darkoutline of a huge boy who was crouching in front ofan open door, a very large box next to it.

Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“ ’Evening, Rubeus,” said Riddle sharply.

The boy slammed the door shut and stood up.

“What yer doin’ down here, Tom?”

Riddle stepped closer.

“It’s all over,” he said. “I’m going to have to turn youin, Rubeus. They’re talking about closing Hogwarts ifthe attacks don’t stop.”

“What d’yeh —”

“I don’t think you meant to kill anyone. But monstersdon’t make good pets. I suppose you just let it out forexercise and —”

“It never killed no one!” said the large boy, backingagainst the closed door. From behind him, Harrycould hear a funny rustling and clicking.

“Come on, Rubeus,” said Riddle, moving yet closer.“The dead girl’s parents will be here tomorrow. Theleast Hogwarts can do is make sure that the thingthat killed their daughter is slaughtered. ...”

“It wasn’t him!” roared the boy, his voice echoing inthe dark passage. “He wouldn’! He never!”

“Stand aside,” said Riddle, drawing out his wand.

His spell lit the corridor with a sudden flaming light.The door behind the large boy flew open with suchforce it knocked him into the wall opposite. And out ofit came something that made Harry let out a long,piercing scream unheard by anyone —

Page | 275 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

A vast, low-slung, hairy body and a tangle of blacklegs; a gleam of many eyes and a pair of razor-sharppincers — Riddle raised his wand again, but he wastoo late. The thing bowled him over as it scuttledaway, tearing up the corridor and out of sight. Riddlescrambled to his feet, looking after it; he raised hiswand, but the huge boy leapt on him, seized hiswand, and threw him back down, yelling,“NOOOOOOO!”

The scene whirled, the darkness became complete;Harry felt himself falling and, with a crash, he landedspread-eagled on his four-poster in the Gryffindordormitory, Riddle’s diary lying open on his stomach.

Before he had had time to regain his breath, thedormitory door opened and Ron came in.

“There you are,” he said.

Harry sat up. He was sweating and shaking.

“What’s up?” said Ron, looking at him with concern.

“It was Hagrid, Ron. Hagrid opened the Chamber ofSecrets fifty years ago.”

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





CORNELIUS FUDGE

Harry, Ron, and Hermione had always known thatHagrid had an unfortunate liking for large andmonstrous creatures. During their first year atHogwarts he had tried to raise a dragon in his littlewooden house, and it would be a long time beforethey forgot the giant, three-headed dog he’dchristened “Fluffy.” And if, as a boy, Hagrid had heardthat a monster was hidden somewhere in the castle,Harry was sure he’d have gone to any lengths for aglimpse of it. He’d probably thought it was a shamethat the monster had been cooped up so long, andthought it deserved the chance to stretch its manylegs; Harry could just imagine the thirteen-year-oldHagrid trying to fit a leash and collar on it. But hewas equally certain that Hagrid would never havemeant to kill anybody.

Harry half wished he hadn’t found out how to workRiddle’s diary. Again and again Ron and Hermionemade him recount what he’d seen, until he washeartily sick of telling them and sick of the long,circular conversations that followed.

Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Riddle might have got the wrong person,” saidHermione. “Maybe it was some other monster thatwas attacking people. ...”

“How many monsters d’you think this place canhold?” Ron asked dully.

“We always knew Hagrid had been expelled,” saidHarry miserably. “And the attacks must’ve stoppedafter Hagrid was kicked out. Otherwise, Riddlewouldn’t have got his award.”

Ron tried a different tack.

“Riddle does sound like Percy — who asked him tosqueal on Hagrid, anyway?”

“But the monster had killed someone, Ron,” saidHermione.

“And Riddle was going to go back to some Muggleorphanage if they closed Hogwarts,” said Harry. “Idon’t blame him for wanting to stay here. ...”

“You met Hagrid down Knockturn Alley, didn’t you,Harry?”

“He was buying a Flesh-Eating Slug Repellent,” saidHarry quickly.

The three of them fell silent. After a long pause,Hermione voiced the knottiest question of all in ahesitant voice.

“Do you think we should go and ask Hagrid about itall?”

Page | 278 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“That’d be a cheerful visit,” said Ron. “ ‘Hello, Hagrid.Tell us, have you been setting anything mad andhairy loose in the castle lately?’ ”

In the end, they decided that they would not sayanything to Hagrid unless there was another attack,and as more and more days went by with no whisperfrom the disembodied voice, they became hopeful thatthey would never need to talk to him about why hehad been expelled. It was now nearly four monthssince Justin and Nearly Headless Nick had beenPetrified, and nearly everybody seemed to think thatthe attacker, whoever it was, had retired for good.Peeves had finally got bored of his “Oh, Potter, yourotter” song, Ernie Macmillan asked Harry quitepolitely to pass a bucket of leaping toadstools inHerbology one day, and in March several of theMandrakes threw a loud and raucous party ingreenhouse three. This made Professor Sprout veryhappy.

“The moment they start trying to move into eachother’s pots, we’ll know they’re fully mature,” she toldHarry. “Then we’ll be able to revive those poor peoplein the hospital wing.”

The second years were given something new to thinkabout during their Easter holidays. The time hadcome to choose their subjects for the third year, amatter that Hermione, at least, took very seriously.

“It could affect our whole future,” she told Harry andRon as they pored over lists of new subjects, markingthem with checks.

“I just want to give up Potions,” said Harry.

Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“We can’t,” said Ron gloomily. “We keep all our oldsubjects, or I’d’ve ditched Defense Against the DarkArts.”

“But that’s very important!” said Hermione, shocked.

“Not the way Lockhart teaches it,” said Ron. “I haven’tlearned anything from him except not to set pixiesloose.”

Neville Longbottom had been sent letters from all thewitches and wizards in his family, all giving himdifferent advice on what to choose. Confused andworried, he sat reading the subject lists with histongue poking out, asking people whether theythought Arithmancy sounded more difficult than thestudy of Ancient Runes. Dean Thomas, who, likeHarry, had grown up with Muggles, ended up closinghis eyes and jabbing his wand at the list, then pickingthe subjects it landed on. Hermione took nobody’sadvice but signed up for everything.

Harry smiled grimly to himself at the thought of whatUncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia would say if he triedto discuss his career in wizardry with them. Not thathe didn’t get any guidance: Percy Weasley was eagerto share his experience.

“Depends where you want to go, Harry,” he said. “It’snever too early to think about the future, so I’drecommend Divination. People say Muggle Studies isa soft option, but I personally think wizards shouldhave a thorough understanding of the non-magicalcommunity, particularly if they’re thinking of workingin close contact with them — look at my father, hehas to deal with Muggle business all the time. Mybrother Charlie was always more of an outdoor type,so he went for Care of Magical Creatures. Play to yourstrengths, Harry.”

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

But the only thing Harry felt he was really good atwas Quidditch. In the end, he chose the same newsubjects as Ron, feeling that if he was lousy at them,at least he’d have someone friendly to help him.

Gryffindor’s next Quidditch match would be againstHufflepuff. Wood was insisting on team practicesevery night after dinner, so that Harry barely hadtime for anything but Quidditch and homework.However, the training sessions were getting better, orat least drier, and the evening before Saturday’smatch he went up to his dormitory to drop off hisbroomstick feeling Gryffindor’s chances for theQuidditch Cup had never been better.

But his cheerful mood didn’t last long. At the top ofthe stairs to the dormitory, he met NevilleLongbottom, who was looking frantic.

“Harry — I don’t know who did it — I just found —”

Watching Harry fearfully, Neville pushed open thedoor.

The contents of Harry’s trunk had been throwneverywhere. His cloak lay ripped on the floor. Thebedclothes had been pulled off his four-poster and thedrawer had been pulled out of his bedside cabinet,the contents strewn over the mattress.

Harry walked over to the bed, openmouthed, treadingon a few loose pages of Travels with Trolls. As he andNeville pulled the blankets back onto his bed, Ron,Dean, and Seamus came in. Dean swore loudly.

“What happened, Harry?”

“No idea,” said Harry. But Ron was examining Harry’srobes. All the pockets were hanging out.

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Someone’s been looking for something,” said Ron. “Isthere anything missing?”

Harry started to pick up all his things and throwthem into his trunk. It was only as he threw the lastof the Lockhart books back into it that he realizedwhat wasn’t there.

“Riddle’s diary’s gone,” he said in an undertone toRon.

“What?”

Harry jerked his head toward the dormitory door andRon followed him out. They hurried down to theGryffindor common room, which was half-empty, andjoined Hermione, who was sitting alone, reading abook called Ancient Runes Made Easy.

Hermione looked aghast at the news.

“But — only a Gryffindor could have stolen — nobodyelse knows our password —”

“Exactly,” said Harry.

They woke the next day to brilliant sunshine and alight, refreshing breeze.

“Perfect Quidditch conditions!” said Woodenthusiastically at the Gryffindor table, loading theteam’s plates with scrambled eggs. “Harry, buck upthere, you need a decent breakfast.”

Harry had been staring down the packed Gryffindortable, wondering if the new owner of Riddle’s diarywas right in front of his eyes. Hermione had beenurging him to report the robbery, but Harry didn’t likethe idea. He’d have to tell a teacher all about thePage | 282 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

diary, and how many people knew why Hagrid hadbeen expelled fifty years ago? He didn’t want to be theone who brought it all up again.

As he left the Great Hall with Ron and Hermione to goand collect his Quidditch things, another very seriousworry was added to Harry’s growing list. He had justset foot on the marble staircase when he heard it yetagain —

“Kill this time ... let me rip ... tear ...”

He shouted aloud and Ron and Hermione bothjumped away from him in alarm.

“The voice!” said Harry, looking over his shoulder. “Ijust heard it again — didn’t you?”

Ron shook his head, wide-eyed. Hermione, however,clapped a hand to her forehead.

“Harry — I think I’ve just understood something! I’vegot to go to the library!”

And she sprinted away, up the stairs.

“ What does she understand?” said Harry distractedly,still looking around, trying to tell where the voice hadcome from.

“Loads more than I do,” said Ron, shaking his head.

“But why’s she got to go to the library?”

“Because that’s what Hermione does,” said Ron,shrugging. “When in doubt, go to the library.”

Harry stood, irresolute, trying to catch the voiceagain, but people were now emerging from the Great

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Hall behind him, talking loudly, exiting through thefront doors on their way to the Quidditch pitch.

“You’d better get moving,” said Ron. “It’s nearly eleven— the match —”

Harry raced up to Gryffindor Tower, collected hisNimbus Two Thousand, and joined the large crowdswarming across the grounds, but his mind was stillin the castle along with the bodiless voice, and as hepulled on his scarlet robes in the locker room, hisonly comfort was that everyone was now outside towatch the game.

The teams walked onto the field to tumultuousapplause. Oliver Wood took off for a warm-up flightaround the goal posts; Madam Hooch released theballs. The Hufflepuffs, who played in canary yellow,were standing in a huddle, having a last-minutediscussion of tactics.

Harry was just mounting his broom when ProfessorMcGonagall came half marching, half running acrossthe pitch, carrying an enormous purple megaphone.

Harry’s heart dropped like a stone.

“This match has been canceled,” ProfessorMcGonagall called through the megaphone,addressing the packed stadium. There were boos andshouts. Oliver Wood, looking devastated, landed andran toward Professor McGonagall without getting offhis broomstick.

“But, Professor!” he shouted. “We’ve got to play — theCup — Gryffindor —”

Professor McGonagall ignored him and continued toshout through her megaphone:

Page | 284 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“All students are to make their way back to the Housecommon rooms, where their Heads of Houses will givethem further information. As quickly as you can,please!”

Then she lowered the megaphone and beckonedHarry over to her.

“Potter, I think you’d better come with me. ...”

Wondering how she could possibly suspect him thistime, Harry saw Ron detach himself from thecomplaining crowd; he came running up to them asthey set off toward the castle. To Harry’s surprise,Professor McGonagall didn’t object.

“Yes, perhaps you’d better come, too, Weasley. ...”

Some of the students swarming around them weregrumbling about the match being canceled; otherslooked worried. Harry and Ron followed ProfessorMcGonagall back into the school and up the marblestaircase. But they weren’t taken to anybody’s officethis time.

“This will be a bit of a shock,” said ProfessorMcGonagall in a surprisingly gentle voice as theyapproached the infirmary. “There has been anotherattack ... another double attack.”

Harry’s insides did a horrible somersault. ProfessorMcGonagall pushed the door open and he and Ronentered.

Madam Pomfrey was bending over a sixth-year girlwith long, curly hair. Harry recognized her as theRavenclaw they’d accidentally asked for directions tothe Slytherin common room. And on the bed next toher was —

Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“HermioneY’ Ron groaned.

Hermione lay utterly still, her eyes open and glassy.

“They were found near the library,” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “I don’t suppose either of you canexplain this? It was on the floor next to them. ...”

She was holding up a small, circular mirror.

Harry and Ron shook their heads, both staring atHermione.

“I will escort you back to Gryffindor Tower,” saidProfessor McGonagall heavily. “I need to address thestudents in any case.”

“All students will return to their House commonrooms by six o’clock in the evening. No student is toleave the dormitories after that time. You will beescorted to each lesson by a teacher. No student is touse the bathroom unaccompanied by a teacher. Allfurther Quidditch training and matches are to bepostponed. There will be no more evening activities.”

The Gryffindors packed inside the common roomlistened to Professor McGonagall in silence. She rolledup the parchment from which she had been readingand said in a somewhat choked voice, “I need hardlyadd that I have rarely been so distressed. It is likelythat the school will be closed unless the culpritbehind these attacks is caught. I would urge anyonewho thinks they might know anything about them tocome forward.”

She climbed somewhat awkwardly out of the portraithole, and the Gryffindors began talking immediately.

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“That’s two Gryffindors down, not counting aGryffindor ghost, one Ravenclaw, and one Hufflepuff,”said the Weasley twins’ friend Lee Jordan, countingon his fingers. “Haven’t any of the teachers noticedthat the Slytherins are all safe? Isn’t it obvious all thisstuff’s coming from Slytherin? The Heir of Slytherin,the monster of Slytherin — why don’t they just chuckall the Slytherins out?” he roared, to nods andscattered applause.

Percy Weasley was sitting in a chair behind Lee, butfor once he didn’t seem keen to make his views heard.He was looking pale and stunned.

“Percy’s in shock,” George told Harry quietly. “ThatRavenclaw girl — Penelope Clearwater — she’s aprefect. I don’t think he thought the monster woulddare attack a prefect.”

But Harry was only half-listening. He didn’t seem tobe able to get rid of the picture of Hermione, lying onthe hospital bed as though carved out of stone. And ifthe culprit wasn’t caught soon, he was looking at alifetime back with the Dursleys. Tom Riddle hadturned Hagrid in because he was faced with theprospect of a Muggle orphanage if the school closed.Harry now knew exactly how he had felt.

“What’re we going to do?” said Ron quietly in Harry’sear. “D’you think they suspect Hagrid?”

“We’ve got to go and talk to him,” said Harry, makingup his mind. “I can’t believe it’s him this time, but ifhe set the monster loose last time he’ll know how toget inside the Chamber of Secrets, and that’s a start.”

“But McGonagall said we’ve got to stay in our towerunless we’re in class —”

Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I think,” said Harry, more quietly still, “it’s time toget my dad’s old cloak out again.”

Harry had inherited just one thing from his father: along and silvery Invisibility Cloak. It was their onlychance of sneaking out of the school to visit Hagridwithout anyone knowing about it. They went to bed atthe usual time, waited until Neville, Dean, andSeamus had stopped discussing the Chamber ofSecrets and finally fallen asleep, then got up, dressedagain, and threw the cloak over themselves.

The journey through the dark and deserted castlecorridors wasn’t enjoyable. Harry, who had wanderedthe castle at night several times before, had neverseen it so crowded after sunset. Teachers, prefects,and ghosts were marching the corridors in pairs,staring around for any unusual activity. TheirInvisibility Cloak didn’t stop them making any noise,and there was a particularly tense moment when Ronstubbed his toe only yards from the spot where Snapestood standing guard. Thankfully, Snape sneezed atalmost exactly the moment Ron swore. It was withrelief that they reached the oak front doors and easedthem open.

It was a clear, starry night. They hurried toward thelit windows of Hagrid’s house and pulled off the cloakonly when they were right outside his front door.

Seconds after they had knocked, Hagrid flung it open.They found themselves face-to-face with him aiming acrossbow at them. Fang the boarhound barked loudlybehind him.

“Oh,” he said, lowering the weapon and staring atthem. “What’re you two doin’ here?”

Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“What’s that for?” said Harry, pointing at thecrossbow as they stepped inside.

“Nothin’ — nothin’ — “ Hagrid muttered. “I’ve binexpectin’ — doesn’ matter — Sit down — I’ll make tea

He hardly seemed to know what he was doing. Henearly extinguished the fire, spilling water from thekettle on it, and then smashed the teapot with anervous jerk of his massive hand.

“Are you okay, Hagrid?” said Harry. “Did you hearabout Hermione?”

“Oh, I heard, all righ’,” said Hagrid, a slight break inhis voice.

He kept glancing nervously at the windows. Hepoured them both large mugs of boiling water (he hadforgotten to add tea bags) and was just putting a slabof fruitcake on a plate when there was a loud knockon the door.

Hagrid dropped the fruitcake. Harry and Ronexchanged panic-stricken looks, then threw theInvisibility Cloak back over themselves and retreatedinto a corner. Hagrid checked that they were hidden,seized his crossbow, and flung open his door oncemore.

“Good evening, Hagrid.”

It was Dumbledore. He entered, looking deadlyserious, and was followed by a second, very odd-looking man.

The stranger had rumpled gray hair and an anxiousexpression, and was wearing a strange mixture of

Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

clothes: a pinstriped suit, a scarlet tie, a long blackcloak, and pointed purple boots. Under his arm hecarried a lime-green bowler.

“That’s Dad’s boss!” Ron breathed. “Cornelius Fudge,the Minister of Magic!”

Harry elbowed Ron hard to make him shut up.

Hagrid had gone pale and sweaty. He dropped intoone of his chairs and looked from Dumbledore toCornelius Fudge.

“Bad business, Hagrid,” said Fudge in rather clippedtones. “Very bad business. Had to come. Four attackson Muggle-borns. Things’ve gone far enough.Ministry’s got to act.”

“I never,” said Hagrid, looking imploringly atDumbledore. “You know I never, ProfessorDumbledore, sir —”

“I want it understood, Cornelius, that Hagrid has myfull confidence,” said Dumbledore, frowning at Fudge.

“Look, Albus,” said Fudge, uncomfortably. “Hagrid’srecord’s against him. Ministry’s got to do something— the school governors have been in touch —”

“Yet again, Cornelius, I tell you that taking Hagridaway will not help in the slightest,” said Dumbledore.His blue eyes were full of a fire Harry had never seenbefore.

“Look at it from my point of view,” said Fudge,fidgeting with his bowler. “I’m under a lot of pressure.Got to be seen to be doing something. If it turns out itwasn’t Hagrid, he’ll be back and no more said. But

Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

I’ve got to take him. Got to. Wouldn’t be doing myduty —”

“Take me?” said Hagrid, who was trembling. “Take mewhere?”

“For a short stretch only,” said Fudge, not meetingHagrid’s eyes. “Not a punishment, Hagrid, more aprecaution. If someone else is caught, you’ll be let outwith a full apology —”

“Not Azkaban?” croaked Hagrid.

Before Fudge could answer, there was another loudrap on the door.

Dumbledore answered it. It was Harry’s turn for anelbow in the ribs; he’d let out an audible gasp.

Mr. Lucius Malfoy strode into Hagrid’s hut, swathedin a long black traveling cloak, smiling a cold andsatisfied smile. Fang started to growl.

“Already here, Fudge,” he said approvingly. “Good,good...”

“What’re you doin’ here?” said Hagrid furiously. “Getoutta my house!”

“My dear man, please believe me, I have no pleasureat all in being inside your — er — d’you call this ahouse?” said Lucius Malfoy, sneering as he lookedaround the small cabin. “I simply called at the schooland was told that the headmaster was here.”

“And what exactly did you want with me, Lucius?”said Dumbledore. He spoke politely, but the fire wasstill blazing in his blue eyes.

Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Dreadful thing, Dumbledore,” said Malfoy lazily,taking out a long roll of parchment, “but thegovernors feel it’s time for you to step aside. This isan Order of Suspension — you’ll find all twelvesignatures on it. I’m afraid we feel you’re losing yourtouch. How many attacks have there been now? Twomore this afternoon, wasn’t it? At this rate, there’ll beno Muggle-borns left at Hogwarts, and we all knowwhat an awful loss that would be to the school.”

“Oh, now, see here, Lucius,” said Fudge, lookingalarmed, “Dumbledore suspended — no, no — lastthing we want just now —”

“The appointment — or suspension — of theheadmaster is a matter for the governors, Fudge,”said Mr. Malfoy smoothly. “And as Dumbledore hasfailed to stop these attacks —”

“See here, Malfoy, if Dumbledore can’t stop them,”said Fudge, whose upper lip was sweating now, “Imean to say, who can?”

“That remains to be seen,” said Mr. Malfoy with anasty smile. “But as all twelve of us have voted —”

Hagrid leapt to his feet, his shaggy black head grazingthe ceiling.

“An’ how many did yeh have ter threaten an’blackmail before they agreed, Malfoy, eh?” he roared.

“Dear, dear, you know, that temper of yours will leadyou into trouble one of these days, Hagrid,” said Mr.Malfoy. “I would advise you not to shout at theAzkaban guards like that. They won’t like it at all.”

“Yeh can’ take Dumbledore!” yelled Hagrid, makingFang the boarhound cower and whimper in his

Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

basket. “Take him away, an’ the Muggle-borns won’stand a chance! There’ll be killin’ next!”

“Calm yourself, Hagrid,” said Dumbledore sharply. Helooked at Lucius Malfoy.

“If the governors want my removal, Lucius, I shall ofcourse step aside —”

“But —” stuttered Fudge.

“iVo!” growled Hagrid.

Dumbledore had not taken his bright blue eyes offLucius Malfoy’s cold gray ones.

“However,” said Dumbledore, speaking very slowlyand clearly so that none of them could miss a word,“you will find that I will only truly have left this schoolwhen none here are loyal to me. You will also findthat help will always be given at Hogwarts to thosewho ask for it.”

For a second, Harry was almost sure Dumbledore’seyes flickered toward the corner where he and Ronstood hidden.

“Admirable sentiments,” said Malfoy, bowing. “Weshall all miss your — er — highly individual way ofrunning things, Albus, and only hope that yoursuccessor will manage to prevent any — ah — killins.”

He strode to the cabin door, opened it, and bowedDumbledore out. Fudge, fiddling with his bowler,waited for Hagrid to go ahead of him, but Hagridstood his ground, took a deep breath, and saidcarefully, “If anyone wanted ter find out some stuff,all they’d have ter do would be ter follow the spiders.That’d lead ’em right! That’s all I’m sayin’.”

Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Fudge stared at him in amazement.

“All right, I’m cornin’,” said Hagrid, pulling on hismoleskin overcoat. But as he was about to followFudge through the door, he stopped again and saidloudly, “An’ someone’ll need ter feed Fang while I’maway.”

The door banged shut and Ron pulled off theInvisibility Cloak.

“We’re in trouble now,” he said hoarsely. “NoDumbledore. They might as well close the schooltonight. There’ll be an attack a day with him gone.”

Fang started howling, scratching at the closed door.

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





ARAGOG

Summer was creeping over the grounds around thecastle; sky and lake alike turned periwinkle blue andflowers large as cabbages burst into bloom in thegreenhouses. But with no Hagrid visible from thecastle windows, striding the grounds with Fang at hisheels, the scene didn’t look right to Harry; no better,in fact, than the inside of the castle, where thingswere so horribly wrong.

Harry and Ron had tried to visit Hermione, butvisitors were now barred from the hospital wing.

“We’re taking no more chances,” Madam Pomfrey toldthem severely through a crack in the infirmary door.“No, I’m sorry, there’s every chance the attacker mightcome back to finish these people off. ...”

With Dumbledore gone, fear had spread as neverbefore, so that the sun warming the castle wallsoutside seemed to stop at the mullioned windows.There was barely a face to be seen in the school thatdidn’t look worried and tense, and any laughter that

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

rang through the corridors sounded shrill andunnatural and was quickly stifled.

Harry constantly repeated Dumbledore’s final wordsto himself. “I will only truly have left this school whennone here are loyal to me. ... Help will always be givenat Hog warts to those who ask for it.” But what goodwere these words? Who exactly were they supposed toask for help, when everyone was just as confused andscared as they were?

Hagrid’s hint about the spiders was far easier tounderstand — the trouble was, there didn’t seem tobe a single spider left in the castle to follow. Harrylooked everywhere he went, helped (rather reluctantly)by Ron. They were hampered, of course, by the factthat they weren’t allowed to wander off on their ownbut had to move around the castle in a pack with theother Gryffindors. Most of their fellow studentsseemed glad that they were being shepherded fromclass to class by teachers, but Harry found it veryirksome.

One person, however, seemed to be thoroughlyenjoying the atmosphere of terror and suspicion.

Draco Malfoy was strutting around the school asthough he had just been appointed Head Boy. Harrydidn’t realize what he was so pleased about until thePotions lesson about two weeks after Dumbledore andHagrid had left, when, sitting right behind Malfoy,Harry overheard him gloating to Crabbe and Goyle.

“I always thought Father might be the one who got ridof Dumbledore,” he said, not troubling to keep hisvoice down. “I told you he thinks Dumbledore’s theworst headmaster the school’s ever had. Maybe we’llget a decent headmaster now. Someone who won’twant the Chamber of Secrets closed. McGonagallwon’t last long, she’s only filling in. ...”

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Snape swept past Harry, making no comment aboutHermione’s empty seat and cauldron.

“Sir,” said Malfoy loudly. “Sir, why don’t you apply forthe headmaster’s job?”

“Now, now, Malfoy,” said Snape, though he couldn’tsuppress a thin-lipped smile. “Professor Dumbledorehas only been suspended by the governors. I daresayhe’ll be back with us soon enough.”

“Yeah, right,” said Malfoy, smirking. “I expect you’dhave Father’s vote, sir, if you wanted to apply for thejob — I’ll tell Father you’re the best teacher here, sir

Snape smirked as he swept off around the dungeon,fortunately not spotting Seamus Finnigan, who waspretending to vomit into his cauldron.

“I’m quite surprised the Mudbloods haven’t all packedtheir bags by now,” Malfoy went on. “Bet you fiveGalleons the next one dies. Pity it wasn’t Granger —”

The bell rang at that moment, which was lucky; atMalfoy’s last words, Ron had leapt off his stool, and inthe scramble to collect bags and books, his attemptsto reach Malfoy went unnoticed.

“Let me at him,” Ron growled as Harry and Deanhung onto his arms. “I don’t care, I don’t need mywand, I’m going to kill him with my bare hands —”

“Hurry up, I’ve got to take you all to Herbology,”barked Snape over the class’s heads, and off theymarched, with Harry, Ron, and Dean bringing up therear, Ron still trying to get loose. It was only safe tolet go of him when Snape had seen them out of the

Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

castle and they were making their way across thevegetable patch toward the greenhouses.

The Herbology class was very subdued; there werenow two missing from their number, Justin andHermione.

Professor Sprout set them all to work pruning theAbyssinian Shrivelfigs. Harry went to tip an armful ofwithered stalks onto the compost heap and foundhimself face-to-face with Ernie Macmillan. Ernie tooka deep breath and said, very formally, “I just want tosay, Harry, that I’m sorry I ever suspected you. Iknow you’d never attack Hermione Granger, and Iapologize for all the stuff I said. We’re all in the sameboat now, and, well —”

He held out a pudgy hand, and Harry shook it.

Ernie and his friend Hannah came to work at thesame Shrivelfig as Harry and Ron.

“That Draco Malfoy character,” said Ernie, breakingoff dead twigs, “he seems very pleased about all this,doesn’t he? D’you know, I think he might beSlytherin’s heir.”

“That’s clever of you,” said Ron, who didn’t seem tohave forgiven Ernie as readily as Harry.

“Do you think it’s Malfoy, Harry?” Ernie asked.

“No,” said Harry, so firmly that Ernie and Hannahstared.

A second later, Harry spotted something.

Several large spiders were scuttling over the groundon the other side of the glass, moving in an

Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

unnaturally straight line as though taking theshortest route to a prearranged meeting. Harry hitRon over the hand with his pruning shears.

“Ouch\ What’re you —”

Harry pointed out the spiders, following their progresswith his eyes screwed up against the sun.

“Oh, yeah,” said Ron, trying, and failing, to lookpleased. “But we can’t follow them now —”

Ernie and Hannah were listening curiously.

Harry’s eyes narrowed as he focused on the spiders. Ifthey pursued their fixed course, there could be nodoubt about where they would end up.

“Looks like they’re heading for the Forbidden Forest.

And Ron looked even unhappier about that.

At the end of the lesson Professor Sprout escorted theclass to their Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson.Harry and Ron lagged behind the others so they couldtalk out of earshot.

“Well have to use the Invisibility Cloak again,” Harrytold Ron. “We can take Fang with us. He’s used togoing into the forest with Hagrid, he might be somehelp.”

“Right,” said Ron, who was twirling his wandnervously in his fingers. “Er — aren’t there — aren’tthere supposed to be werewolves in the forest?” headded as they took their usual places at the back ofLockhart’s classroom.

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Preferring not to answer that question, Harry said,“There are good things in there, too. The centaurs areall right, and the unicorns ...”

Ron had never been into the Forbidden Forest before.Harry had entered it only once and had hoped neverto do so again.

Lockhart bounded into the room and the class staredat him. Every other teacher in the place was lookinggrimmer than usual, but Lockhart appeared nothingshort of buoyant.

“Come now,” he cried, beaming around him. “Why allthese long faces?”

People swapped exasperated looks, but nobodyanswered.

“Don’t you people realize,” said Lockhart, speakingslowly, as though they were all a bit dim, “the dangerhas passed! The culprit has been taken away —”

“Says who?” said Dean Thomas loudly.

“My dear young man, the Minister of Magic wouldn’thave taken Hagrid if he hadn’t been one hundredpercent sure that he was guilty,” said Lockhart, in thetone of someone explaining that one and one madetwo.

“Oh, yes he would,” said Ron, even more loudly thanDean.

“I flatter myself I know a touch more about Hagrid’sarrest than you do, Mr. Weasley,” said Lockhart in aself-satisfied tone.

Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ron started to say that he didn’t think so, somehow,but stopped in midsentence when Harry kicked himhard under the desk.

“We weren’t there, remember?” Harry muttered.

But Lockhart’s disgusting cheeriness, his hints thathe had always thought Hagrid was no good, hisconfidence that the whole business was now at anend, irritated Harry so much that he yearned to throwGadding with Ghouls right in Lockhart’s stupid face.Instead he contented himself with scrawling a note toRon: Let’s do it tonight

Ron read the message, swallowed hard, and lookedsideways at the empty seat usually filled byHermione. The sight seemed to stiffen his resolve, andhe nodded.

The Gryffindor common room was always verycrowded these days, because from six o’clock onwardthe Gryffindors had nowhere else to go. They also hadplenty to talk about, with the result that the commonroom often didn’t empty until past midnight.

Harry went to get the Invisibility Cloak out of histrunk right after dinner, and spent the evening sittingon it, waiting for the room to clear. Fred and Georgechallenged Harry and Ron to a few games ofExploding Snap, and Ginny sat watching them, verysubdued in Hermione’s usual chair. Harry and Ronkept losing on purpose, trying to finish the gamesquickly, but even so, it was well past midnight whenFred, George, and Ginny finally went to bed.

Harry and Ron waited for the distant sounds of twodormitory doors closing before seizing the cloak,

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

throwing it over themselves, and climbing through theportrait hole.

It was another difficult journey through the castle,dodging all the teachers. At last they reached theentrance hall, slid back the lock on the oak frontdoors, squeezed between them, trying to stop anycreaking, and stepped out into the moonlit grounds.

“ ’Course,” said Ron abruptly as they strode acrossthe black grass, “we might get to the forest and findthere’s nothing to follow. Those spiders might not’vebeen going there at all. I know it looked like they weremoving in that sort of general direction, but ...”

His voice trailed away hopefully.

They reached Hagrid’s house, sad and sorry-lookingwith its blank windows. When Harry pushed the dooropen, Fang went mad with joy at the sight of them.Worried he might wake everyone at the castle with hisdeep, booming barks, they hastily fed him treacletoffee from a tin on the mantelpiece, which glued histeeth together.

Harry left the Invisibility Cloak on Hagrid’s table.There would be no need for it in the pitch-dark forest.

“C’mon, Fang, we’re going for a walk,” said Harry,patting his leg, and Fang bounded happily out of thehouse behind them, dashed to the edge of the forest,and lifted his leg against a large sycamore tree.

Harry took out his wand, murmured, “Lumos\” and atiny light appeared at the end of it, just enough to letthem watch the path for signs of spiders.

“Good thinking,” said Ron. “I’d light mine, too, butyou know — it’d probably blow up or something. ...”

Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry tapped Ron on the shoulder, pointing at thegrass. Two solitary spiders were hurrying away fromthe wandlight into the shade of the trees.

“Okay,” Ron sighed as though resigned to the worst,“I’m ready. Let’s go.”

So, with Fang scampering around them, sniffing treeroots and leaves, they entered the forest. By the glowof Harry’s wand, they followed the steady trickle ofspiders moving along the path. They walked behindthem for about twenty minutes, not speaking,listening hard for noises other than breaking twigsand rustling leaves. Then, when the trees had becomethicker than ever, so that the stars overhead were nolonger visible, and Harry’s wand shone alone in thesea of dark, they saw their spider guides leaving thepath.

Harry paused, trying to see where the spiders weregoing, but everything outside his little sphere of lightwas pitch-black. He had never been this deep into theforest before. He could vividly remember Hagridadvising him not to leave the forest path last timehe’d been in here. But Hagrid was miles away now,probably sitting in a cell in Azkaban, and he had alsosaid to follow the spiders.

Something wet touched Harry’s hand and he jumpedbackward, crushing Ron’s foot, but it was only Fang’snose.

“What d’you reckon?” Harry said to Ron, whose eyeshe could just make out, reflecting the light from hiswand.

“We’ve come this far,” said Ron.

Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

So they followed the darting shadows of the spidersinto the trees. They couldn’t move very quickly now;there were tree roots and stumps in their way, barelyvisible in the near blackness. Harry could feel Fang’shot breath on his hand. More than once, they had tostop, so that Harry could crouch down and find thespiders in the wandlight.

They walked for what seemed like at least half anhour, their robes snagging on low-slung branches andbrambles. After a while, they noticed that the groundseemed to be sloping downward, though the treeswere as thick as ever.

Then Fang suddenly let loose a great, echoing bark,making both Harry and Ron jump out of their skins.

“What?” said Ron loudly, looking around into thepitch-dark, and gripping Harry’s elbow very hard.

“There’s something moving over there,” Harrybreathed. “Listen ... sounds like something big. ...”

They listened. Some distance to their right, thesomething big was snapping branches as it carved apath through the trees.

“Oh, no,” said Ron. “Oh, no, oh, no, oh —”

“Shut up,” said Harry frantically. “It’ll hear you.”

“Hear me?” said Ron in an unnaturally high voice.

“It’s already heard Fang!”

The darkness seemed to be pressing on their eyeballsas they stood, terrified, waiting. There was a strangerumbling noise and then silence.

“What d’you think it’s doing?” said Harry.

Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Probably getting ready to pounce,” said Ron.

They waited, shivering, hardly daring to move.

“D’you think it’s gone?” Harry whispered.

“Dunno —”

Then, to their right, came a sudden blaze of light, sobright in the darkness that both of them flung uptheir hands to shield their eyes. Fang yelped and triedto run, but got lodged in a tangle of thorns and yelpedeven louder.

“Harry!” Ron shouted, his voice breaking with relief.“Harry, it’s our car!”

“What?”

“Come on!”

Harry blundered after Ron toward the light, stumblingand tripping, and a moment later they had emergedinto a clearing.

Mr. Weasley’s car was standing, empty, in the middleof a circle of thick trees under a roof of densebranches, its headlights ablaze. As Ron walked,openmouthed, toward it, it moved slowly toward him,exactly like a large, turquoise dog greeting its owner.

“It’s been here all the time!” said Ron delightedly,walking around the car. “Look at it. The forest’sturned it wild. ...”

The sides of the car were scratched and smeared withmud. Apparently it had taken to trundling around theforest on its own. Fang didn’t seem at all keen on it;he kept close to Harry, who could feel him quivering.

Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

His breathing slowing down again, Harry stuffed hiswand back into his robes.

“And we thought it was going to attack us!” said Ron,leaning against the car and patting it. “I wonderedwhere it had gone!”

Harry squinted around on the floodlit ground forsigns of more spiders, but they had all scuttled awayfrom the glare of the headlights.

“We’ve lost the trail,” he said. “C’mon, let’s go and findthem.”

Ron didn’t speak. He didn’t move. His eyes were fixedon a point some ten feet above the forest floor, rightbehind Harry. His face was livid with terror.

Harry didn’t even have time to turn around. Therewas a loud clicking noise and suddenly he feltsomething long and hairy seize him around themiddle and lift him off the ground, so that he washanging facedown. Struggling, terrified, he heardmore clicking, and saw Ron’s legs leave the ground,too, heard Fang whimpering and howling — nextmoment, he was being swept away into the darktrees.

Head hanging, Harry saw that what had hold of himwas marching on six immensely long, hairy legs, thefront two clutching him tightly below a pair of shiningblack pincers. Behind him, he could hear another ofthe creatures, no doubt carrying Ron. They weremoving into the very heart of the forest. Harry couldhear Fang fighting to free himself from a thirdmonster, whining loudly, but Harry couldn’t haveyelled even if he had wanted to; he seemed to have lefthis voice back with the car in the clearing.

Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

He never knew how long he was in the creature’sclutches; he only knew that the darkness suddenlylifted enough for him to see that the leaf-strewnground was now swarming with spiders. Craning hisneck sideways, he realized that they had reached theridge of a vast hollow, a hollow that had been clearedof trees, so that the stars shone brightly onto theworst scene he had ever laid eyes on.

Spiders. Not tiny spiders like those surging over theleaves below. Spiders the size of carthorses, eight-eyed, eight-legged, black, hairy, gigantic. The massivespecimen that was carrying Harry made its way downthe steep slope toward a misty, domed web in the verycenter of the hollow, while its fellows closed in allaround it, clicking their pincers excitedly at the sightof its load.

Harry fell to the ground on all fours as the spiderreleased him. Ron and Fang thudded down next tohim. Fang wasn’t howling anymore, but coweringsilently on the spot. Ron looked exactly like Harry felt.His mouth was stretched wide in a kind of silentscream and his eyes were popping.

Harry suddenly realized that the spider that haddropped him was saying something. It had been hardto tell, because he clicked his pincers with every wordhe spoke.

“Aragog!” it called. “Aragog!”

And from the middle of the misty, domed web, aspider the size of a small elephant emerged, veryslowly. There was gray in the black of his body andlegs, and each of the eyes on his ugly, pincered headwas milky white. He was blind.

“What is it?” he said, clicking his pincers rapidly.

Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Men,” clicked the spider who had caught Harry.

“Is it Hagrid?” said Aragog, moving closer, his eightmilky eyes wandering vaguely.

“Strangers,” clicked the spider who had brought Ron.“Kill them,” clicked Aragog fretfully. “I was sleeping.

“We’re friends of Hagrid’s,” Harry shouted. His heartseemed to have left his chest to pound in his throat.

Click, click, click went the pincers of the spiders allaround the hollow.

Aragog paused.

“Hagrid has never sent men into our hollow before,”he said slowly.

“Hagrid’s in trouble,” said Harry, breathing very fast.“That’s why we’ve come.”

“In trouble?” said the aged spider, and Harry thoughthe heard concern beneath the clicking pincers. “Butwhy has he sent you?”

Harry thought of getting to his feet but decidedagainst it; he didn’t think his legs would support him.So he spoke from the ground, as calmly as he could.

“They think, up at the school, that Hagrid’s beensetting a — a — something on students. They’vetaken him to Azkaban.”

Aragog clicked his pincers furiously, and all aroundthe hollow the sound was echoed by the crowd of

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

spiders; it was like applause, except applause didn’tusually make Harry feel sick with fear.

“But that was years ago,” said Aragog fretfully. “Yearsand years ago. I remember it well. That’s why theymade him leave the school. They believed that I wasthe monster that dwells in what they call theChamber of Secrets. They thought that Hagrid hadopened the Chamber and set me free.”

“And you ... you didn’t come from the Chamber ofSecrets?” said Harry, who could feel cold sweat on hisforehead.

“I!” said Aragog, clicking angrily. “I was not born inthe castle. I come from a distant land. A traveler gaveme to Hagrid when I was an egg. Hagrid was only aboy, but he cared for me, hidden in a cupboard in thecastle, feeding me on scraps from the table. Hagrid ismy good friend, and a good man. When I wasdiscovered, and blamed for the death of a girl, heprotected me. I have lived here in the forest eversince, where Hagrid still visits me. He even found mea wife, Mosag, and you see how our family has grown,all through Hagrid’s goodness. ...”

Harry summoned what remained of his courage.

“So you never — never attacked anyone?”

“Never,” croaked the old spider. “It would have beenmy instinct, but out of respect for Hagrid, I neverharmed a human. The body of the girl who was killedwas discovered in a bathroom. I never saw any part ofthe castle but the cupboard in which I grew up. Ourkind like the dark and the quiet. ...”

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“But then ... Do you know what did kill that girl?”said Harry. “Because whatever it is, it’s back andattacking people again —”

His words were drowned by a loud outbreak ofclicking and the rustling of many long legs shiftingangrily; large black shapes shifted all around him.

“The thing that lives in the castle,” said Aragog, “is anancient creature we spiders fear above all others. Welldo I remember how I pleaded with Hagrid to let me go,when I sensed the beast moving about the school.”

“What is it?” said Harry urgently.

More loud clicking, more rustling; the spiders seemedto be closing in.

“We do not speak of it!” said Aragog fiercely. “We donot name it! I never even told Hagrid the name of thatdread creature, though he asked me, many times.”

Harry didn’t want to press the subject, not with thespiders pressing closer on all sides. Aragog seemed tobe tired of talking. He was backing slowly into hisdomed web, but his fellow spiders continued to inchslowly toward Harry and Ron.

“Well just go, then,” Harry called desperately toAragog, hearing leaves rustling behind him.

“Go?” said Aragog slowly. “I think not. ...”

“But — but —”

“My sons and daughters do not harm Hagrid, on mycommand. But I cannot deny them fresh meat, whenit wanders so willingly into our midst. Good-bye,friend of Hagrid.”

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry spun around. Feet away, towering above him,was a solid wall of spiders, clicking, their many eyesgleaming in their ugly black heads.

Even as he reached for his wand, Harry knew it wasno good, there were too many of them, but as he triedto stand, ready to die fighting, a loud, long notesounded, and a blaze of light flamed through thehollow.

Mr. Weasley’s car was thundering down the slope,headlights glaring, its horn screeching, knockingspiders aside; several were thrown onto their backs,their endless legs waving in the air. The car screechedto a halt in front of Harry and Ron and the doors flewopen.

“Get Fang!” Harry yelled, diving into the front seat;

Ron seized the boarhound around the middle andthrew him, yelping, into the back of the car — thedoors slammed shut — Ron didn’t touch theaccelerator but the car didn’t need him; the engineroared and they were off, hitting more spiders. Theysped up the slope, out of the hollow, and they weresoon crashing through the forest, branches whippingthe windows as the car wound its way cleverlythrough the widest gaps, following a path it obviouslyknew.

Harry looked sideways at Ron. His mouth was stillopen in the silent scream, but his eyes weren’tpopping anymore.

“Are you okay?”

Ron stared straight ahead, unable to speak.

They smashed their way through the undergrowth,Fang howling loudly in the back seat, and Harry saw

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

the side mirror snap off as they squeezed past a largeoak. After ten noisy, rocky minutes, the trees thinned,and Harry could again see patches of sky.

The car stopped so suddenly that they were nearlythrown into the windshield. They had reached theedge of the forest. Fang flung himself at the window inhis anxiety to get out, and when Harry opened thedoor, he shot off through the trees to Hagrid’s house,tail between his legs. Harry got out too, and after aminute or so, Ron seemed to regain the feeling in hislimbs and followed, still stiff-necked and staring.

Harry gave the car a grateful pat as it reversed backinto the forest and disappeared from view.

Harry went back into Hagrid’s cabin to get theInvisibility Cloak. Fang was trembling under ablanket in his basket. When Harry got outside again,he found Ron being violently sick in the pumpkinpatch.

“Follow the spiders,” said Ron weakly, wiping hismouth on his sleeve. “I’ll never forgive Hagrid. We’relucky to be alive.”

“I bet he thought Aragog wouldn’t hurt friends of his,”said Harry.

“That’s exactly Hagrid’s problem!” said Ron, thumpingthe wall of the cabin. “He always thinks monstersaren’t as bad as they’re made out, and look where it’sgot him! A cell in Azkaban!” He was shiveringuncontrollably now. “What was the point of sendingus in there? What have we found out, I’d like toknow?”

“That Hagrid never opened the Chamber of Secrets,”said Harry, throwing the cloak over Ron and proddinghim in the arm to make him walk. “He was innocent.”

Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ron gave a loud snort. Evidently, hatching Aragog ina cupboard wasn’t his idea of being innocent.

As the castle loomed nearer Harry twitched the cloakto make sure their feet were hidden, then pushed thecreaking front doors ajar. They walked carefully backacross the entrance hall and up the marble staircase,holding their breath as they passed corridors wherewatchful sentries were walking. At last they reachedthe safety of the Gryffindor common room, where thefire had burned itself into glowing ash. They took offthe cloak and climbed the winding stair to theirdormitory.

Ron fell onto his bed without bothering to getundressed. Harry, however, didn’t feel very sleepy. Hesat on the edge of his fourposter, thinking hard abouteverything Aragog had said.

The creature that was lurking somewhere in thecastle, he thought, sounded like a sort of monsterVoldemort — even other monsters didn’t want toname it. But he and Ron were no closer to finding outwhat it was, or how it Petrified its victims. EvenHagrid had never known what was in the Chamber ofSecrets.

Harry swung his legs up onto his bed and leanedback against his pillows, watching the moon glintingat him through the tower window.

He couldn’t see what else they could do. They had hitdead ends everywhere. Riddle had caught the wrongperson, the Heir of Slytherin had got off, and no onecould tell whether it was the same person, or adifferent one, who had opened the Chamber this time.There was nobody else to ask. Harry lay down, stillthinking about what Aragog had said.

Page | 313 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

He was becoming drowsy when what seemed liketheir very last hope occurred to him, and he suddenlysat bolt upright.

“Ron,” he hissed through the dark, “Ron —”

Ron woke with a yelp like Fang’s, stared wildlyaround, and saw Harry.

“Ron — that girl who died. Aragog said she was foundin a bathroom,” said Harry, ignoring Neville’ssnuffling snores from the corner. “What if she neverleft the bathroom? What if she’s still there?”

Ron rubbed his eyes, frowning through the moonlight.And then he understood, too.

“You don’t think — not Moaning Myrtle?”

Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





THE CHAMBER OF SECRETS

All those times we were in that bathroom, and shewas just three toilets away,” said Ron bitterly atbreakfast next day, “and we could’ve asked her, andnow ...”

It had been hard enough trying to look for spiders.Escaping their teachers long enough to sneak into agirls’ bathroom, the girls’ bathroom, moreover, rightnext to the scene of the first attack, was going to bealmost impossible.

But something happened in their first lesson,Transfiguration, that drove the Chamber of Secretsout of their minds for the first time in weeks. Tenminutes into the class, Professor McGonagall toldthem that their exams would start on the first ofJune, one week from today.

“Exams?” howled Seamus Finnigan. “We’re stillgetting exams?”

Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

There was a loud bang behind Harry as NevilleLongbottom’s wand slipped, vanishing one of the legson his desk. Professor McGonagall restored it with awave of her own wand, and turned, frowning, toSeamus.

“The whole point of keeping the school open at thistime is for you to receive your education,” she saidsternly. “The exams will therefore take place as usual,and I trust you are all studying hard.”

Studying hard! It had never occurred to Harry thatthere would be exams with the castle in this state.There was a great deal of mutinous muttering aroundthe room, which made Professor McGonagall scowleven more darkly.

“Professor Dumbledore’s instructions were to keep theschool running as normally as possible,” she said.“And that, I need hardly point out, means finding outhow much you have learned this year.”

Harry looked down at the pair of white rabbits he wassupposed to be turning into slippers. What had helearned so far this year? He couldn’t seem to think ofanything that would be useful in an exam.

Ron looked as though he’d just been told he had to goand live in the Forbidden Forest.

“Can you imagine me taking exams with this?” heasked Harry, holding up his wand, which had juststarted whistling loudly.

Three days before their first exam, ProfessorMcGonagall made another announcement atbreakfast.

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I have good news,” she said, and the Great Hall,instead of falling silent, erupted.

“Dumbledore’s coming back!” several people yelledjoyfully.

“You’ve caught the Heir of Slytherin!” squealed a girlat the Ravenclaw table.

“Quidditch matches are back on!” roared Woodexcitedly.

When the hubbub had subsided, ProfessorMcGonagall said, “Professor Sprout has informed methat the Mandrakes are ready for cutting at last.Tonight, we will be able to revive those people whohave been Petrified. I need hardly remind you all thatone of them may well be able to tell us who, or what,attacked them. I am hopeful that this dreadful yearwill end with our catching the culprit.”

There was an explosion of cheering. Harry looked overat the Slytherin table and wasn’t at all surprised tosee that Draco Malfoy hadn’t joined in. Ron, however,was looking happier than he’d looked in days.

“It won’t matter that we never asked Myrtle, then!” hesaid to Harry. “Hermione’ll probably have all theanswers when they wake her up! Mind you, she’ll gocrazy when she finds out we’ve got exams in threedays’ time. She hasn’t studied. It might be kinder toleave her where she is till they’re over.”

Just then, Ginny Weasley came over and sat downnext to Ron. She looked tense and nervous, and Harrynoticed that her hands were twisting in her lap.

“What’s up?” said Ron, helping himself to moreporridge.

Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ginny didn’t say anything, but glanced up and downthe Gryffindor table with a scared look on her facethat reminded Harry of someone, though he couldn’tthink who.

“Spit it out,” said Ron, watching her.

Harry suddenly realized who Ginny looked like. Shewas rocking backward and forward slightly in herchair, exactly like Dobby did when he was teeteringon the edge of revealing forbidden information.

“I’ve got to tell you something,” Ginny mumbled,carefully not looking at Harry.

“What is it?” said Harry.

Ginny looked as though she couldn’t find the rightwords.

“What?” said Ron.

Ginny opened her mouth, but no sound came out.Harry leaned forward and spoke quietly, so that onlyGinny and Ron could hear him.

“Is it something about the Chamber of Secrets? Haveyou seen something? Someone acting oddly?”

Ginny drew a deep breath and, at that precisemoment, Percy Weasley appeared, looking tired andwan.

“If you’ve finished eating, I’ll take that seat, Ginny. I’mstarving, I’ve only just come off patrol duty.”

Ginny jumped up as though her chair had just beenelectrified, gave Percy a fleeting, frightened look, and

Page | 318 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

scampered away. Percy sat down and grabbed a mugfrom the center of the table.

“Percy!” said Ron angrily. “She was just about to tellus something important!”

Halfway through a gulp of tea, Percy choked.

“What sort of thing?” he said, coughing.

“I just asked her if she’d seen anything odd, and shestarted to say —”

“Oh — that — that’s nothing to do with the Chamberof Secrets,” said Percy at once.

“How do you know?” said Ron, his eyebrows raised.

“Well, er, if you must know, Ginny, er, walked in onme the other day when I was — well, never mind —the point is, she spotted me doing something and I,um, I asked her not to mention it to anybody. I mustsay, I did think she’d keep her word. It’s nothing,really, I’d just rather —”

Harry had never seen Percy look so uncomfortable.

“What were you doing, Percy?” said Ron, grinning.

“Go on, tell us, we won’t laugh.”

Percy didn’t smile back.

“Pass me those rolls, Harry, I’m starving.”

Harry knew the whole mystery might be solvedtomorrow without their help, but he wasn’t about topass up a chance to speak to Myrtle if it turned up —and to his delight it did, midmorning, when they werebeing led to History of Magic by Gilderoy Lockhart.

Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Lockhart, who had so often assured them that alldanger had passed, only to be proved wrong rightaway, was now wholeheartedly convinced that it washardly worth the trouble to see them safely down thecorridors. His hair wasn’t as sleek as usual; it seemedhe had been up most of the night, patrolling thefourth floor.

“Mark my words,” he said, ushering them around acorner. “The first words out of those poor Petrifiedpeople’s mouths will be ‘It was Hagrid.’ Frankly, I’mastounded Professor McGonagall thinks all thesesecurity measures are necessary.”

“I agree, sir,” said Harry, making Ron drop his booksin surprise.

“Thank you, Harry,” said Lockhart graciously whilethey waited for a long line of Hufflepuffs to pass. “Imean, we teachers have quite enough to be getting onwith, without walking students to classes andstanding guard all night. ...”

“That’s right,” said Ron, catching on. “Why don’t youleave us here, sir, we’ve only got one more corridor togo-”

“You know, Weasley, I think I will,” said Lockhart. “Ireally should go and prepare my next class —”

And he hurried off.

“Prepare his class,” Ron sneered after him. “Gone tocurl his hair, more like.”

They let the rest of the Gryffindors draw ahead ofthem, then darted down a side passage and hurriedoff toward Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom. But just as

Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

they were congratulating each other on their brilliantscheme —

“Potter! Weasley! What are you doing?”

It was Professor McGonagall, and her mouth was thethinnest of thin lines.

“We were — we were —” Ron stammered. “We weregoing to — to go and see —”

“Hermione,” said Harry. Ron and ProfessorMcGonagall both looked at him.

“We haven’t seen her for ages, Professor,” Harry wenton hurriedly, treading on Ron’s foot, “and we thoughtwe’d sneak into the hospital wing, you know, and tellher the Mandrakes are nearly ready and, er, not toworry —”

Professor McGonagall was still staring at him, and fora moment, Harry thought she was going to explode,but when she spoke, it was in a strangely croakyvoice.

“Of course,” she said, and Harry, amazed, saw a tearglistening in her beady eye. “Of course, I realize thishas all been hardest on the friends of those who havebeen ... I quite understand. Yes, Potter, of course youmay visit Miss Granger. I will inform Professor Binnswhere you’ve gone. Tell Madam Pomfrey I have givenmy permission.”

Harry and Ron walked away, hardly daring to believethat they’d avoided detention. As they turned thecorner, they distinctly heard Professor McGonagallblow her nose.

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“That,” said Ron fervently, “was the best story you’veever come up with.”

They had no choice now but to go to the hospital wingand tell Madam Pomfrey that they had ProfessorMcGonagall’s permission to visit Hermione.

Madam Pomfrey let them in, but reluctantly.

“There’s just no point talking to a Petrified person,”she said, and they had to admit she had a point whenthey’d taken their seats next to Hermione. It wasplain that Hermione didn’t have the faintest inklingthat she had visitors, and that they might just as welltell her bedside cabinet not to worry for all the good itwould do.

“Wonder if she did see the attacker, though?” saidRon, looking sadly at Hermione’s rigid face. “Becauseif he sneaked up on them all, no one’ll ever know. ...”

But Harry wasn’t looking at Hermione’s face. He wasmore interested in her right hand. It lay clenched ontop of her blankets, and bending closer, he saw that apiece of paper was scrunched inside her fist.

Making sure that Madam Pomfrey was nowhere near,he pointed this out to Ron.

“Try and get it out,” Ron whispered, shifting his chairso that he blocked Harry from Madam Pomfrey’s view.

It was no easy task. Hermione’s hand was clamped sotightly around the paper that Harry was sure he wasgoing to tear it. While Ron kept watch he tugged andtwisted, and at last, after several tense minutes, thepaper came free.

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

It was a page torn from a very old library book. Harrysmoothed it out eagerly and Ron leaned close to readit, too.

Of the many fearsome beasts and monsters that roamour land, there is none more curious or more deadlythan the Basilisk, known also as the King of Serpents.This snake, which may reach gigantic size and livemany hundreds of years, is born from a chicken’s egg,hatched beneath a toad. Its methods of killing aremost wondrous, for aside from its deadly andvenomous fangs, the Basilisk has a murderous stare,and all who are fixed with the beam of its eye shallsuffer instant death. Spiders flee before the Basilisk,for it is their mortal enemy, and the Basilisk flees onlyfrom the crowing of the rooster, which is fatal to it.

And beneath this, a single word had been written, ina hand Harry recognized as Hermione’s. Pipes.

It was as though somebody had just flicked a light onin his brain.

“Ron,” he breathed. “This is it. This is the answer. Themonster in the Chamber’s a basilisk — a giantserpent! That’s why I’ve been hearing that voice allover the place, and nobody else has heard it. It’sbecause I understand Parseltongue. ...”

Harry looked up at the beds around him.

“The basilisk kills people by looking at them. But noone’s died — because no one looked it straight in theeye. Colin saw it through his camera. The basiliskburned up all the film inside it, but Colin just gotPetrified. Justin ... Justin must’ve seen the basiliskthrough Nearly Headless Nick! Nick got the full blastPage | 323 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

of it, but he couldn’t die again ... and Hermione andthat Ravenclaw prefect were found with a mirror nextto them. Hermione had just realized the monster wasa basilisk. I bet you anything she warned the firstperson she met to look around corners with a mirrorfirst! And that girl pulled out her mirror — and —”

Ron’s jaw had dropped.

“And Mrs. Norris?” he whispered eagerly.

Harry thought hard, picturing the scene on the nightof Halloween.

“The water ...” he said slowly. “The flood fromMoaning Myrtle’s bathroom. I bet you Mrs. Norrisonly saw the reflection. ...”

He scanned the page in his hand eagerly. The morehe looked at it, the more it made sense.

"... The crowing of the rooster ... is fatal to if!” he readaloud. “Hagrid’s roosters were killed! The Heir ofSlytherin didn’t want one anywhere near the castleonce the Chamber was opened! Spiders flee before it\

It all fits!”

“But how’s the basilisk been getting around theplace?” said Ron. “A giant snake ... Someone would’veseen ...”

Harry, however, pointed at the word Hermione hadscribbled at the foot of the page.

“Pipes,” he said. “Pipes ... Ron, it’s been using theplumbing. I’ve been hearing that voice inside thewalls. ...”

Ron suddenly grabbed Harry’s arm.

Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“The entrance to the Chamber of Secrets!” he saidhoarsely. “What if it’s a bathroom? What if it’s in —”

“— Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom,” said Harry.

They sat there, excitement coursing through them,hardly able to believe it.

“This means,” said Harry, “I can’t be the onlyParselmouth in the school. The Heir of Slytherin’sone, too. That’s how he’s been controlling thebasilisk.”

“What’re we going to do?” said Ron, whose eyes wereflashing. “Should we go straight to McGonagall?”

“Let’s go to the staffroom,” said Harry, jumping up.“She’ll be there in ten minutes. It’s nearly break.”

They ran downstairs. Not wanting to be discoveredhanging around in another corridor, they wentstraight into the deserted staffroom. It was a large,paneled room full of dark, wooden chairs. Harry andRon paced around it, too excited to sit down.

But the bell to signal break never came.

Instead, echoing through the corridors came ProfessorMcGonagall’s voice, magically magnified.

“All students to return to their House dormitories atonce. All teachers return to the staffroom. Immediately,please.”

Harry wheeled around to stare at Ron.

“Not another attack? Not now?”

Page | 325 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“What’ll we do?” said Ron, aghast. “Go back to thedormitory?”

“No,” said Harry, glancing around. There was an uglysort of wardrobe to his left, full of the teachers’cloaks. “In here. Let’s hear what it’s all about. Thenwe can tell them what we’ve found out.”

They hid themselves inside it, listening to therumbling of hundreds of people moving overhead, andthe staffroom door banging open. From between themusty folds of the cloaks, they watched the teachersfiltering into the room. Some of them were lookingpuzzled, others downright scared. Then ProfessorMcGonagall arrived.

“It has happened,” she told the silent staffroom. “Astudent has been taken by the monster. Right intothe Chamber itself.”

Professor Flitwick let out a squeal. Professor Sproutclapped her hands over her mouth. Snape gripped theback of a chair very hard and said, “How can you besure?”

“The Heir of Slytherin,” said Professor McGonagall,who was very white, “left another message. Rightunderneath the first one. ‘Her skeleton will lie in theChamber forever.’ ”

Professor Flitwick burst into tears.

“Who is it?” said Madam Hooch, who had sunk, weak-kneed, into a chair. “Which student?”

“Ginny Weasley,” said Professor McGonagall.

Harry felt Ron slide silently down onto the wardrobefloor beside him.

Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“We shall have to send all the students hometomorrow,” said Professor McGonagall. “This is theend of Hogwarts. Dumbledore always said ...”

The staffroom door banged open again. For one wildmoment, Harry was sure it would be Dumbledore.

But it was Lockhart, and he was beaming.

“So sorry — dozed off— what have I missed?”

He didn’t seem to notice that the other teachers werelooking at him with something remarkably likehatred. Snape stepped forward.

“Just the man,” he said. “The very man. A girl hasbeen snatched by the monster, Lockhart. Taken intothe Chamber of Secrets itself. Your moment has comeat last.”

Lockhart blanched.

“That’s right, Gilderoy,” chipped in Professor Sprout.“Weren’t you saying just last night that you’ve knownall along where the entrance to the Chamber ofSecrets is?”

“I — well, I —” sputtered Lockhart.

“Yes, didn’t you tell me you were sure you knew whatwas inside it?” piped up Professor Flitwick.

“D-did I? I don’t recall —”

“I certainly remember you saying you were sorry youhadn’t had a crack at the monster before Hagrid wasarrested,” said Snape. “Didn’t you say that the wholeaffair had been bungled, and that you should havebeen given a free rein from the first?”

Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Lockhart stared around at his stony-faced colleagues.

“I — I really never — you may have misunderstood —”

“Well leave it to you, then, Gilderoy,” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “Tonight will be an excellent time to doit. Well make sure everyone’s out of your way. You’llbe able to tackle the monster all by yourself. A freerein at last.”

Lockhart gazed desperately around him, but nobodycame to the rescue. He didn’t look remotely handsomeanymore. His lip was trembling, and in the absence ofhis usually toothy grin, he looked weak-chinned andfeeble.

“V-very well,” he said. “I’ll — I’ll be in my office,getting — getting ready.”

And he left the room.

“Right,” said Professor McGonagall, whose nostrilswere flared, “that’s got him out from under our feet.The Heads of Houses should go and inform theirstudents what has happened. Tell them the HogwartsExpress will take them home first thing tomorrow.

Will the rest of you please make sure no studentshave been left outside their dormitories.”

The teachers rose and left, one by one.

It was probably the worst day of Harry’s entire life.

He, Ron, Fred, and George sat together in a corner ofthe Gryffindor common room, unable to say anythingto each other. Percy wasn’t there. He had gone tosend an owl to Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, then shuthimself up in his dormitory.

Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

No afternoon ever lasted as long as that one, nor hadGryffindor Tower ever been so crowded, yet so quiet.Near sunset, Fred and George went up to bed, unableto sit there any longer.

“She knew something, Harry,” said Ron, speaking forthe first time since they had entered the wardrobe inthe staffroom. “That’s why she was taken. It wasn’tsome stupid thing about Percy at all. She’d found outsomething about the Chamber of Secrets. That mustbe why she was —” Ron rubbed his eyes frantically. “Imean, she was a pureblood. There can’t be any otherreason.”

Harry could see the sun sinking, blood-red, below theskyline. This was the worst he had ever felt. If onlythere was something they could do. Anything.

“Harry,” said Ron. “D’you think there’s any chance atall she’s not — you know —”

Harry didn’t know what to say. He couldn’t see howGinny could still be alive.

“D’you know what?” said Ron. “I think we should goand see Lockhart. Tell him what we know. He’s goingto try and get into the Chamber. We can tell himwhere we think it is, and tell him it’s a basilisk inthere.”

Because Harry couldn’t think of anything else to do,and because he wanted to be doing something, heagreed. The Gryffindors around them were somiserable, and felt so sorry for the Weasleys, thatnobody tried to stop them as they got up, crossed theroom, and left through the portrait hole.

Darkness was falling as they walked down toLockhart’s office. There seemed to be a lot of activity

Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

going on inside it. They could hear scraping, thumps,and hurried footsteps.

Harry knocked and there was a sudden silence frominside. Then the door opened the tiniest crack andthey saw one of Lockhart’s eyes peering through it.

“Oh — Mr. Potter — Mr. Weasley —” he said, openingthe door a bit wider. “I’m rather busy at the moment— if you would be quick —”

“Professor, we’ve got some information for you,” saidHarry. “We think it’ll help you.”

“Er — well — it’s not terribly —” The side ofLockhart’s face that they could see looked veryuncomfortable. “I mean — well — all right —”

He opened the door and they entered.

His office had been almost completely stripped. Twolarge trunks stood open on the floor. Robes, jade-green, lilac, midnight-blue, had been hastily foldedinto one of them; books were jumbled untidily intothe other. The photographs that had covered the wallswere now crammed into boxes on the desk.

“Are you going somewhere?” said Harry.

“Er, well, yes,” said Lockhart, ripping a life-size posterof himself from the back of the door as he spoke andstarting to roll it up. “Urgent call — unavoidable —got to go —”

“What about my sister?” said Ron jerkily.

“Well, as to that — most unfortunate —” saidLockhart, avoiding their eyes as he wrenched open a

Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

drawer and started emptying the contents into a bag.“No one regrets more than I —”

“You’re the Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher!”said Harry. “You can’t go now! Not with all the Darkstuff going on here!”

“Well — I must say — when I took the job —”Lockhart muttered, now piling socks on top of hisrobes, “nothing in the job description — didn’t expect

“You mean you’re running away? said Harrydisbelievingly. “After all that stuff you did in yourbooks —”

“Books can be misleading,” said Lockhart delicately.

“You wrote them!” Harry shouted.

“My dear boy,” said Lockhart, straightening up andfrowning at Harry. “Do use your common sense. Mybooks wouldn’t have sold half as well if people didn’tthink I’d done all those things. No one wants to readabout some ugly old Armenian warlock, even if he didsave a village from werewolves. He’d look dreadful onthe front cover. No dress sense at all. And the witchwho banished the Bandon Banshee had a hairy chin.

I mean, come on —”

“So you’ve just been taking credit for what a load ofother people have done?” said Harry incredulously.

“Harry, Harry,” said Lockhart, shaking his headimpatiently, “it’s not nearly as simple as that. Therewas work involved. I had to track these people down.Ask them exactly how they managed to do what theydid. Then I had to put a Memory Charm on them sothey wouldn’t remember doing it. If there’s one thing IPage | 331 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

pride myself on, it’s my Memory Charms. No, it’s beena lot of work, Harry. It’s not all book signings andpublicity photos, you know. You want fame, you haveto be prepared for a long hard slog.”

He banged the lids of his trunks shut and lockedthem.

“Let’s see,” he said. “I think that’s everything. Yes.Only one thing left.”

He pulled out his wand and turned to them.

“Awfully sorry, boys, but I’ll have to put a MemoryCharm on you now. Can’t have you blabbing mysecrets all over the place. I’d never sell another book

Harry reached his wand just in time. Lockhart hadbarely raised his, when Harry bellowed,

“ Expelliarmus\ ”

Lockhart was blasted backward, falling over histrunk; his wand flew high into the air; Ron caught it,and flung it out of the open window.

“Shouldn’t have let Professor Snape teach us thatone,” said Harry furiously, kicking Lockhart’s trunkaside. Lockhart was looking up at him, feeble oncemore. Harry was still pointing his wand at him.

“What d’you want me to do?” said Lockhart weakly. “Idon’t know where the Chamber of Secrets is. There’snothing I can do.”

“You’re in luck,” said Harry, forcing Lockhart to hisfeet at wandpoint. “We think we know where it is.And what’s inside it. Let’s go.”

Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

They marched Lockhart out of his office and down thenearest stairs, along the dark corridor where themessages shone on the wall, to the door of MoaningMyrtle’s bathroom.

They sent Lockhart in first. Harry was pleased to seethat he was shaking.

Moaning Myrtle was sitting on the tank of the endtoilet.

“Oh, it’s you,” she said when she saw Harry. “What doyou want this time?”

“To ask you how you died,” said Harry.

Myrtle’s whole aspect changed at once. She looked asthough she had never been asked such a flatteringquestion.

“Ooooh, it was dreadful,” she said with relish. “Ithappened right in here. I died in this very stall. Iremember it so well. I’d hidden because Olive Hornbywas teasing me about my glasses. The door waslocked, and I was crying, and then I heard somebodycome in. They said something funny. A differentlanguage, I think it must have been. Anyway, whatreally got me was that it was a boy speaking. So Iunlocked the door, to tell him to go and use his owntoilet, and then —” Myrtle swelled importantly, herface shining. “I died.”

“How?” said Harry.

“No idea,” said Myrtle in hushed tones. “I justremember seeing a pair of great, big, yellow eyes. Mywhole body sort of seized up, and then I was floatingaway. ...” She looked dreamily at Harry. “And then Icame back again. I was determined to haunt OlivePage | 333 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Hornby, you see. Oh, she was sorry she’d everlaughed at my glasses.”

“Where exactly did you see the eyes?” said Harry.

“Somewhere there,” said Myrtle, pointing vaguelytoward the sink in front of her toilet.

Harry and Ron hurried over to it. Lockhart wasstanding well back, a look of utter terror on his face.

It looked like an ordinary sink. They examined everyinch of it, inside and out, including the pipes below.And then Harry saw it: Scratched on the side of one ofthe copper taps was a tiny snake.

“That tap’s never worked,” said Myrtle brightly as hetried to turn it.

“Harry,” said Ron. “Say something. Something inParseltongue.”

“But —” Harry thought hard. The only times he’d evermanaged to speak Parseltongue were when he’d beenfaced with a real snake. He stared hard at the tinyengraving, trying to imagine it was real.

“Open up,” he said.

He looked at Ron, who shook his head.

“English,” he said.

Harry looked back at the snake, willing himself tobelieve it was alive. If he moved his head, thecandlelight made it look as though it were moving.

“Open up,” he said.

Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Except that the words weren’t what he heard; astrange hissing had escaped him, and at once the tapglowed with a brilliant white light and began to spin.Next second, the sink began to move; the sink, in fact,sank, right out of sight, leaving a large pipe exposed,a pipe wide enough for a man to slide into.

Harry heard Ron gasp and looked up again. He hadmade up his mind what he was going to do.

“I’m going down there,” he said.

He couldn’t not go, not now they had found theentrance to the Chamber, not if there was even thefaintest, slimmest, wildest chance that Ginny mightbe alive.

“Me too,” said Ron.

There was a pause.

“Well, you hardly seem to need me,” said Lockhart,with a shadow of his old smile. “I’ll just —”

He put his hand on the door knob, but Ron and Harryboth pointed their wands at him.

“You can go first,” Ron snarled.

White-faced and wandless, Lockhart approached theopening.

“Boys,” he said, his voice feeble. “Boys, what good willit do?”

Harry jabbed him in the back with his wand.

Lockhart slid his legs into the pipe.

Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I really don’t think —” he started to say, but Rongave him a push, and he slid out of sight. Harryfollowed quickly. He lowered himself slowly into thepipe, then let go.

It was like rushing down an endless, slimy, darkslide. He could see more pipes branching off in alldirections, but none as large as theirs, which twistedand turned, sloping steeply downward, and he knewthat he was falling deeper below the school than eventhe dungeons. Behind him he could hear Ron,thudding slightly at the curves.

And then, just as he had begun to worry about whatwould happen when he hit the ground, the pipeleveled out, and he shot out of the end with a wetthud, landing on the damp floor of a dark stonetunnel large enough to stand in. Lockhart was gettingto his feet a little ways away, covered in slime andwhite as a ghost. Harry stood aside as Ron camewhizzing out of the pipe, too.

“We must be miles under the school,” said Harry, hisvoice echoing in the black tunnel.

“Under the lake, probably,” said Ron, squintingaround at the dark, slimy walls.

All three of them turned to stare into the darknessahead.

“Lumosl” Harry muttered to his wand and it lit again.“C’mon,” he said to Ron and Lockhart, and off theywent, their footsteps slapping loudly on the wet floor.

The tunnel was so dark that they could only see alittle distance ahead. Their shadows on the wet wallslooked monstrous in the wandlight.

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Remember,” Harry said quietly as they walkedcautiously forward, “any sign of movement, close youreyes right away. ...”

But the tunnel was quiet as the grave, and the firstunexpected sound they heard was a loud crunch asRon stepped on what turned out to be a rat’s skull.Harry lowered his wand to look at the floor and sawthat it was littered with small animal bones. Tryingvery hard not to imagine what Ginny might look like ifthey found her, Harry led the way forward, around adark bend in the tunnel.

“Harry — there’s something up there —” said Ronhoarsely, grabbing Harry’s shoulder.

They froze, watching. Harry could just see the outlineof something huge and curved, lying right across thetunnel. It wasn’t moving.

“Maybe it’s asleep,” he breathed, glancing back at theother two. Lockhart’s hands were pressed over hiseyes. Harry turned back to look at the thing, his heartbeating so fast it hurt.

Very slowly, his eyes as narrow as he could makethem and still see, Harry edged forward, his wandheld high.

The light slid over a gigantic snake skin, of a vivid,poisonous green, lying curled and empty across thetunnel floor. The creature that had shed it must havebeen twenty feet long at least.

“Blimey,” said Ron weakly.

There was a sudden movement behind them. GilderoyLockhart’s knees had given way.

Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Get up,” said Ron sharply, pointing his wand atLockhart.

Lockhart got to his feet — then he dived at Ron,knocking him to the ground.

Harry jumped forward, but too late — Lockhart wasstraightening up, panting, Ron’s wand in his handand a gleaming smile back on his face.

“The adventure ends here, boys!” he said. “I shall takea bit of this skin back up to the school, tell them Iwas too late to save the girl, and that you twotragically lost your minds at the sight of her mangledbody — say good-bye to your memories!”

He raised Ron’s Spellotaped wand high over his headand yelled, “Obliviatel”

The wand exploded with the force of a small bomb.Harry flung his arms over his head and ran, slippingover the coils of snake skin, out of the way of greatchunks of tunnel ceiling that were thundering to thefloor. Next moment, he was standing alone, gazing ata solid wall of broken rock.

“Ron!” he shouted. “Are you okay? Ron!”

“I’m here!” came Ron’s muffled voice from behind therock-fall. “I’m okay — this git’s not, though — he gotblasted by the wand —”

There was a dull thud and a loud “ow!” It sounded asthough Ron had just kicked Lockhart in the shins.

“What now?” Ron’s voice said, sounding desperate.“We can’t get through — it’ll take ages. ...”

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked up at the tunnel ceiling. Huge crackshad appeared in it. He had never tried to break apartanything as large as these rocks by magic, and nowdidn’t seem a good moment to try — what if the wholetunnel caved in?

There was another thud and another “ow!” frombehind the rocks. They were wasting time. Ginny hadalready been in the Chamber of Secrets for hours. ...Harry knew there was only one thing to do.

“Wait there,” he called to Ron. “Wait with Lockhart. I’llgo on. ... If I’m not back in an hour ...”

There was a very pregnant pause.

“I’ll try and shift some of this rock,” said Ron, whoseemed to be trying to keep his voice steady. “So youcan — can get back through. And, Harry —”

“See you in a bit,” said Harry, trying to inject someconfidence into his shaking voice.

And he set off alone past the giant snake skin.

Soon the distant noise of Ron straining to shift therocks was gone. The tunnel turned and turned again.Every nerve in Harry’s body was tinglingunpleasantly. He wanted the tunnel to end, yetdreaded what he’d find when it did. And then, at last,as he crept around yet another bend, he saw a solidwall ahead on which two entwined serpents werecarved, their eyes set with great, glinting emeralds.

Harry approached, his throat very dry. There was noneed to pretend these stone snakes were real; theireyes looked strangely alive.

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

He could guess what he had to do. He cleared histhroat, and the emerald eyes seemed to flicker.

“Open,” said Harry, in a low, faint hiss.

The serpents parted as the wall cracked open, thehalves slid smoothly out of sight, and Harry, shakingfrom head to foot, walked inside.

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





THE HEIR OF SLYTHERIN

He was standing at the end of a very long, dimly litchamber. Towering stone pillars entwined with morecarved serpents rose to support a ceiling lost indarkness, casting long, black shadows through theodd, greenish gloom that filled the place.

His heart beating very fast, Harry stood listening tothe chill silence. Could the basilisk be lurking in ashadowy corner, behind a pillar? And where wasGinny?

He pulled out his wand and moved forward betweenthe serpentine columns. Every careful footstep echoedloudly off the shadowy walls. He kept his eyesnarrowed, ready to clamp them shut at the smallestsign of movement. The hollow eye sockets of the stonesnakes seemed to be following him. More than once,with a jolt of the stomach, he thought he saw one stir.

Then, as he drew level with the last pair of pillars, astatue high as the Chamber itself loomed into view,standing against the back wall.

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry had to crane his neck to look up into the giantface above: It was ancient and monkeyish, with along, thin beard that fell almost to the bottom of thewizard’s sweeping stone robes, where two enormousgray feet stood on the smooth Chamber floor. Andbetween the feet, facedown, lay a small, black-robedfigure with flaming-red hair.

“Ginnyl” Harry muttered, sprinting to her anddropping to his knees. “Ginny — don’t be dead —please don’t be dead —” He flung his wand aside,grabbed Ginny’s shoulders, and turned her over. Herface was white as marble, and as cold, yet her eyeswere closed, so she wasn’t Petrified. But then shemust be —

“Ginny, please wake up,” Harry muttered desperately,shaking her. Ginny’s head lolled hopelessly from sideto side.

“She won’t wake,” said a soft voice.

Harry jumped and spun around on his knees.

A tall, black-haired boy was leaning against thenearest pillar, watching. He was strangely blurredaround the edges, as though Harry were looking athim through a misted window. But there was nomistaking him —

“Tom — Tom Riddle?”

Riddle nodded, not taking his eyes off Harry’s face.

“What d’you mean, she won’t wake?” Harry saiddesperately. “She’s not — she’s not — ?”

“She’s still alive,” said Riddle. “But only just.”

Page | 342 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry stared at him. Tom Riddle had been atHogwarts fifty years ago, yet here he stood, a weird,misty light shining about him, not a day older thansixteen.

“Are you a ghost?” Harry said uncertainly.

“A memory,” said Riddle quietly. “Preserved in a diaryfor fifty years.”

He pointed toward the floor near the statue’s gianttoes. Lying open there was the little black diary Harryhad found in Moaning Myrtle’s bathroom. For asecond, Harry wondered how it had got there — butthere were more pressing matters to deal with.

“You’ve got to help me, Tom,” Harry said, raisingGinny’s head again. “We’ve got to get her out of here.There’s a basilisk ... I don’t know where it is, but itcould be along any moment. ... Please, help me —”

Riddle didn’t move. Harry, sweating, managed to hoistGinny half off the floor, and bent to pick up his wandagain.

But his wand had gone.

“Did you see — ?”

He looked up. Riddle was still watching him —twirling Harry’s wand between his long fingers.

“Thanks,” said Harry, stretching out his hand for it.

A smile curled the corners of Riddle’s mouth. Hecontinued to stare at Harry, twirling the wand idly.

Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Listen,” said Harry urgently, his knees sagging withGinny’s dead weight. “We’ve got to go\ If the basiliskcomes —”

“It won’t come until it is called,” said Riddle calmly.

Harry lowered Ginny back onto the floor, unable tohold her up any longer.

“What d’you mean?” he said. “Look, give me my wand,I might need it —”

Riddle’s smile broadened.

“You won’t be needing it,” he said.

Harry stared at him.

“What d’you mean, I won’t be — ?”

“I’ve waited a long time for this, Harry Potter,” saidRiddle. “For the chance to see you. To speak to you.”

“Look,” said Harry, losing patience, “I don’t think youget it. We’re in the Chamber of Secrets. We can talklater —”

“We’re going to talk now,” said Riddle, still smilingbroadly, and he pocketed Harry’s wand.

Harry stared at him. There was something very funnygoing on here. ...

“How did Ginny get like this?” he asked slowly.

“Well, that’s an interesting question,” said Riddlepleasantly. “And quite a long story. I suppose the realreason Ginny Weasley’s like this is because she

Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

opened her heart and spilled all her secrets to aninvisible stranger.”

“What are you talking about?” said Harry.

“The diary,” said Riddle. “My diary. Little Ginny’s beenwriting in it for months and months, telling me all herpitiful worries and woes — how her brothers teaseher, how she had to come to school with secondhandrobes and books, how” — Riddle’s eyes glinted —

“how she didn’t think famous, good, great HarryPotter would ever like her. ...”

All the time he spoke, Riddle’s eyes never left Harry’sface. There was an almost hungry look in them.

“It’s very boring, having to listen to the silly littletroubles of an eleven-year-old girl,” he went on. “But Iwas patient. I wrote back. I was sympathetic, I waskind. Ginny simply loved me. No one’s everunderstood me like you, Tom. ... I’m so glad I’ve gotthis diary to confide in. ... It’s like having a friend I cancarry around in my pocket. ...”

Riddle laughed, a high, cold laugh that didn’t suithim. It made the hairs stand up on the back ofHarry’s neck.

“If I say it myself, Harry, I’ve always been able tocharm the people I needed. So Ginny poured out hersoul to me, and her soul happened to be exactly whatI wanted. ... I grew stronger and stronger on a diet ofher deepest fears, her darkest secrets. I grewpowerful, far more powerful than little Miss Weasley.Powerful enough to start feeding Miss Weasley a fewof my secrets, to start pouring a little of my soul backinto her ...”

Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“What d’you mean?” said Harry, whose mouth hadgone very dry.

“Haven’t you guessed yet, Harry Potter?” said Riddlesoftly. “Ginny Weasley opened the Chamber ofSecrets. She strangled the school roosters anddaubed threatening messages on the walls. She setthe Serpent of Slytherin on four Mudbloods, and theSquib’s cat.”

“No,” Harry whispered.

“Yes,” said Riddle, calmly. “Of course, she didn’t knowwhat she was doing at first. It was very amusing. Iwish you could have seen her new diary entries ... farmore interesting, they became. ... Dear Tom,” herecited, watching Harry’s horrified face, “7 think I’mlosing my memory. There are rooster feathers all overmy robes and I don’t know how they got there. DearTom, I can’t remember what I did on the night ofHalloween, but a cat was attacked and I’ve got paintall down my front. Dear Tom, Percy keeps telling meI’m pale and I’m not myself. I think he suspects me. ...There was another attack today and I don’t knowwhere I was. Tom, what am I going to do? I think I’mgoing mad. ... I think I’m the one attacking everyone,Tom\”

Harry’s fists were clenched, the nails digging deepinto his palms.

“It took a very long time for stupid little Ginny to stoptrusting her diary,” said Riddle. “But she finallybecame suspicious and tried to dispose of it. Andthat’s where you came in, Harry. You found it, and Icouldn’t have been more delighted. Of all the peoplewho could have picked it up, it was you, the veryperson I was most anxious to meet. ...”

Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“And why did you want to meet me?” said Harry.

Anger was coursing through him, and it was an effortto keep his voice steady.

“Well, you see, Ginny told me all about you, Harry,”said Riddle. “Your whole fascinating history.” His eyesroved over the lightning scar on Harry’s forehead, andtheir expression grew hungrier. “I knew I must findout more about you, talk to you, meet you if I could.So I decided to show you my famous capture of thatgreat oaf, Hagrid, to gain your trust —”

“Hagrid’s my friend,” said Harry, his voice nowshaking. “And you framed him, didn’t you? I thoughtyou made a mistake, but —”

Riddle laughed his high laugh again.

“It was my word against Hagrid’s, Harry. Well, youcan imagine how it looked to old Armando Dippet. Onthe one hand, Tom Riddle, poor but brilliant,parentless but so brave, school prefect, model student... on the other hand, big, blundering Hagrid, introuble every other week, trying to raise werewolfcubs under his bed, sneaking off to the ForbiddenForest to wrestle trolls ... but I admit, even /wassurprised how well the plan worked. I thoughtsomeone must realize that Hagrid couldn’t possibly bethe Heir of Slytherin. It had taken me five whole yearsto find out everything I could about the Chamber ofSecrets and discover the secret entrance ... as thoughHagrid had the brains, or the power!

“Only the Transfiguration teacher, Dumbledore,seemed to think Hagrid was innocent. He persuadedDippet to keep Hagrid and train him as gamekeeper.Yes, I think Dumbledore might have guessed. ...Dumbledore never seemed to like me as much as theother teachers did. ...”

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I bet Dumbledore saw right through you,” saidHarry, his teeth gritted.

“Well, he certainly kept an annoyingly close watch onme after Hagrid was expelled,” said Riddle carelessly.“I knew it wouldn’t be safe to open the Chamber againwhile I was still at school. But I wasn’t going to wastethose long years I’d spent searching for it. I decided toleave behind a diary, preserving my sixteen-year-oldself in its pages, so that one day, with luck, I wouldbe able to lead another in my footsteps, and finishSalazar Slytherin’s noble work.”

“Well, you haven’t finished it,” said Harrytriumphantly. “No one’s died this time, not even thecat. In a few hours the Mandrake Draught will beready and everyone who was Petrified will be all rightagain —”

“Haven’t I already told you,” said Riddle quietly, “thatkilling Mudbloods doesn’t matter to me anymore? Formany months now, my new target has been — you.”

Harry stared at him.

“Imagine how angry I was when the next time mydiary was opened, it was Ginny who was writing tome, not you. She saw you with the diary, you see, andpanicked. What if you found out how to work it, and Irepeated all her secrets to you? What if, even worse, Itold you who’d been strangling roosters? So thefoolish little brat waited until your dormitory wasdeserted and stole it back. But I knew what I mustdo. It was clear to me that you were on the trail ofSlytherin’s heir. From everything Ginny had told meabout you, I knew you would go to any lengths tosolve the mystery — particularly if one of your bestfriends was attacked. And Ginny had told me the

Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

whole school was buzzing because you could speakParseltongue. ...

“So I made Ginny write her own farewell on the walland come down here to wait. She struggled and criedand became very boring. But there isn’t much life leftin her. ... She put too much into the diary, into me.Enough to let me leave its pages at last. ... I havebeen waiting for you to appear since we arrived here. Iknew you’d come. I have many questions for you,Harry Potter.”

“Like what?” Harry spat, fists still clenched.

“Well,” said Riddle, smiling pleasantly, “how is it thatyou — a skinny boy with no extraordinary magicaltalent — managed to defeat the greatest wizard of alltime? How did you escape with nothing but a scar,while Lord Voldemort’s powers were destroyed?”

There was an odd red gleam in his hungry eyes now.

“Why do you care how I escaped?” said Harry slowly.“Voldemort was after your time. ...”

“Voldemort,” said Riddle softly, “is my past, present,and future, Harry Potter. ...”

He pulled Harry’s wand from his pocket and began totrace it through the air, writing three shimmeringwords:

tom marvolo riddle

Then he waved the wand once, and the letters of hisname rearranged themselves:

i am lord voldemort

Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“You see?” he whispered. “It was a name I was alreadyusing at Hogwarts, to my most intimate friends only,of course. You think I was going to use my filthyMuggle father’s name forever? I, in whose veins runsthe blood of Salazar Slytherin himself, through mymother’s side? I, keep the name of a foul, commonMuggle, who abandoned me even before I was born,just because he found out his wife was a witch? No,Harry — I fashioned myself a new name, a name Iknew wizards everywhere would one day fear tospeak, when I had become the greatest sorcerer in theworld!”

Harry’s brain seemed to have jammed. He starednumbly at Riddle, at the orphaned boy who hadgrown up to murder Harry’s own parents, and somany others. ... At last he forced himself to speak.

“You’re not,” he said, his quiet voice full of hatred.

“Not what?” snapped Riddle.

“Not the greatest sorcerer in the world,” said Harry,breathing fast. “Sorry to disappoint you and all that,but the greatest wizard in the world is AlbusDumbledore. Everyone says so. Even when you werestrong, you didn’t dare try and take over at Hogwarts.Dumbledore saw through you when you were atschool and he still frightens you now, wherever you’rehiding these days —”

The smile had gone from Riddle’s face, to be replacedby a very ugly look.

“Dumbledore’s been driven out of this castle by themere memory of me!” he hissed.

Page | 350 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“He’s not as gone as you might think!” Harry retorted.He was speaking at random, wanting to scare Riddle,wishing rather than believing it to be true —

Riddle opened his mouth, but froze.

Music was coming from somewhere. Riddle whirledaround to stare down the empty Chamber. The musicwas growing louder. It was eerie, spine-tingling,unearthly; it lifted the hair on Harry’s scalp and madehis heart feel as though it was swelling to twice itsnormal size. Then, as the music reached such a pitchthat Harry felt it vibrating inside his own ribs, flameserupted at the top of the nearest pillar.

A crimson bird the size of a swan had appeared,piping its weird music to the vaulted ceiling. It had aglittering golden tail as long as a peacock’s andgleaming golden talons, which were gripping a raggedbundle.

A second later, the bird was flying straight at Harry. Itdropped the ragged thing it was carrying at his feet,then landed heavily on his shoulder. As it folded itsgreat wings, Harry looked up and saw it had a long,sharp golden beak and a beady black eye.

The bird stopped singing. It sat still and warm next toHarry’s cheek, gazing steadily at Riddle.

“That’s a phoenix. ...” said Riddle, staring shrewdlyback at it.

“Fawkes?” Harry breathed, and he felt the bird’sgolden claws squeeze his shoulder gently.

“And that —” said Riddle, now eyeing the ragged thingthat Fawkes had dropped, “that’s the old schoolSorting Hat —”

Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

So it was. Patched, frayed, and dirty, the hat laymotionless at Harry’s feet.

Riddle began to laugh again. He laughed so hard thatthe dark Chamber rang with it, as though ten Riddleswere laughing at once —

“This is what Dumbledore sends his defender! Asongbird and an old hat! Do you feel brave, HarryPotter? Do you feel safe now?”

Harry didn’t answer. He might not see what useFawkes or the Sorting Hat were, but he was no longeralone, and he waited for Riddle to stop laughing withhis courage mounting.

“To business, Harry,” said Riddle, still smilingbroadly. “Twice — in your past, in my future — wehave met. And twice I failed to kill you. How did yousurvive? Tell me everything. The longer you talk,” headded softly, “the longer you stay alive.”

Harry was thinking fast, weighing his chances. Riddlehad the wand. He, Harry, had Fawkes and the SortingHat, neither of which would be much good in a duel.

It looked bad, all right ... but the longer Riddle stoodthere, the more life was dwindling out of Ginny ... andin the meantime, Harry noticed suddenly, Riddle’soutline was becoming clearer, more solid. ... If it hadto be a fight between him and Riddle, better soonerthan later.

“No one knows why you lost your powers when youattacked me,” said Harry abruptly. “I don’t knowmyself. But I know why you couldn’t kill me. Becausemy mother died to save me. My common Muggle-bornmother,” he added, shaking with suppressed rage.“She stopped you killing me. And I’ve seen the realyou, I saw you last year. You’re a wreck. You’re barelyPage | 352 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

alive. That’s where all your power got you. You’re inhiding. You’re ugly, you’re foul —”

Riddle’s face contorted. Then he forced it into anawful smile.

“So. Your mother died to save you. Yes, that’s apowerful counter-charm. I can see now ... there isnothing special about you, after all. I wondered, yousee. There are strange likenesses between us, afterall. Even you must have noticed. Both half-bloods,orphans, raised by Muggles. Probably the only twoParselmouths to come to Hogwarts since the greatSlytherin himself. We even look something alike ...but after all, it was merely a lucky chance that savedyou from me. That’s all I wanted to know.”

Harry stood, tense, waiting for Riddle to raise hiswand. But Riddle’s twisted smile was widening again.

“Now, Harry, I’m going to teach you a little lesson.Let’s match the powers of Lord Voldemort, Heir ofSalazar Slytherin, against famous Harry Potter, andthe best weapons Dumbledore can give him. ...”

He cast an amused eye over Fawkes and the SortingHat, then walked away. Harry, fear spreading up hisnumb legs, watched Riddle stop between the highpillars and look up into the stone face of Slytherin,high above him in the half-darkness. Riddle openedhis mouth wide and hissed — but Harry understoodwhat he was saying. ...

“Speak to me, Slytherin, greatest of the HogwartsFour.”

Harry wheeled around to look up at the statue,Fawkes swaying on his shoulder.

Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Slytherin’s gigantic stone face was moving.Horrorstruck, Harry saw his mouth opening, widerand wider, to make a huge black hole.

And something was stirring inside the statue’s mouth.Something was slithering up from its depths.

Harry backed away until he hit the dark Chamberwall, and as he shut his eyes tight he felt Fawkes’wing sweep his cheek as he took flight. Harry wantedto shout, “Don’t leave me!” but what chance did aphoenix have against the king of serpents?

Something huge hit the stone floor of the Chamber.Harry felt it shudder — he knew what was happening,he could sense it, could almost see the giant serpentuncoiling itself from Slytherin’s mouth. Then he heardRiddle’s hissing voice:

“Kill him.”

The basilisk was moving toward Harry; he could hearits heavy body slithering heavily across the dustyfloor. Eyes still tightly shut, Harry began to runblindly sideways, his hands outstretched, feeling hisway — Voldemort was laughing —

Harry tripped. He fell hard onto the stone and tastedblood — the serpent was barely feet from him, hecould hear it coming —

There was a loud, explosive spitting sound right abovehim, and then something heavy hit Harry so hardthat he was smashed into the wall. Waiting for fangsto sink through his body he heard more mad hissing,something thrashing wildly off the pillars —

He couldn’t help it — he opened his eyes wide enoughto squint at what was going on.

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

The enormous serpent, bright, poisonous green, thickas an oak trunk, had raised itself high in the air andits great blunt head was weaving drunkenly betweenthe pillars. As Harry trembled, ready to close his eyesif it turned, he saw what had distracted the snake.

Fawkes was soaring around its head, and the basiliskwas snapping furiously at him with fangs long andthin as sabers —

Fawkes dived. His long golden beak sank out of sightand a sudden shower of dark blood spattered thefloor. The snake’s tail thrashed, narrowly missingHarry, and before Harry could shut his eyes, it turned

— Harry looked straight into its face and saw that itseyes, both its great, bulbous yellow eyes, had beenpunctured by the phoenix; blood was streaming to thefloor, and the snake was spitting in agony.

“NO!” Harry heard Riddle screaming. “LEAVE THEBIRD! LEAVE THE BIRD! THE BOY IS BEHIND YOU!YOU CAN STILL SMELL HIM! KILL HIM!”

The blinded serpent swayed, confused, still deadly.Fawkes was circling its head, piping his eerie song,jabbing here and there at its scaly nose as the bloodpoured from its ruined eyes.

“Help me, help me,” Harry muttered wildly, “someone

— anyone —”

The snake’s tail whipped across the floor again. Harryducked. Something soft hit his face.

The basilisk had swept the Sorting Hat into Harry’sarms. Harry seized it. It was all he had left, his onlychance — he rammed it onto his head and threwhimself flat onto the floor as the basilisk’s tail swungover him again.

Page | 355 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Help me — help me — Harry thought, his eyesscrewed tight under the hat. Please help me —

There was no answering voice. Instead, the hatcontracted, as though an invisible hand wassqueezing it very tightly.

Something very hard and heavy thudded onto the topof Harry’s head, almost knocking him out. Starswinking in front of his eyes, he grabbed the top of thehat to pull it off and felt something long and hardbeneath it.

A gleaming silver sword had appeared inside the hat,its handle glittering with rubies the size of eggs.

“KILL THE BOY! LEAVE THE BIRD! THE BOY ISBEHIND YOU! SNIFF — SMELL HIM!”

Harry was on his feet, ready. The basilisk’s head wasfalling, its body coiling around, hitting pillars as ittwisted to face him. He could see the vast, bloody eyesockets, see the mouth stretching wide, wide enoughto swallow him whole, lined with fangs long as hissword, thin, glittering, venomous —

It lunged blindly — Harry dodged and it hit theChamber wall. It lunged again, and its forked tonguelashed Harry’s side. He raised the sword in both hishands —

The basilisk lunged again, and this time its aim wastrue — Harry threw his whole weight behind thesword and drove it to the hilt into the roof of theserpent’s mouth —

But as warm blood drenched Harry’s arms, he felt asearing pain just above his elbow. One long,poisonous fang was sinking deeper and deeper into

Page | 356 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

his arm and it splintered as the basilisk keeled oversideways and fell, twitching, to the floor.

Harry slid down the wall. He gripped the fang thatwas spreading poison through his body and wrenchedit out of his arm. But he knew it was too late. White-hot pain was spreading slowly and steadily from thewound. Even as he dropped the fang and watched hisown blood soaking his robes, his vision went foggy.The Chamber was dissolving in a whirl of dull color.

A patch of scarlet swam past, and Harry heard a softclatter of claws beside him.

“Fawkes,” said Harry thickly. “You were fantastic,Fawkes. ...” He felt the bird lay its beautiful head onthe spot where the serpent’s fang had pierced him.

He could hear echoing footsteps and then a darkshadow moved in front of him.

“You’re dead, Harry Potter,” said Riddle’s voice abovehim. “Dead. Even Dumbledore’s bird knows it. Do yousee what he’s doing, Potter? He’s crying.”

Harry blinked. Fawkes’s head slid in and out of focus.Thick, pearly tears were trickling down the glossyfeathers.

“I’m going to sit here and watch you die, Harry Potter.Take your time. I’m in no hurry.”

Harry felt drowsy. Everything around him seemed tobe spinning.

“So ends the famous Harry Potter,” said Riddle’sdistant voice. “Alone in the Chamber of Secrets,forsaken by his friends, defeated at last by the DarkLord he so unwisely challenged. You’ll be back with

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

your dear Mudblood mother soon, Harry. ... Shebought you twelve years of borrowed time ... but LordVoldemort got you in the end, as you knew he must.

If this is dying, thought Harry, it’s not so bad.

Even the pain was leaving him. ...

But was this dying? Instead of going black, theChamber seemed to be coming back into focus. Harrygave his head a little shake and there was Fawkes,still resting his head on Harry’s arm. A pearly patchof tears was shining all around the wound — exceptthat there was no wound —

“Get away, bird,” said Riddle’s voice suddenly. “Getaway from him — I said, get away —”

Harry raised his head. Riddle was pointing Harry’swand at Fawkes; there was a bang like a gun, andFawkes took flight again in a whirl of gold and scarlet.

“Phoenix tears ...” said Riddle quietly, staring atHarry’s arm. “Of course ... healing powers ... I forgot

He looked into Harry’s face. “But it makes nodifference. In fact, I prefer it this way. Just you andme, Harry Potter ... you and me. ...”

He raised the wand —

Then, in a rush of wings, Fawkes had soared backoverhead and something fell into Harry’s lap — thediary.

For a split second, both Harry and Riddle, wand stillraised, stared at it. Then, without thinking, without

Page | 358 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

considering, as though he had meant to do it allalong, Harry seized the basilisk fang on the floor nextto him and plunged it straight into the heart of thebook.

There was a long, dreadful, piercing scream. Inkspurted out of the diary in torrents, streaming overHarry’s hands, flooding the floor. Riddle was writhingand twisting, screaming and flailing and then —

He had gone. Harry’s wand fell to the floor with aclatter and there was silence. Silence except for thesteady drip drip of ink still oozing from the diary. Thebasilisk venom had burned a sizzling hole rightthrough it.

Shaking all over, Harry pulled himself up. His headwas spinning as though he’d just traveled miles byFloo powder. Slowly, he gathered together his wandand the Sorting Hat, and, with a huge tug, retrievedthe glittering sword from the roof of the basilisk’smouth.

Then came a faint moan from the end of theChamber. Ginny was stirring. As Harry hurriedtoward her, she sat up. Her bemused eyes traveledfrom the huge form of the dead basilisk, over Harry,in his blood-soaked robes, then to the diary in hishand. She drew a great, shuddering gasp and tearsbegan to pour down her face.

“Harry — oh, Harry — I tried to tell you at b-breakfast, but I c-couldn’t say it in front of Percy — itwas me, Harry — but I — I s-swear I d-didn’t mean to— R-Riddle made me, he t-took me over — and —how did you kill that — that thing? W-where’s Riddle?The last thing I r-remember is him coming out of thediary —”

Page | 359 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“It’s all right,” said Harry, holding up the diary, andshowing Ginny the fang hole, “Riddle’s finished. Look!Him and the basilisk. C’mon, Ginny, let’s get out ofhere —”

“I’m going to be expelled!” Ginny wept as Harry helpedher awkwardly to her feet. “I’ve looked forward tocoming to Hogwarts ever since B-Bill came and n-nowI’ll have to leave and — w-what’ll Mum and Dad say?”

Fawkes was waiting for them, hovering in theChamber entrance. Harry urged Ginny forward; theystepped over the motionless coils of the dead basilisk,through the echoing gloom, and back into the tunnel.Harry heard the stone doors close behind them with asoft hiss.

After a few minutes’ progress up the dark tunnel, adistant sound of slowly shifting rock reached Harry’sears.

“Ron!” Harry yelled, speeding up. “Ginny’s okay! I’vegot her!”

He heard Ron give a strangled cheer, and they turnedthe next bend to see his eager face staring throughthe sizable gap he had managed to make in therockfall.

“Ginny\” Ron thrust an arm through the gap in therock to pull her through first. “You’re alive! I don’tbelieve it! What happened? How — what — where didthat bird come from?”

Fawkes had swooped through the gap after Ginny.

“He’s Dumbledore’s,” said Harry, squeezing throughhimself.

Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“How come you’ve got a sword?” said Ron, gaping atthe glittering weapon in Harry’s hand.

“I’ll explain when we get out of here,” said Harry witha sideways glance at Ginny, who was crying harderthan ever.

“But —”

“Later,” Harry said shortly. He didn’t think it was agood idea to tell Ron yet who’d been opening theChamber, not in front of Ginny, anyway. “Where’sLockhart?”

“Back there,” said Ron, still looking puzzled butjerking his head up the tunnel toward the pipe. “He’sin a bad way. Come and see.”

Led by Fawkes, whose wide scarlet wings emitted asoft golden glow in the darkness, they walked all theway back to the mouth of the pipe. Gilderoy Lockhartwas sitting there, humming placidly to himself.

“His memory’s gone,” said Ron. “The Memory Charmbackfired. Hit him instead of us. Hasn’t got a cluewho he is, or where he is, or who we are. I told him tocome and wait here. He’s a danger to himself.”

Lockhart peered good-naturedly up at them all.

“Hello,” he said. “Odd sort of place, this, isn’t it? Doyou live here?”

“No,” said Ron, raising his eyebrows at Harry.

Harry bent down and looked up the long, dark pipe.

“Have you thought how we’re going to get back upthis?” he said to Ron.

Page | 361 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Ron shook his head, but Fawkes the phoenix hadswooped past Harry and was now fluttering in front ofhim, his beady eyes bright in the dark. He was wavinghis long golden tail feathers. Harry looked uncertainlyat him.

“He looks like he wants you to grab hold ...” said Ron,looking perplexed. “But you’re much too heavy for abird to pull up there —”

“Fawkes,” said Harry, “isn’t an ordinary bird.” Heturned quickly to the others. “We’ve got to hold on toeach other. Ginny, grab Ron’s hand. ProfessorLockhart —”

“He means you,” said Ron sharply to Lockhart.

“You hold Ginny’s other hand —”

Harry tucked the sword and the Sorting Hat into hisbelt, Ron took hold of the back of Harry’s robes, andHarry reached out and took hold of Fawkes’sstrangely hot tail feathers.

An extraordinary lightness seemed to spread throughhis whole body and the next second, in a rush ofwings, they were flying upward through the pipe.Harry could hear Lockhart dangling below him,saying, “Amazing! Amazing! This is just like magic!”The chill air was whipping through Harry’s hair, andbefore he’d stopped enjoying the ride, it was over —all four of them were hitting the wet floor of MoaningMyrtle’s bathroom, and as Lockhart straightened hishat, the sink that hid the pipe was sliding back intoplace.

Myrtle goggled at them.

“You’re alive,” she said blankly to Harry.

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“There’s no need to sound so disappointed,” he saidgrimly, wiping flecks of blood and slime off hisglasses.

“Oh, well ... I’d just been thinking ... if you had died,you’d have been welcome to share my toilet,” saidMyrtle, blushing silver.

“Urgh!” said Ron as they left the bathroom for thedark, deserted corridor outside. “Harry! I thinkMyrtle’s grown fond of you! You’ve got competition,Ginny!”

But tears were still flooding silently down Ginny’sface.

“Where now?” said Ron, with an anxious look atGinny. Harry pointed.

Fawkes was leading the way, glowing gold along thecorridor. They strode after him, and moments later,found themselves outside Professor McGonagall’soffice.

Harry knocked and pushed the door open.

Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





DOBBY’S REWARD

For a moment there was silence as Harry, Ron,

Ginny, and Lockhart stood in the doorway, covered inmuck and slime and (in Harry’s case) blood. Thenthere was a scream.

“Ginny\”

It was Mrs. Weasley, who had been sitting crying infront of the fire. She leapt to her feet, closely followedby Mr. Weasley, and both of them flung themselves ontheir daughter.

Harry, however, was looking past them. ProfessorDumbledore was standing by the mantelpiece,beaming, next to Professor McGonagall, who wastaking great, steadying gasps, clutching her chest.Fawkes went whooshing past Harry’s ear and settledon Dumbledore’s shoulder, just as Harry foundhimself and Ron being swept into Mrs. Weasley’s tightembrace.

“You saved her! You saved her! How did you do it?”

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“I think we’d all like to know that,” said ProfessorMcGonagall weakly.

Mrs. Weasley let go of Harry, who hesitated for amoment, then walked over to the desk and laid uponit the Sorting Hat, the ruby-encrusted sword, andwhat remained of Riddle’s diary.

Then he started telling them everything. For nearly aquarter of an hour he spoke into the rapt silence: Hetold them about hearing the disembodied voice, howHermione had finally realized that he was hearing abasilisk in the pipes; how he and Ron had followedthe spiders into the forest, that Aragog had told themwhere the last victim of the basilisk had died; how hehad guessed that Moaning Myrtle had been thevictim, and that the entrance to the Chamber ofSecrets might be in her bathroom. ...

“Very well,” Professor McGonagall prompted him ashe paused, “so you found out where the entrance was— breaking a hundred school rules into pieces alongthe way, I might add — but how on earth did you allget out of there alive, Potter?”

So Harry, his voice now growing hoarse from all thistalking, told them about Fawkes’s timely arrival andabout the Sorting Hat giving him the sword. But thenhe faltered. He had so far avoided mentioning Riddle’sdiary — or Ginny. She was standing with her headagainst Mrs. Weasley’s shoulder, and tears were stillcoursing silently down her cheeks. What if theyexpelled her? Harry thought in panic. Riddle’s diarydidn’t work anymore. ... How could they prove it hadbeen he who’d made her do it all?

Instinctively, Harry looked at Dumbledore, whosmiled faintly, the firelight glancing off his half-moonspectacles.

Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“What interests me most,” said Dumbledore gently, “ishow Lord Voldemort managed to enchant Ginny,when my sources tell me he is currently in hiding inthe forests of Albania.”

Relief — warm, sweeping, glorious relief — swept overHarry.

“W-what’s that?” said Mr. Weasley in a stunned voice.“You-Know-Who? En-enchant Ginny? But Ginny’s not... Ginny hasn’t been ... has she?”

“It was this diary,” said Harry quickly, picking it upand showing it to Dumbledore. “Riddle wrote it whenhe was sixteen. ...”

Dumbledore took the diary from Harry and peeredkeenly down his long, crooked nose at its burnt andsoggy pages.

“Brilliant,” he said softly. “Of course, he was probablythe most brilliant student Hogwarts has ever seen.”

He turned around to the Weasleys, who were lookingutterly bewildered.

“Very few people know that Lord Voldemort was oncecalled Tom Riddle. I taught him myself, fifty yearsago, at Hogwarts. He disappeared after leaving theschool ... traveled far and wide ... sank so deeply intothe Dark Arts, consorted with the very worst of ourkind, underwent so many dangerous, magicaltransformations, that when he resurfaced as LordVoldemort, he was barely recognizable. Hardly anyoneconnected Lord Voldemort with the clever, handsomeboy who was once Head Boy here.”

“But, Ginny,” said Mrs. Weasley. “What’s our Ginnygot to do with — with — him?”

Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“His d-diary!” Ginny sobbed. “I’ve b-been writing in it,and he’s been w-writing back all year —”

“Ginnyl” said Mr. Weasley, flabbergasted. “Haven’t Itaught you anything? What have I always told you?Never trust anything that can think for itself if youcan’t see where it keeps its brain. Why didn’t youshow the diary to me, or your mother? A suspiciousobject like that, it was clearly full of Dark Magic —”

“I d-didn’t know,” sobbed Ginny. “I found it inside oneof the books Mum got me. I th-thought someone hadjust left it in there and forgotten about it —”

“Miss Weasley should go up to the hospital wing rightaway,” Dumbledore interrupted in a firm voice. “Thishas been a terrible ordeal for her. There will be nopunishment. Older and wiser wizards than she havebeen hoodwinked by Lord Voldemort.” He strode overto the door and opened it. “Bed rest and perhaps alarge, steaming mug of hot chocolate. I always findthat cheers me up,” he added, twinkling kindly downat her. “You will find that Madam Pomfrey is stillawake. She’s just giving out Mandrake juice — Idaresay the basilisk’s victims will be waking up anymoment.”

“So Hermione’s okay!” said Ron brightly.

“There has been no lasting harm done, Ginny,” saidDumbledore.

Mrs. Weasley led Ginny out, and Mr. Weasleyfollowed, still looking deeply shaken.

“You know, Minerva,” Professor Dumbledore saidthoughtfully to Professor McGonagall, “I think all thismerits a good feast Might I ask you to go and alertthe kitchens?”

Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Right,” said Professor McGonagall crisply, alsomoving to the door. “Ill leave you to deal with Potterand Weasley, shall I?”

“Certainly,” said Dumbledore.

She left, and Harry and Ron gazed uncertainly atDumbledore. What exactly had Professor McGonagallmeant, deal with them? Surely — surely — theyweren’t about to be punished?

“I seem to remember telling you both that I wouldhave to expel you if you broke any more school rules,”said Dumbledore.

Ron opened his mouth in horror.

“Which goes to show that the best of us mustsometimes eat our words,” Dumbledore went on,smiling. “You will both receive Special Awards forServices to the School and — let me see — yes, I thinktwo hundred points apiece for Gryffindor.”

Ron went as brightly pink as Lockhart’s valentineflowers and closed his mouth again.

“But one of us seems to be keeping mightily quietabout his part in this dangerous adventure,”Dumbledore added. “Why so modest, Gilderoy?”

Harry gave a start. He had completely forgotten aboutLockhart. He turned and saw that Lockhart wasstanding in a corner of the room, still wearing hisvague smile. When Dumbledore addressed him,Lockhart looked over his shoulder to see who he wastalking to.

Page | 368 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Professor Dumbledore,” Ron said quickly, “there wasan accident down in the Chamber of Secrets.Professor Lockhart —”

“Am I a professor?” said Lockhart in mild surprise.“Goodness. I expect I was hopeless, was I?”

“He tried to do a Memory Charm and the wandbackfired,” Ron explained quietly to Dumbledore.

“Dear me,” said Dumbledore, shaking his head, hislong silver mustache quivering. “Impaled upon yourown sword, Gilderoy!”

“Sword?” said Lockhart dimly. “Haven’t got a sword.That boy has, though.” He pointed at Harry. “He’lllend you one.”

“Would you mind taking Professor Lockhart up to theinfirmary, too?” Dumbledore said to Ron. “I’d like afew more words with Harry. ...”

Lockhart ambled out. Ron cast a curious look back atDumbledore and Harry as he closed the door.

Dumbledore crossed to one of the chairs by the fire.

“Sit down, Harry,” he said, and Harry sat, feelingunaccountably nervous.

“First of all, Harry, I want to thank you,” saidDumbledore, eyes twinkling again. “You must haveshown me real loyalty down in the Chamber. Nothingbut that could have called Fawkes to you.”

He stroked the phoenix, which had fluttered downonto his knee. Harry grinned awkwardly asDumbledore watched him.

Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“And so you met Tom Riddle,” said Dumbledorethoughtfully. “I imagine he was most interested inyou. ...”

Suddenly, something that was nagging at Harry cametumbling out of his mouth.

“Professor Dumbledore ... Riddle said I’m like him.Strange likenesses, he said. ...”

“Did he, now?” said Dumbledore, looking thoughtfullyat Harry from under his thick silver eyebrows. “Andwhat do you think, Harry?”

“I don’t think I’m like him!” said Harry, more loudlythan he’d intended. “I mean, I’m — I’m in Gryffindor,I’m ...”

But he fell silent, a lurking doubt resurfacing in hismind.

“Professor,” he started again after a moment. “TheSorting Hat told me I’d — I’d have done well inSlytherin. Everyone thought / was Slytherin’s heir fora while ... because I can speak Parseltongue. ...”

“You can speak Parseltongue, Harry,” saidDumbledore calmly, “because Lord Voldemort — whois the last remaining descendant of Salazar Slytherin— can speak Parseltongue. Unless I’m muchmistaken, he transferred some of his own powers toyou the night he gave you that scar. Not something heintended to do, I’m sure. ...”

“Voldemort put a bit of himself in me?” Harry said,thunderstruck.

“It certainly seems so.”

Page | 370 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“So I should be in Slytherin,” Harry said, lookingdesperately into Dumbledore’s face. “The Sorting Hatcould see Slytherin’s power in me, and it —”

“Put you in Gryffindor,” said Dumbledore calmly.“Listen to me, Harry. You happen to have manyqualities Salazar Slytherin prized in his hand-pickedstudents. His own very rare gift, Parseltongue —resourcefulness — determination — a certaindisregard for rules,” he added, his mustachequivering again. “Yet the Sorting Hat placed you inGryffindor. You know why that was. Think.”

“It only put me in Gryffindor,” said Harry in adefeated voice, “because I asked not to go inSlytherin. ...”

“Exactly,” said Dumbledore, beaming once more.“Which makes you very different from Tom Riddle. Itis our choices, Harry, that show what we truly are, farmore than our abilities.” Harry sat motionless in hischair, stunned. “If you want proof, Harry, that youbelong in Gryffindor, I suggest you look more closelyat this.”

Dumbledore reached across to Professor McGonagall’sdesk, picked up the blood-stained silver sword, andhanded it to Harry. Dully, Harry turned it over, therubies blazing in the firelight. And then he saw thename engraved just below the hilt.

Godric Gryffindor.

“Only a true Gryffindor could have pulled that out ofthe hat, Harry,” said Dumbledore simply.

For a minute, neither of them spoke. ThenDumbledore pulled open one of the drawers in

Page | 371 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Professor McGonagall’s desk and took out a quill anda bottle of ink.

“What you need, Harry, is some food and sleep. Isuggest you go down to the feast, while I write toAzkaban — we need our gamekeeper back. And Imust draft an advertisement for the Daily Prophet,too,” he added thoughtfully. “Well be needing a newDefense Against the Dark Arts teacher. ... Dear me,we do seem to run through them, don’t we?”

Harry got up and crossed to the door. He had justreached for the handle, however, when the door burstopen so violently that it bounced back off the wall.

Lucius Malfoy stood there, fury in his face. Andcowering behind his legs, heavily wrapped inbandages, was Dobby.

“Good evening, Lucius,” said Dumbledore pleasantly.

Mr. Malfoy almost knocked Harry over as he sweptinto the room. Dobby went scurrying in after him,crouching at the hem of his cloak, a look of abjectterror on his face.

The elf was carrying a stained rag with which he wasattempting to finish cleaning Mr. Malfoy’s shoes.Apparently Mr. Malfoy had set out in a great hurry,for not only were his shoes half-polished, but hisusually sleek hair was disheveled. Ignoring the elfbobbing apologetically around his ankles, he fixed hiscold eyes upon Dumbledore.

“So!” he said “You’ve come back. The governorssuspended you, but you still saw fit to return toHogwarts.”

Page | 372 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Well, you see, Lucius,” said Dumbledore, smilingserenely, “the other eleven governors contacted metoday. It was something like being caught in ahailstorm of owls, to tell the truth. They’d heard thatArthur Weasley’s daughter had been killed andwanted me back here at once. They seemed to think Iwas the best man for the job after all. Very strangetales they told me, too. ... Several of them seemed tothink that you had threatened to curse their familiesif they didn’t agree to suspend me in the first place.”

Mr. Malfoy went even paler than usual, but his eyeswere still slits of fury.

“So — have you stopped the attacks yet?” he sneered.“Have you caught the culprit?”

“We have,” said Dumbledore, with a smile.

“Well?” said Mr. Malfoy sharply. “Who is it?”

“The same person as last time, Lucius,” saidDumbledore. “But this time, Lord Voldemort wasacting through somebody else. By means of thisdiary.”

He held up the small black book with the large holethrough the center, watching Mr. Malfoy closely.Harry, however, was watching Dobby.

The elf was doing something very odd. His great eyesfixed meaningfully on Harry, he kept pointing at thediary, then at Mr. Malfoy, and then hitting himselfhard on the head with his fist.

“I see ...” said Mr. Malfoy slowly to Dumbledore.

“A clever plan,” said Dumbledore in a level voice, stillstaring Mr. Malfoy straight in the eye. “Because if

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Harry here” — Mr. Malfoy shot Harry a swift, sharplook — “and his friend Ron hadn’t discovered thisbook, why — Ginny Weasley might have taken all theblame. No one would ever have been able to prove shehadn’t acted of her own free will. ...”

Mr. Malfoy said nothing. His face was suddenlymasklike.

“And imagine,” Dumbledore went on, “what mighthave happened then. ... The Weasleys are one of ourmost prominent pure-blood families. Imagine theeffect on Arthur Weasley and his Muggle ProtectionAct, if his own daughter was discovered attacking andkilling Muggle-borns. ... Very fortunate the diary wasdiscovered, and Riddle’s memories wiped from it. Whoknows what the consequences might have beenotherwise. ...”

Mr. Malfoy forced himself to speak.

“Very fortunate,” he said stiffly.

And still, behind his back, Dobby was pointing, firstto the diary, then to Lucius Malfoy, then punchinghimself in the head.

And Harry suddenly understood. He nodded atDobby, and Dobby backed into a corner, now twistinghis ears in punishment.

“Don’t you want to know how Ginny got hold of thatdiary, Mr. Malfoy?” said Harry.

Lucius Malfoy rounded on him.

“How should I know how the stupid little girl got holdof it?” he said.

Page | 374 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“Because you gave it to her,” said Harry. “In Flourishand Blotts. You picked up her old Transfigurationbook and slipped the diary inside it, didn’t you?”

He saw Mr. Malfoy’s white hands clench andunclench.

“Prove it,” he hissed.

“Oh, no one will be able to do that,” said Dumbledore,smiling at Harry. “Not now that Riddle has vanishedfrom the book. On the other hand, I would advise you,Lucius, not to go giving out any more of LordVoldemort’s old school things. If any more of themfind their way into innocent hands, I think ArthurWeasley, for one, will make sure they are traced backto you. ...”

Lucius Malfoy stood for a moment, and Harrydistinctly saw his right hand twitch as though he waslonging to reach for his wand. Instead, he turned tohis house-elf.

“We’re going, Dobby!”

He wrenched open the door and as the elf camehurrying up to him, he kicked him right through it.They could hear Dobby squealing with pain all theway along the corridor. Harry stood for a moment,thinking hard. Then it came to him —

“Professor Dumbledore,” he said hurriedly. “Can I givethat diary back to Mr. Malfoy, please?”

“Certainly, Harry,” said Dumbledore calmly. “Buthurry. The feast, remember. ...”

Harry grabbed the diary and dashed out of the office.He could hear Dobby’s squeals of pain receding

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

around the corner. Quickly, wondering if this plancould possibly work, Harry took off one of his shoes,pulled off his slimy, filthy sock, and stuffed the diaryinto it. Then he ran down the dark corridor.

He caught up with them at the top of the stairs.

“Mr. Malfoy,” he gasped, skidding to a halt, “I’ve gotsomething for you —”

And he forced the smelly sock into Lucius Malfoy’shand.

“What the — ?”

Mr. Malfoy ripped the sock off the diary, threw itaside, then looked furiously from the ruined book toHarry.

“You’ll meet the same sticky end as your parents oneof these days, Harry Potter,” he said softly. “They weremeddlesome fools, too.”

He turned to go.

“Come, Dobby. I said, come.”

But Dobby didn’t move. He was holding up Harry’sdisgusting, slimy sock, and looking at it as though itwere a priceless treasure.

“Master has given a sock,” said the elf in wonderment.“Master gave it to Dobby.”

“What’s that?” spat Mr. Malfoy. “What did you say?”

“Got a sock,” said Dobby in disbelief. “Master threw it,and Dobby caught it, and Dobby — Dobby is free.”

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

Lucius Malfoy stood frozen, staring at the elf. Then helunged at Harry.

“You’ve lost me my servant, boy!”

But Dobby shouted, “You shall not harm HarryPotter!”

There was a loud bang, and Mr. Malfoy was thrownbackward. He crashed down the stairs, three at atime, landing in a crumpled heap on the landingbelow. He got up, his face livid, and pulled out hiswand, but Dobby raised a long, threatening finger.

“You shall go now,” he said fiercely, pointing down atMr. Malfoy. “You shall not touch Harry Potter. Youshall go now.”

Lucius Malfoy had no choice. With a last, incensedstare at the pair of them, he swung his cloak aroundhim and hurried out of sight.

“Harry Potter freed Dobby!” said the elf shrilly, gazingup at Harry, moonlight from the nearest windowreflected in his orb-like eyes. “Harry Potter set Dobbyfree!”

“Least I could do, Dobby,” said Harry, grinning. “Justpromise never to try and save my life again.”

The elf’s ugly brown face split suddenly into a wide,toothy smile.

“I’ve just got one question, Dobby,” said Harry asDobby pulled on Harry’s sock with shaking hands.“You told me all this had nothing to do with He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named, remember? Well —”

Page | 377 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

“It was a clue, sir,” said Dobby, his eyes widening, asthough this was obvious. “Was giving you a clue. TheDark Lord, before he changed his name, could befreely named, you see?”

“Right,” said Harry weakly. “Well, I’d better go. There’sa feast, and my friend Hermione should be awake bynow. ...”

Dobby threw his arms around Harry’s middle andhugged him.

“Harry Potter is greater by far than Dobby knew!” hesobbed. “Farewell, Harry Potter!”

And with a final loud crack, Dobby disappeared.

Harry had been to several Hogwarts feasts, but neverone quite like this. Everybody was in their pajamas,and the celebration lasted all night. Harry didn’t knowwhether the best bit was Hermione running towardhim, screaming “You solved it! You solved it!” orJustin hurrying over from the Hufflepuff table towring his hand and apologize endlessly for suspectinghim, or Hagrid turning up at half past three, cuffingHarry and Ron so hard on the shoulders that theywere knocked into their plates of trifle, or his andRon’s four hundred points for Gryffindor securing theHouse Cup for the second year running, or ProfessorMcGonagall standing up to tell them all that theexams had been canceled as a school treat (“Oh, no!”said Hermione), or Dumbledore announcing that,unfortunately, Professor Lockhart would be unable toreturn next year, owing to the fact that he needed togo away and get his memory back. Quite a few of theteachers joined in the cheering that greeted this news.

“Shame,” said Ron, helping himself to a jamdoughnut. “He was starting to grow on me.”

Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

The rest of the final term passed in a haze of blazingsunshine. Hogwarts was back to normal with only afew, small differences — Defense Against the DarkArts classes were canceled (“but we’ve had plenty ofpractice at that anyway,” Ron told a disgruntledHermione) and Lucius Malfoy had been sacked as aschool governor. Draco was no longer struttingaround the school as though he owned the place. Onthe contrary, he looked resentful and sulky. On theother hand, Ginny Weasley was perfectly happyagain.

Too soon, it was time for the journey home on theHogwarts Express. Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred,George, and Ginny got a compartment to themselves.They made the most of the last few hours in whichthey were allowed to do magic before the holidays.They played Exploding Snap, set off the very last ofFred and George’s Filibuster fireworks, and practiceddisarming each other by magic. Harry was gettingvery good at it.

They were almost at King’s Cross when Harryremembered something.

“Ginny — what did you see Percy doing, that he didn’twant you to tell anyone?”

“Oh, that,” said Ginny, giggling. “Well — Percy’s got agirlfriend.”

Fred dropped a stack of books on George’s head.“What?”

“It’s that Ravenclaw prefect, Penelope Clearwater,”said Ginny. “That’s who he was writing to all lastsummer. He’s been meeting her all over the school insecret. I walked in on them kissing in an empty

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling

classroom one day. He was so upset when she was —you know — attacked. You won’t tease him, will you?”she added anxiously.

“Wouldn’t dream of it,” said Fred, who was lookinglike his birthday had come early.

“Definitely not,” said George, sniggering.

The Hogwarts Express slowed and finally stopped.

Harry pulled out his quill and a bit of parchment andturned to Ron and Hermione.

“This is called a telephone number,” he told Ron,scribbling it twice, tearing the parchment in two, andhanding it to them. “I told your dad how to use atelephone last summer — he’ll know. Call me at theDursleys’, okay? I can’t stand another two monthswith only Dudley to talk to. ...”

“Your aunt and uncle will be proud, though, won’tthey?” said Hermione as they got off the train andjoined the crowd thronging toward the enchantedbarrier. “When they hear what you did this year?

“Proud?” said Harry. “Are you crazy? All those times Icould’ve died, and I didn’t manage it? They’ll befurious. ...”

And together they walked back through the gatewayto the Muggle world.

Page | 380 Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets - J.K. Rowling





