Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


Harry Potter Series (PDFs)





Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


J.K. Rowling

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.5)



/



THE RIDDLE HOUSE

The villagers of Little Hangleton still called it “theRiddle House,” even though it had been many yearssince the Riddle family had lived there. It stood on ahill overlooking the village, some of its windowsboarded, tiles missing from its roof, and ivy spreadingunchecked over its face. Once a fine-looking manor,and easily the largest and grandest building for milesaround, the Riddle House was now damp, derelict,and unoccupied.

The Little Hangletons all agreed that the old housewas “creepy.” Half a century ago, something strangeand horrible had happened there, something that theolder inhabitants of the village still liked to discusswhen topics for gossip were scarce. The story hadbeen picked over so many times, and had beenembroidered in so many places, that nobody wasquite sure what the truth was anymore. Every versionof the tale, however, started in the same place: Fiftyyears before, at daybreak on a fine summer’smorning, when the Riddle House had still been well

Page | 2

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

kept and impressive, a maid had entered the drawingroom to find all three Riddles dead.

The maid had run screaming down the hill into thevillage and roused as many people as she could.

“Lying there with their eyes wide open! Cold as ice!Still in their dinner things!”

The police were summoned, and the whole of LittleHangleton had seethed with shocked curiosity and ill-disguised excitement. Nobody wasted their breathpretending to feel very sad about the Riddles, for theyhad been most unpopular. Elderly Mr. and Mrs.Riddle had been rich, snobbish, and rude, and theirgrown-up son, Tom, had been, if anything, worse. Allthe villagers cared about was the identity of theirmurderer — for plainly, three apparently healthypeople did not all drop dead of natural causes on thesame night.

The Hanged Man, the village pub, did a roaring tradethat night; the whole village seemed to have turnedout to discuss the murders. They were rewarded forleaving their firesides when the Riddles’ cook arriveddramatically in their midst and announced to thesuddenly silent pub that a man called Frank Brycehad just been arrested.

“Frank!” cried several people. “Never!”

Frank Bryce was the Riddles’ gardener. He lived alonein a rundown cottage on the grounds of the RiddleHouse. Frank had come back from the war with avery stiff leg and a great dislike of crowds and loudnoises, and had been working for the Riddles eversince.

Page | 3

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But over in the neighboring town of Great Hangleton,in the dark and dingy police station, Frank wasstubbornly repeating, again and again, that he wasinnocent, and that the only person he had seen nearthe house on the day of the Riddles’ deaths had beena teenage boy, a stranger, dark-haired and pale.Nobody else in the village had seen any such boy, andthe police were quite sure that Frank had inventedhim.

Then, just when things were looking very serious forFrank, the report on the Riddles’ bodies came backand changed everything.

The police had never read an odder report. A team ofdoctors had examined the bodies and had concludedthat none of the Riddles had been poisoned, stabbed,shot, strangled, suffocated, or (as far as they couldtell) harmed at all. In fact (the report continued, in atone of unmistakable bewilderment), the Riddles allappeared to be in perfect health — apart from the factthat they were all dead. The doctors did note (asthough determined to find something wrong with thebodies) that each of the Riddles had a look of terrorupon his or her face — but as the frustrated policesaid, whoever heard of three people being frightenedto death?

As there was no proof that the Riddles had beenmurdered at all, the police were forced to let Frank go.The Riddles were buried in the Little Hangletonchurchyard, and their graves remained objects ofcuriosity for a while. To everyone’s surprise, and amida cloud of suspicion, Frank Bryce returned to hiscottage on the grounds of the Riddle House.

“ ’S far as I’m concerned, he killed them, and I don’tcare what the police say,” said Dot in the Hanged

Page | 5

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Man. “And if he had any decency, he’d leave here,knowing as how we knows he did it.”

But Frank did not leave. He stayed to tend the gardenfor the next family who lived in the Riddle House, andthen the next — for neither family stayed long.

Perhaps it was partly because of Frank that the newowners said there was a nasty feeling about the place,which, in the absence of inhabitants, started to fallinto disrepair.

The wealthy man who owned the Riddle House thesedays neither lived there nor put it to any use; theysaid in the village that he kept it for “tax reasons,”though nobody was very clear what these might be.The wealthy owner continued to pay Frank to do thegardening, however. Frank was nearing his seventy-seventh birthday now, very deaf, his bad leg stifferthan ever, but could be seen pottering around theflower beds in fine weather, even though the weedswere starting to creep up on him, try as he might tosuppress them.

Weeds were not the only things Frank had to contendwith either. Boys from the village made a habit ofthrowing stones through the windows of the RiddleHouse. They rode their bicycles over the lawns Frankworked so hard to keep smooth. Once or twice, theybroke into the old house for a dare. They knew thatold Frank’s devotion to the house and groundsamounted almost to an obsession, and it amusedthem to see him limping across the garden,brandishing his stick and yelling croakily at them.Frank, for his part, believed the boys tormented himbecause they, like their parents and grandparents,thought him a murderer. So when Frank awoke onenight in August and saw something very odd up atthe old house, he merely assumed that the boys hadgone one step further in their attempts to punish him.Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

It was Frank’s bad leg that woke him; it was paininghim worse than ever in his old age. He got up andlimped downstairs into the kitchen with the idea ofrefilling his hot-water bottle to ease the stiffness inhis knee. Standing at the sink, filling the kettle, helooked up at the Riddle House and saw lightsglimmering in its upper windows. Frank knew at oncewhat was going on. The boys had broken into thehouse again, and judging by the flickering quality ofthe light, they had started a fire.

Frank had no telephone, and in any case, he haddeeply mistrusted the police ever since they hadtaken him in for questioning about the Riddles’deaths. He put down the kettle at once, hurried backupstairs as fast as his bad leg would allow, and wassoon back in his kitchen, fully dressed and removinga rusty old key from its hook by the door. He pickedup his walking stick, which was propped against thewall, and set off into the night.

The front door of the Riddle House bore no sign ofbeing forced, nor did any of the windows. Franklimped around to the back of the house until hereached a door almost completely hidden by ivy, tookout the old key, put it into the lock, and opened thedoor noiselessly.

He let himself into the cavernous kitchen. Frank hadnot entered it for many years; nevertheless, althoughit was very dark, he remembered where the door intothe hall was, and he groped his way toward it, hisnostrils full of the smell of decay, ears pricked for anysound of footsteps or voices from overhead. Hereached the hall, which was a little lighter owing tothe large mullioned windows on either side of thefront door, and started to climb the stairs, blessingthe dust that lay thick upon the stone, because itmuffled the sound of his feet and stick.

Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

On the landing, Frank turned right, and saw at oncewhere the intruders were: At the very end of thepassage a door stood ajar, and a flickering light shonethrough the gap, casting a long sliver of gold acrossthe black floor. Frank edged closer and closer,grasping his walking stick firmly. Several feet fromthe entrance, he was able to see a narrow slice of theroom beyond.

The fire, he now saw, had been lit in the grate. Thissurprised him. Then he stopped moving and listenedintently, for a man’s voice spoke within the room; itsounded timid and fearful.

“There is a little more in the bottle, My Lord, if youare still hungry.”

“Later,” said a second voice. This too belonged to aman — but it was strangely high-pitched, and cold asa sudden blast of icy wind. Something about thatvoice made the sparse hairs on the back of Frank’sneck stand up. “Move me closer to the fire, Wormtail.”

Frank turned his right ear toward the door, the betterto hear. There came the clink of a bottle being putdown upon some hard surface, and then the dullscraping noise of a heavy chair being dragged acrossthe floor. Frank caught a glimpse of a small man, hisback to the door, pushing the chair into place. He waswearing a long black cloak, and there was a baldpatch at the back of his head. Then he went out ofsight again.

“Where is Nagini?” said the cold voice.

“I — I don’t know, My Lord,” said the first voicenervously. “She set out to explore the house, I think.

Page | 8

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You will milk her before we retire, Wormtail,” saidthe second voice. “I will need feeding in the night. Thejourney has tired me greatly.”

Brow furrowed, Frank inclined his good ear still closerto the door, listening very hard. There was a pause,and then the man called Wormtail spoke again.

“My Lord, may I ask how long we are going to stayhere?”

“A week,” said the cold voice. “Perhaps longer. Theplace is moderately comfortable, and the plan cannotproceed yet. It would be foolish to act before theQuidditch World Cup is over.”

Frank inserted a gnarled finger into his ear androtated it. Owing, no doubt, to a buildup of earwax,he had heard the word “Quidditch,” which was not aword at all.

“The — the Quidditch World Cup, My Lord?” saidWormtail. (Frank dug his finger still more vigorouslyinto his ear.) “Forgive me, but — I do not understand— why should we wait until the World Cup is over?”

“Because, fool, at this very moment wizards arepouring into the country from all over the world, andevery meddler from the Ministry of Magic will be onduty, on the watch for signs of unusual activity,checking and double-checking identities. They will beobsessed with security, lest the Muggles noticeanything. So we wait.”

Frank stopped trying to clear out his ear. He haddistinctly heard the words “Ministry of Magic,”“wizards,” and “Muggles.” Plainly, each of theseexpressions meant something secret, and Frank couldthink of only two sorts of people who would speak inPage | 9 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

code: spies and criminals. Frank tightened his holdon his walking stick once more, and listened moreclosely still.

“Your Lordship is still determined, then?” Wormtailsaid quietly.

“Certainly I am determined, Wormtail.” There was anote of menace in the cold voice now.

A slight pause followed — and then Wormtail spoke,the words tumbling from him in a rush, as though hewas forcing himself to say this before he lost hisnerve.

“It could be done without Harry Potter, My Lord.”

Another pause, more protracted, and then —

“Without Harry Potter?” breathed the second voicesoftly. “I see ...”

“My Lord, I do not say this out of concern for the boy!”said Wormtail, his voice rising squeakily. “The boy isnothing to me, nothing at all! It is merely that if wewere to use another witch or wizard — any wizard —the thing could be done so much more quickly! If youallowed me to leave you for a short while — you knowthat I can disguise myself most effectively — I couldbe back here in as little as two days with a suitableperson —”

“I could use another wizard,” said the cold voicesoftly, “that is true. ...”

“My Lord, it makes sense,” said Wormtail, soundingthoroughly relieved now. “Laying hands on HarryPotter would be so difficult, he is so well protected —”

Page | 10

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“And so you volunteer to go and fetch me asubstitute? I wonder ... perhaps the task of nursingme has become wearisome for you, “Wormtail? Couldthis suggestion of abandoning the plan be nothingmore than an attempt to desert me?”

“My Lord! I — I have no wish to leave you, none at all

“Do not lie to me!” hissed the second voice. “I canalways tell, Wormtail! You are regretting that you everreturned to me. I revolt you. I see you flinch when youlook at me, feel you shudder when you touch me. ...”

“No! My devotion to Your Lordship —”

“Your devotion is nothing more than cowardice. Youwould not be here if you had anywhere else to go.

How am I to survive without you, when I need feedingevery few hours? Who is to milk Nagini?”

“But you seem so much stronger, My Lord —”

“Liar,” breathed the second voice. “I am no stronger,and a few days alone would be enough to rob me ofthe little health I have regained under your clumsycare. Silencel”

Wormtail, who had been sputtering incoherently, fellsilent at once. For a few seconds, Frank could hearnothing but the fire crackling. Then the second manspoke once more, in a whisper that was almost a hiss.

“I have my reasons for using the boy, as I havealready explained to you, and I will use no other. Ihave waited thirteen years. A few more months willmake no difference. As for the protection surroundingthe boy, I believe my plan will be effective. All that isneeded is a little courage from you, Wormtail —

Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

courage you will find, unless you wish to feel the fullextent of Lord Voldemort’s wrath —”

“My Lord, I must speak!” said Wormtail, panic in hisvoice now. “All through our journey I have gone overthe plan in my head — My Lord, Bertha Jorkins’sdisappearance will not go unnoticed for long, and ifwe proceed, if I murder —”

“IP” whispered the second voice. “If? If you follow theplan, Wormtail, the Ministry need never know thatanyone else has died. You will do it quietly andwithout fuss; I only wish that I could do it myself, butin my present condition ... Come, Wormtail, one moredeath and our path to Harry Potter is clear. I am notasking you to do it alone. By that time, my faithfulservant will have rejoined us —”

“I am a faithful servant,” said Wormtail, the meresttrace of sullenness in his voice.

“Wormtail, I need somebody with brains, somebodywhose loyalty has never wavered, and you,unfortunately, fulfill neither requirement.”

“I found you,” said Wormtail, and there was definitelya sulky edge to his voice now. “I was the one whofound you. I brought you Bertha Jorkins.”

“That is true,” said the second man, soundingamused. “A stroke of brilliance I would not havethought possible from you, Wormtail — though, iftruth be told, you were not aware how useful shewould be when you caught her, were you?”

“I — I thought she might be useful, My Lord —”

“Liar,” said the second voice again, the cruelamusement more pronounced than ever. “However, I

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

do not deny that her information was invaluable.Without it, I could never have formed our plan, andfor that, you will have your reward, Wormtail. I willallow you to perform an essential task for me, onethat many of my followers would give their righthands to perform. ...”

“R-really, My Lord? What — ?” Wormtail soundedterrified again.

“Ah, Wormtail, you don’t want me to spoil thesurprise? Your part will come at the very end ... but Ipromise you, you will have the honor of being just asuseful as Bertha Jorkins.”

“You ... you ...” Wormtail’s voice suddenly soundedhoarse, as though his mouth had gone very dry. “You... are going ... to kill me too?”

“Wormtail, Wormtail,” said the cold voice silkily, “whywould I kill you? I killed Bertha because I had to. Shewas fit for nothing after my questioning, quiteuseless. In any case, awkward questions would havebeen asked if she had gone back to the Ministry withthe news that she had met you on her holidays.Wizards who are supposed to be dead would do wellnot to run into Ministry of Magic witches at waysideinns. ...”

Wormtail muttered something so quietly that Frankcould not hear it, but it made the second man laugh— an entirely mirthless laugh, cold as his speech.

“We could have modified her memory? But MemoryCharms can be broken by a powerful wizard, as Iproved when I questioned her. It would be an insult toher memory not to use the information I extractedfrom her, Wormtail.”

Page | 13

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Out in the corridor, Frank suddenly became awarethat the hand gripping his walking stick was slipperywith sweat. The man with the cold voice had killed awoman. He was talking about it without any kind ofremorse — with amusement. He was dangerous — amadman. And he was planning more murders — thisboy, Harry Potter, whoever he was — was in danger —

Frank knew what he must do. Now, if ever, was thetime to go to the police. He would creep out of thehouse and head straight for the telephone box in thevillage ... but the cold voice was speaking again, andFrank remained where he was, frozen to the spot,listening with all his might.

“One more murder ... my faithful servant at Hogwarts... Harry Potter is as good as mine, Wormtail. It isdecided. There will be no more argument. But quiet ...I think I hear Nagini. ...”

And the second man’s voice changed. He startedmaking noises such as Frank had never heard before;he was hissing and spitting without drawing breath.Frank thought he must be having some sort of fit orseizure.

And then Frank heard movement behind him in thedark passageway. He turned to look, and foundhimself paralyzed with fright.

Something was slithering toward him along the darkcorridor floor, and as it drew nearer to the sliver offirelight, he realized with a thrill of terror that it was agigantic snake, at least twelve feet long. Horrified,transfixed, Frank stared as its undulating body cut awide, curving track through the thick dust on thefloor, coming closer and closer — What was he to do?The only means of escape was into the room where

Page | 14

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

two men sat plotting murder, yet if he stayed wherehe was the snake would surely kill him —

But before he had made his decision, the snake waslevel with him, and then, incredibly, miraculously, itwas passing; it was following the spitting, hissingnoises made by the cold voice beyond the door, and inseconds, the tip of its diamond-patterned tail hadvanished through the gap.

There was sweat on Frank’s forehead now, and thehand on the walking stick was trembling. Inside theroom, the cold voice was continuing to hiss, andFrank was visited by a strange idea, an impossibleidea. ... This man could talk to snakes.

Frank didn’t understand what was going on. Hewanted more than anything to be back in his bed withhis hot-water bottle. The problem was that his legsdidn’t seem to want to move. As he stood thereshaking and trying to master himself, the cold voiceswitched abruptly to English again.

“Nagini has interesting news, Wormtail,” it said.

“In-indeed, My Lord?” said Wormtail.

“Indeed, yes,” said the voice. “According to Nagini,there is an old Muggle standing right outside thisroom, listening to every word we say.”

Frank didn’t have a chance to hide himself. Therewere footsteps, and then the door of the room wasflung wide open.

A short, balding man with graying hair, a pointednose, and small, watery eyes stood before Frank, amixture of fear and alarm in his face.

Page | 15

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Invite him inside, Wormtail. Where are yourmanners?”

The cold voice was coming from the ancient armchairbefore the fire, but Frank couldn’t see the speaker.The snake, on the other hand, was curled up on therotting hearth rug, like some horrible travesty of a petdog.

Wormtail beckoned Frank into the room. Though stilldeeply shaken, Frank took a firmer grip upon hiswalking stick and limped over the threshold.

The fire was the only source of light in the room; itcast long, spidery shadows upon the walls. Frankstared at the back of the armchair; the man inside itseemed to be even smaller than his servant, for Frankcouldn’t even see the back of his head.

“You heard everything, Muggle?” said the cold voice.

“What’s that you’re calling me?” said Frank defiantly,for now that he was inside the room, now that thetime had come for some sort of action, he felt braver;it had always been so in the war.

“I am calling you a Muggle,” said the voice coolly. “Itmeans that you are not a wizard.”

“I don’t know what you mean by wizard,” said Frank,his voice growing steadier. “All I know is I’ve heardenough to interest the police tonight, I have. You’vedone murder and you’re planning more! And I’ll tellyou this too,” he added, on a sudden inspiration, “mywife knows I’m up here, and if I don’t come back —”

“You have no wife,” said the cold voice, very quietly.“Nobody knows you are here. You told nobody that

Page | 16

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

you were coming. Do not lie to Lord Voldemort,Muggle, for he knows ... he always knows. ...”

“Is that right?” said Frank roughly. “Lord, is it? Well, Idon’t think much of your manners, My Lord. Turn’round and face me like a man, why don’t you?”

“But I am not a man, Muggle,” said the cold voice,barely audible now over the crackling of the flames. “Iam much, much more than a man. However ... whynot? I will face you. ... Wormtail, come turn my chairaround.”

The servant gave a whimper.

“You heard me, Wormtail.”

Slowly, with his face screwed up, as though he wouldrather have done anything than approach his masterand the hearth rug where the snake lay, the smallman walked forward and began to turn the chair. Thesnake lifted its ugly triangular head and hissedslightly as the legs of the chair snagged on its rug.

And then the chair was facing Frank, and he sawwhat was sitting in it. His walking stick fell to thefloor with a clatter. He opened his mouth and let outa scream. He was screaming so loudly that he neverheard the words the thing in the chair spoke as itraised a wand. There was a flash of green light, arushing sound, and Frank Bryce crumpled. He wasdead before he hit the floor.

Two hundred miles away, the boy called Harry Potterwoke with a start.

Page | 17

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE SCAR

Harry lay flat on his back, breathing hard as thoughhe had been running. He had awoken from a vividdream with his hands pressed over his face. The oldscar on his forehead, which was shaped like a bolt oflightning, was burning beneath his fingers as thoughsomeone had just pressed a white-hot wire to hisskin.

He sat up, one hand still on his scar, the otherreaching out in the darkness for his glasses, whichwere on the bedside table. He put them on and hisbedroom came into clearer focus, lit by a faint, mistyorange light that was filtering through the curtainsfrom the street lamp outside the window.

Harry ran his fingers over the scar again. It was stillpainful. He turned on the lamp beside him, scrambledout of bed, crossed the room, opened his wardrobe,and peered into the mirror on the inside of the door. Askinny boy of fourteen looked back at him, his brightgreen eyes puzzled under his untidy black hair. He

Page | 18

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

examined the lightning-bolt scar of his reflection moreclosely. It looked normal, but it was still stinging.

Harry tried to recall what he had been dreamingabout before he had awoken. It had seemed so real. ...There had been two people he knew and one hedidn’t. ... He concentrated hard, frowning, trying toremember. ...

The dim picture of a darkened room came to him. ...There had been a snake on a hearth rug ... a smallman called Peter, nicknamed Wormtail ... and a cold,high voice ... the voice of Lord Voldemort. Harry feltas though an ice cube had slipped down into hisstomach at the very thought. ...

He closed his eyes tightly and tried to remember whatVoldemort had looked like, but it was impossible. ...All Harry knew was that at the moment whenVoldemort’s chair had swung around, and he, Harry,had seen what was sitting in it, he had felt a spasm ofhorror, which had awoken him ... or had that beenthe pain in his scar?

And who had the old man been? For there haddefinitely been an old man; Harry had watched himfall to the ground. It was all becoming confused.

Harry put his face into his hands, blocking out hisbedroom, trying to hold on to the picture of that dimlylit room, but it was like trying to keep water in hiscupped hands; the details were now trickling away asfast as he tried to hold on to them. ... Voldemort andWormtail had been talking about someone they hadkilled, though Harry could not remember the name ...and they had been plotting to kill someone else ...him).

Harry took his face out of his hands, opened his eyes,and stared around his bedroom as though expecting

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

to see something unusual there. As it happened,there were an extraordinary number of unusualthings in this room. A large wooden trunk stood openat the foot of his bed, revealing a cauldron,broomstick, black robes, and assorted spellbooks.Rolls of parchment littered that part of his desk thatwas not taken up by the large, empty cage in whichhis snowy owl, Hedwig, usually perched. On the floorbeside his bed a book lay open; Harry had beenreading it before he fell asleep last night. The picturesin this book were all moving. Men in bright orangerobes were zooming in and out of sight onbroomsticks, throwing a red ball to one another.

Harry walked over to the book, picked it up, andwatched one of the wizards score a spectacular goalby putting the ball through a fifty-foot-high hoop.

Then he snapped the book shut. Even Quidditch — inHarry’s opinion, the best sport in the world —couldn’t distract him at the moment. He placed Flyingwith the Cannons on his bedside table, crossed to thewindow, and drew back the curtains to survey thestreet below.

Privet Drive looked exactly as a respectable suburbanstreet would be expected to look in the early hours ofSaturday morning. All the curtains were closed. As faras Harry could see through the darkness, therewasn’t a living creature in sight, not even a cat.

And yet ... and yet ... Harry went restlessly back tothe bed and sat down on it, running a finger over hisscar again. It wasn’t the pain that bothered him;

Harry was no stranger to pain and injury. He had lostall the bones from his right arm once and had thempainfully regrown in a night. The same arm had beenpierced by a venomous foot-long fang not longafterward. Only last year Harry had fallen fifty feetfrom an airborne broomstick. He was used to bizarrePage | 20 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

accidents and injuries; they were unavoidable if youattended Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardryand had a knack for attracting a lot of trouble.

No, the thing that was bothering Harry was that thelast time his scar had hurt him, it had been becauseVoldemort had been close by. ... But Voldemortcouldn’t be here, now. ... The idea of Voldemortlurking in Privet Drive was absurd, impossible. ...

Harry listened closely to the silence around him. Washe half-expecting to hear the creak of a stair or theswish of a cloak? And then he jumped slightly as heheard his cousin Dudley give a tremendous gruntingsnore from the next room.

Harry shook himself mentally; he was being stupid.There was no one in the house with him except UncleVernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley, and they wereplainly still asleep, their dreams untroubled andpainless.

Asleep was the way Harry liked the Dursleys best; itwasn’t as though they were ever any help to himawake. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and Dudley wereHarry’s only living relatives. They were Muggles whohated and despised magic in any form, which meantthat Harry was about as welcome in their house asdry rot. They had explained away Harry’s longabsences at Hogwarts over the last three years bytelling everyone that he went to St. Brutus’s SecureCenter for Incurably Criminal Boys. They knewperfectly well that, as an underage wizard, Harrywasn’t allowed to use magic outside Hogwarts, butthey were still apt to blame him for anything thatwent wrong about the house. Harry had never beenable to confide in them or tell them anything abouthis life in the wizarding world. The very idea of goingto them when they awoke, and telling them about hisPage | 21 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

scar hurting him, and about his worries aboutVoldemort, was laughable.

And yet it was because of Voldemort that Harry hadcome to live with the Dursleys in the first place. If ithadn’t been for Voldemort, Harry would not have hadthe lightning scar on his forehead. If it hadn’t been forVoldemort, Harry would still have had parents. ...

Harry had been a year old the night that Voldemort —the most powerful Dark wizard for a century, a wizardwho had been gaining power steadily for eleven years— arrived at his house and killed his father andmother. Voldemort had then turned his wand onHarry; he had performed the curse that had disposedof many full-grown witches and wizards in his steadyrise to power — and, incredibly, it had not worked.Instead of killing the small boy, the curse hadrebounded upon Voldemort. Harry had survived withnothing but a lightning-shaped cut on his forehead,and Voldemort had been reduced to something barelyalive. His powers gone, his life almost extinguished,Voldemort had fled; the terror in which the secretcommunity of witches and wizards had lived for solong had lifted, Voldemort’s followers had disbanded,and Harry Potter had become famous.

It had been enough of a shock for Harry to discover,on his eleventh birthday, that he was a wizard; it hadbeen even more disconcerting to find out thateveryone in the hidden wizarding world knew hisname. Harry had arrived at Hogwarts to find thatheads turned and whispers followed him wherever hewent. But he was used to it now: At the end of thissummer, he would be starting his fourth year atHogwarts, and Harry was already counting the daysuntil he would be back at the castle again.

Page | 22

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But there was still a fortnight to go before he wentback to school. He looked hopelessly around his roomagain, and his eye paused on the birthday cards histwo best friends had sent him at the end of July.

What would they say if Harry wrote to them and toldthem about his scar hurting?

At once, Hermione Granger’s voice seemed to fill hishead, shrill and panicky.

“ Your scar hurt? Harry, that’s really serious. ... Writeto Professor Dumbledorel And I’ll go and checkCommon Magical Ailments and Afflictions. ... Maybethere’s something in there about curse scars. ...”

Yes, that would be Hermione’s advice: Go straight tothe headmaster of Hogwarts, and in the meantime,consult a book. Harry stared out of the window at theinky blue-black sky. He doubted very much whether abook could help him now. As far as he knew, he wasthe only living person to have survived a curse likeVoldemort’s; it was highly unlikely, therefore, that hewould find his symptoms listed in Common MagicalAilments and Afflictions. As for informing theheadmaster, Harry had no idea where Dumbledorewent during the summer holidays. He amused himselffor a moment, picturing Dumbledore, with his longsilver beard, full-length wizard’s robes, and pointedhat, stretched out on a beach somewhere, rubbingsuntan lotion onto his long crooked nose. WhereverDumbledore was, though, Harry was sure thatHedwig would be able to find him; Harry’s owl hadnever yet failed to deliver a letter to anyone, evenwithout an address. But what would he write?

Dear Professor Dumbledore, Sorry to bother you, butmy scar hurt this morning. Yours sincerely, HarryPotter.

Page | 23

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Even inside his head the words sounded stupid.

And so he tried to imagine his other best friend, RonWeasley’s, reaction, and in a moment, Ron’s red hairand long-nosed, freckled face seemed to swim beforeHarry, wearing a bemused expression.

“Your scar hurt? But... but You-Knotu-Who can’t benear you now, can he? I mean ... you’d know, wouldn’tyou? He’d be trying to do you in again, wouldn’t he? Idunno, Harry, maybe curse scars always twinge a bit... I’ll ask Dad. ...”

Mr. Weasley was a fully qualified wizard who workedin the Misuse of Muggle Artifacts Office at theMinistry of Magic, but he didn’t have any particularexpertise in the matter of curses, as far as Harryknew. In any case, Harry didn’t like the idea of thewhole Weasley family knowing that he, Harry, wasgetting jumpy about a few moments’ pain. Mrs.Weasley would fuss worse than Hermione, and Fredand George, Ron’s sixteen-year-old twin brothers,might think Harry was losing his nerve. The Weasleyswere Harry’s favorite family in the world; he washoping that they might invite him to stay any timenow (Ron had mentioned something about theQuidditch World Cup), and he somehow didn’t wanthis visit punctuated with anxious inquiries about hisscar.

Harry kneaded his forehead with his knuckles. Whathe really wanted (and it felt almost shameful to admitit to himself) was someone like — someone like aparent: an adult wizard whose advice he could askwithout feeling stupid, someone who cared abouthim, who had had experience with Dark Magic. ...

Page | 24

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

And then the solution came to him. It was so simple,and so obvious, that he couldn’t believe it had takenso long — Sirius.

Harry leapt up from the bed, hurried across the room,and sat down at his desk; he pulled a piece ofparchment toward him, loaded his eagle-feather quillwith ink, wrote Dear Sirius, then paused, wonderinghow best to phrase his problem, still marveling at thefact that he hadn’t thought of Sirius straight away.

But then, perhaps it wasn’t so surprising — after all,he had only found out that Sirius was his godfathertwo months ago.

There was a simple reason for Sirius’s completeabsence from Harry’s life until then — Sirius hadbeen in Azkaban, the terrifying wizard jail guarded bycreatures called dementors, sightless, soul-suckingfiends who had come to search for Sirius at Hogwartswhen he had escaped. Yet Sirius had been innocent— the murders for which he had been convicted hadbeen committed by Wormtail, Voldemort’s supporter,whom nearly everybody now believed dead. Harry,

Ron, and Hermione knew otherwise, however; theyhad come face-to-face with Wormtail only theprevious year, though only Professor Dumbledore hadbelieved their story.

For one glorious hour, Harry had believed that he wasleaving the Dursleys at last, because Sirius hadoffered him a home once his name had been cleared.But the chance had been snatched away from him —Wormtail had escaped before they could take him tothe Ministry of Magic, and Sirius had had to flee forhis life. Harry had helped him escape on the back of ahippogriff called Buckbeak, and since then, Siriushad been on the run. The home Harry might have hadif Wormtail had not escaped had been haunting himall summer. It had been doubly hard to return to thePage | 25 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dursleys knowing that he had so nearly escaped themforever.

Nevertheless, Sirius had been of some help to Harry,even if he couldn’t be with him. It was due to Siriusthat Harry now had all his school things in hisbedroom with him. The Dursleys had never allowedthis before; their general wish of keeping Harry asmiserable as possible, coupled with their fear of hispowers, had led them to lock his school trunk in thecupboard under the stairs every summer prior to this.But their attitude had changed since they had foundout that Harry had a dangerous murderer for agodfather — for Harry had conveniently forgotten totell them that Sirius was innocent.

Harry had received two letters from Sirius since hehad been back at Privet Drive. Both had beendelivered, not by owls (as was usual with wizards),but by large, brightly colored tropical birds. Hedwighad not approved of these flashy intruders; she hadbeen most reluctant to allow them to drink from herwater tray before flying off again. Harry, on the otherhand, had liked them; they put him in mind of palmtrees and white sand, and he hoped that, whereverSirius was (Sirius never said, in case the letters wereintercepted), he was enjoying himself. Somehow,

Harry found it hard to imagine dementors survivingfor long in bright sunlight; perhaps that was whySirius had gone south. Sirius’s letters, which werenow hidden beneath the highly useful loosefloorboard under Harry’s bed, sounded cheerful, andin both of them he had reminded Harry to call on himif ever Harry needed to. Well, he needed to now, allright. ...

Harry’s lamp seemed to grow dimmer as the cold graylight that precedes sunrise slowly crept into the room.Finally, when the sun had risen, when his bedroom

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

walls had turned gold, and when sounds of movementcould be heard from Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia’sroom, Harry cleared his desk of crumpled pieces ofparchment and reread his finished letter.

Dear Sirius,

Thanks for your last letter. That bird was enormous; itcould hardly get through my window.

Things are the same as usual here. Dudley’s diet isn’tgoing too well. My aunt found him smugglingdoughnuts into his room yesterday. They told himthey’d have to cut his pocket money if he keeps doingit, so he got really angry and chucked his PlayStationout of the window. That’s a sort of computer thing youcan play games on. Bit stupid really, now he hasn’teven got Mega-Mutilation Part Three to take his mindoff things.

I’m okay, mainly because the Dursleys are terrifiedyou might turn up and turn them all into bats if I askyou to.

A weird thing happened this morning, though. My scarhurt again. Last time that happened it was becauseVoldemort was at Hogwarts. But I don’t reckon he canbe anywhere near me now, can he? Do you know ifcurse scars sometimes hurt years afterward?

I’ll send this with Hedwig when she gets back; she’soffhunt-\ing at the moment. Say hello to Buckbeak forme.

Harry

Yes, thought Harry, that looked all right. There wasno point putting in the dream; he didn’t want it tolook as though he was too worried. He folded up the

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

parchment and laid it aside on his desk, ready forwhen Hedwig returned. Then he got to his feet,stretched, and opened his wardrobe once more.Without glancing at his reflection, he started to getdressed before going down to breakfast.

Page | 28

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



THE INVITATION

By the time Harry arrived in the kitchen, the threeDursleys were already seated around the table. Noneof them looked up as he entered or sat down. UncleVernon’s large red face was hidden behind themorning’s Daily Mail, and Aunt Petunia was cutting agrapefruit into quarters, her lips pursed over herhorselike teeth.

Dudley looked furious and sulky, and somehowseemed to be taking up even more space than usual.This was saying something, as he always took up anentire side of the square table by himself. When AuntPetunia put a quarter of unsweetened grapefruit ontoDudley’s plate with a tremulous “There you are, Diddydarling,” Dudley glowered at her. His life had taken amost unpleasant turn since he had come home forthe summer with his end-of-year report.

Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia had managed to findexcuses for his bad marks as usual: Aunt Petuniaalways insisted that Dudley was a very gifted boywhose teachers didn’t understand him, while Uncle

Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Vernon maintained that “he didn’t want some swottylittle nancy boy for a son anyway.” They also skatedover the accusations of bullying in the report — “He’sa boisterous little boy, but he wouldn’t hurt a fly!”Aunt Petunia had said tearfully.

However, at the bottom of the report there were a fewwell-chosen comments from the school nurse that noteven Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia could explainaway. No matter how much Aunt Petunia wailed thatDudley was big-boned, and that his poundage wasreally puppy fat, and that he was a growing boy whoneeded plenty of food, the fact remained that theschool outfitters didn’t stock knickerbockers bigenough for him anymore. The school nurse had seenwhat Aunt Petunia’s eyes — so sharp when it came tospotting fingerprints on her gleaming walls, and inobserving the comings and goings of the neighbors —simply refused to see: that far from needing extranourishment, Dudley had reached roughly the sizeand weight of a young killer whale.

So — after many tantrums, after arguments thatshook Harry’s bedroom floor, and many tears fromAunt Petunia — the new regime had begun. The dietsheet that had been sent by the Smeltings schoolnurse had been taped to the fridge, which had beenemptied of all Dudley’s favorite things — fizzy drinksand cakes, chocolate bars and burgers — and filledinstead with fruit and vegetables and the sorts ofthings that Uncle Vernon called “rabbit food.” Tomake Dudley feel better about it all, Aunt Petunia hadinsisted that the whole family follow the diet too. Shenow passed a grapefruit quarter to Harry. He noticedthat it was a lot smaller than Dudley’s. Aunt Petuniaseemed to feel that the best way to keep up Dudley’smorale was to make sure that he did, at least, getmore to eat than Harry.

Page | 30

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But Aunt Petunia didn’t know what was hidden underthe loose floorboard upstairs. She had no idea thatHarry was not following the diet at all. The momenthe had got wind of the fact that he was expected tosurvive the summer on carrot sticks, Harry had sentHedwig to his friends with pleas for help, and theyhad risen to the occasion magnificently. Hedwig hadreturned from Hermione’s house with a large boxstuffed full of sugar-free snacks. (Hermione’s parentswere dentists.) Hagrid, the Hogwarts gamekeeper, hadobliged with a sack full of his own homemade rockcakes. (Harry hadn’t touched these; he had had toomuch experience of Hagrid’s cooking.) Mrs. Weasley,however, had sent the family owl, Errol, with anenormous fruitcake and assorted meat pies. PoorErrol, who was elderly and feeble, had needed a fullfive days to recover from the journey. And then onHarry’s birthday (which the Dursleys had completelyignored) he had received four superb birthday cakes,one each from Ron, Hermione, Hagrid, and Sirius.Harry still had two of them left, and so, lookingforward to a real breakfast when he got back upstairs,he ate his grapefruit without complaint.

Uncle Vernon laid aside his paper with a deep sniff ofdisapproval and looked down at his own grapefruitquarter.

“Is this it?” he said grumpily to Aunt Petunia.

Aunt Petunia gave him a severe look, and thennodded pointedly at Dudley, who had already finishedhis own grapefruit quarter and was eyeing Harry’swith a very sour look in his piggy little eyes.

Uncle Vernon gave a great sigh, which ruffled hislarge, bushy mustache, and picked up his spoon.

Page | 31

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The doorbell rang. Uncle Vernon heaved himself outof his chair and set off down the hall. Quick as aflash, while his mother was occupied with the kettle,Dudley stole the rest of Uncle Vernon’s grapefruit.

Harry heard talking at the door, and someonelaughing, and Uncle Vernon answering curtly. Thenthe front door closed, and the sound of ripping papercame from the hall.

Aunt Petunia set the teapot down on the table andlooked curiously around to see where Uncle Vernonhad got to. She didn’t have to wait long to find out;after about a minute, he was back. He looked livid.

“You,” he barked at Harry. “In the living room. Now.”

Bewildered, wondering what on earth he wassupposed to have done this time, Harry got up andfollowed Uncle Vernon out of the kitchen and into thenext room. Uncle Vernon closed the door sharplybehind both of them.

“So,” he said, marching over to the fireplace andturning to face Harry as though he were about topronounce him under arrest. “So.”

Harry would have dearly loved to have said, “Sowhat?” but he didn’t feel that Uncle Vernon’s tempershould be tested this early in the morning, especiallywhen it was already under severe strain from lack offood. He therefore settled for looking politely puzzled.

“This just arrived,” said Uncle Vernon. He brandisheda piece of purple writing paper at Harry. “A letter.About you.”

Page | 32

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s confusion increased. Who would be writing toUncle Vernon about him? Who did he know who sentletters by the postman?

Uncle Vernon glared at Harry, then looked down atthe letter and began to read aloud:

Dear Mr. and Mrs. Dursley,

We have never been introduced, but I am sure youhave heard a great deal from Harry about my son Ron.

As Harry might have told you, the final of theQuidditch World Cup takes place this Monday night,and my husband, Arthur, has just managed to getprime tickets through his connections at theDepartment of Magical Games and Sports.

I do hope you will allow us to take Harry to the match,as this really is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity; Britainhasn’t hosted the cup for thirty years, and tickets areextremely hard to come by. We would of course be gladto have Harry stay for the remainder of the summerholidays, and to see him safely onto the train back toschool.

It would be best for Harry to send us your answer asquickly as possible in the normal way, because theMuggle postman has never delivered to our house, andI am not sure he even knows where it is.

Hoping to see Harry soon,

Yours sincerely,

Molly Weasley

P.S. I do hope we’ve put enough stamps on.

Page | 33

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Uncle Vernon finished reading, put his hand backinto his breast pocket, and drew out something else.

“Look at this,” he growled.

He held up the envelope in which Mrs. Weasley’sletter had come, and Harry had to fight down a laugh.Every bit of it was covered in stamps except for asquare inch on the front, into which Mrs. Weasleyhad squeezed the Dursleys’ address in minutewriting.

“She did put enough stamps on, then,” said Harry,trying to sound as though Mrs. Weasley’s was amistake anyone could make. His uncle’s eyes flashed.

“The postman noticed,” he said through gritted teeth.“Very interested to know where this letter came from,he was. That’s why he rang the doorbell. Seemed tothink it was funny.”

Harry didn’t say anything. Other people might notunderstand why Uncle Vernon was making a fussabout too many stamps, but Harry had lived with theDursleys too long not to know how touchy they wereabout anything even slightly out of the ordinary. Theirworst fear was that someone would find out that theywere connected (however distantly) with people likeMrs. Weasley.

Uncle Vernon was still glaring at Harry, who tried tokeep his expression neutral. If he didn’t do or sayanything stupid, he might just be in for the treat of alifetime. He waited for Uncle Vernon to saysomething, but he merely continued to glare. Harrydecided to break the silence.

“So — can I go then?” he asked.

Page | 34

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

A slight spasm crossed Uncle Vernon’s large purpleface. The mustache bristled. Harry thought he knewwhat was going on behind the mustache: a furiousbattle as two of Uncle Vernon’s most fundamentalinstincts came into conflict. Allowing Harry to gowould make Harry happy, something Uncle Vernonhad struggled against for thirteen years. On the otherhand, allowing Harry to disappear to the Weasleys’ forthe rest of the summer would get rid of him twoweeks earlier than anyone could have hoped, andUncle Vernon hated having Harry in the house. Togive himself thinking time, it seemed, he looked downat Mrs. Weasley’s letter again.

“Who is this woman?” he said, staring at thesignature with distaste.

“You’ve seen her,” said Harry. “She’s my friend Ron’smother, she was meeting him off the Hog — off theschool train at the end of last term.”

He had almost said “Hogwarts Express,” and that wasa sure way to get his uncle’s temper up. Nobody evermentioned the name of Harry’s school aloud in theDursley household.

Uncle Vernon screwed up his enormous face asthough trying to remember something veryunpleasant.

“Dumpy sort of woman?” he growled finally. “Load ofchildren with red hair?”

Harry frowned. He thought it was a bit rich of UncleVernon to call anyone “dumpy,” when his own son,Dudley, had finally achieved what he’d beenthreatening to do since the age of three, and becomewider than he was tall.

Page | 35

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Uncle Vernon was perusing the letter again.

“Quidditch,” he muttered under his breath.

“Quidditch — what is this rubbish?”

Harry felt a second stab of annoyance.

“It’s a sport,” he said shortly. “Played on broom —”

“All right, all right!” said Uncle Vernon loudly. Harrysaw, with some satisfaction, that his uncle lookedvaguely panicky. Apparently his nerves couldn’t standthe sound of the word “broomsticks” in his livingroom. He took refuge in perusing the letter again.Harry saw his lips form the words “send us youranswer ... in the normal way.” He scowled.

“What does she mean, ‘the normal way’?” he spat.

“Normal for us,” said Harry, and before his unclecould stop him, he added, “you know, owl post. That’swhat’s normal for wizards.”

Uncle Vernon looked as outraged as if Harry had justuttered a disgusting swear word. Shaking with anger,he shot a nervous look through the window, asthough expecting to see some of the neighbors withtheir ears pressed against the glass.

“How many times do I have to tell you not to mentionthat unnaturalness under my roof?” he hissed, hisface now a rich plum color. “You stand there, in theclothes Petunia and I have put on your ungratefulback —”

“Only after Dudley finished with them,” said Harrycoldly, and indeed, he was dressed in a sweatshirt solarge for him that he had had to roll back the sleeves

Page | 36

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

five times so as to be able to use his hands, andwhich fell past the knees of his extremely baggy jeans.

“I will not be spoken to like that!” said Uncle Vernon,trembling with rage.

But Harry wasn’t going to stand for this. Gone werethe days when he had been forced to take every singleone of the Dursleys’ stupid rules. He wasn’t followingDudley’s diet, and he wasn’t going to let Uncle Vernonstop him from going to the Quidditch World Cup, notif he could help it. Harry took a deep, steadyingbreath and then said, “Okay, I can’t see the WorldCup. Can I go now, then? Only I’ve got a letter toSirius I want to finish. You know — my godfather.”

He had done it. He had said the magic words. Now hewatched the purple recede blotchily from UncleVernon’s face, making it look like badly mixed blackcurrant ice cream.

“You’re — you’re writing to him, are you?” said UncleVernon, in a would-be calm voice — but Harry hadseen the pupils of his tiny eyes contract with suddenfear.

“Well — yeah,” said Harry, casually. “It’s been a whilesince he heard from me, and, you know, if he doesn’t,he might start thinking something’s wrong.”

He stopped there to enjoy the effect of these words.

He could almost see the cogs working under UncleVernon’s thick, dark, neatly parted hair. If he tried tostop Harry writing to Sirius, Sirius would think Harrywas being mistreated. If he told Harry he couldn’t goto the Quidditch World Cup, Harry would write andtell Sirius, who would know Harry was beingmistreated. There was only one thing for UncleVernon to do. Harry could see the conclusion formingPage | 37 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

in his uncle’s mind as though the great mustachedface were transparent. Harry tried not to smile, tokeep his own face as blank as possible. And then —

“Well, all right then. You can go to this ruddy ... thisstupid ... this World Cup thing. You write and tellthese — these Weasleys they’re to pick you up, mind.I haven’t got time to go dropping you off all over thecountry. And you can spend the rest of the summerthere. And you can tell your — your godfather ... tellhim ... tell him you’re going.”

“Okay then,” said Harry brightly.

He turned and walked toward the living room door,fighting the urge to jump into the air and whoop. Hewas going ... he was going to the Weasleys’, he wasgoing to watch the Quidditch World Cup!

Outside in the hall he nearly ran into Dudley, whohad been lurking behind the door, clearly hoping tooverhear Harry being told off. He looked shocked tosee the broad grin on Harry’s face.

“That was an excellent breakfast, wasn’t it?” saidHarry. “I feel really full, don’t you?”

Laughing at the astonished look on Dudley’s face,Harry took the stairs three at a time, and hurledhimself back into his bedroom.

The first thing he saw was that Hedwig was back. Shewas sitting in her cage, staring at Harry with herenormous amber eyes, and clicking her beak in theway that meant she was annoyed about something.Exactly what was annoying her became apparentalmost at once.

Page | 38

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“OUCH!” said Harry as what appeared to be a small,gray, feathery tennis ball collided with the side of hishead. Harry massaged the spot furiously, looking upto see what had hit him, and saw a minute owl, smallenough to fit into the palm of his hand, whizzingexcitedly around the room like a loose firework. Harrythen realized that the owl had dropped a letter at hisfeet. Harry bent down, recognized Ron’s handwriting,then tore open the envelope. Inside was a hastilyscribbled note.

Harry — DAD GOT THE TICKETS — Ireland versusBulgaria, Monday night. Mum’s writing to the Mugglesto ask you to stay. They might already have the letter,

I don’t know how fast Muggle post is. Thought I’d sendthis with Pig anyway.

Harry stared at the word “Pig,” then looked up at thetiny owl now zooming around the light fixture on theceiling. He had never seen anything that looked lesslike a pig. Maybe he couldn’t read Ron’s writing. Hewent back to the letter:

We’re coming for you whether the Muggles like it ornot, you can’t miss the World Cup, only Mum and Dadreckon it’s better if we pretend to ask their permissionfirst. If they say yes, send Pig back with your answerpronto, and we’ll come and get you at five o’clock onSunday. If they say no, send Pig back pronto and we’llcome and get you at five o’clock on Sunday anyway.

Hermione’s arriving this afternoon. Percy’s startedwork — the Department of International MagicalCooperation. Don’t mention anything about Abroadwhile you’re here unless you want the pants bored offyou.

See you soon —

Page | 39

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Ron

“Calm down!” Harry said as the small owl flew lowover his head, twittering madly with what Harry couldonly assume was pride at having delivered the letterto the right person. “Come here, I need you to take myanswer back!”

The owl fluttered down on top of Hedwig’s cage.Hedwig looked coldly up at it, as though daring it totry and come any closer.

Harry seized his eagle-feather quill once more,grabbed a fresh piece of parchment, and wrote:

Ron, it’s all okay, the Muggles say I can come. See youfive o’clock tomorrow. Can’t wait.

Harry

He folded this note up very small, and with immensedifficulty, tied it to the tiny owl’s leg as it hopped onthe spot with excitement. The moment the note wassecure, the owl was off again; it zoomed out of thewindow and out of sight.

Harry turned to Hedwig.

“Feeling up to a long journey?” he asked her.

Hedwig hooted in a dignified sort of a way.

“Can you take this to Sirius for me?” he said, pickingup his letter. “Hang on ... I just want to finish it.”

He unfolded the parchment and hastily added apostscript.

Page | 40

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

If you want to contact me, I’ll be at my friend RonWeasley’s for the rest of the summer. His dad’s got ustickets for the Quidditch World Cup\

The letter finished, he tied it to Hedwig’s leg; she keptunusually still, as though determined to show himhow a real post owl should behave.

“I’ll be at Ron’s when you get back, all right?” Harrytold her.

She nipped his finger affectionately, then, with a softswooshing noise, spread her enormous wings andsoared out of the open window.

Harry watched her out of sight, then crawled underhis bed, wrenched up the loose floorboard, and pulledout a large chunk of birthday cake. He sat there onthe floor eating it, savoring the happiness that wasflooding through him. He had cake, and Dudley hadnothing but grapefruit; it was a bright summer’s day,he would be leaving Privet Drive tomorrow, his scarfelt perfectly normal again, and he was going to watchthe Quidditch World Cup. It was hard, just now, tofeel worried about anything — even Lord Voldemort.

Page | 41

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





BACK TO THE BURROW

By twelve o’clock the next day, Harry’s school trunkwas packed with his school things and all his mostprized possessions — the Invisibility Cloak he hadinherited from his father, the broomstick he hadgotten from Sirius, the enchanted map of Hogwarts hehad been given by Fred and George Weasley last year.He had emptied his hiding place under the loosefloorboard of all food, double-checked every nook andcranny of his bedroom for forgotten spellbooks orquills, and taken down the chart on the wall countingdown the days to September the first, on which heliked to cross off the days remaining until his returnto Hogwarts.

The atmosphere inside number four, Privet Drive wasextremely tense. The imminent arrival at their houseof an assortment of wizards was making the Dursleysuptight and irritable. Uncle Vernon had lookeddownright alarmed when Harry informed him that theWeasleys would be arriving at five o’clock the verynext day.

Page | 42

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I hope you told them to dress properly, these people,”he snarled at once. “I’ve seen the sort of stuff your lotwear. They’d better have the decency to put onnormal clothes, that’s all.”

Harry felt a slight sense of foreboding. He had rarelyseen Mr. or Mrs. Weasley wearing anything that theDursleys would call “normal.” Their children mightdon Muggle clothing during the holidays, but Mr. andMrs. Weasley usually wore long robes in varyingstates of shabbiness. Harry wasn’t bothered aboutwhat the neighbors would think, but he was anxiousabout how rude the Dursleys might be to theWeasleys if they turned up looking like their worstidea of wizards.

Uncle Vernon had put on his best suit. To somepeople, this might have looked like a gesture ofwelcome, but Harry knew it was because UncleVernon wanted to look impressive and intimidating.Dudley, on the other hand, looked somehowdiminished. This was not because the diet was at lasttaking effect, but due to fright. Dudley had emergedfrom his last encounter with a fully-grown wizard witha curly pig’s tail poking out of the seat of his trousers,and Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon had had to payfor its removal at a private hospital in London. Itwasn’t altogether surprising, therefore, that Dudleykept running his hand nervously over his backside,and walking sideways from room to room, so as not topresent the same target to the enemy.

Lunch was an almost silent meal. Dudley didn’t evenprotest at the food (cottage cheese and grated celery).Aunt Petunia wasn’t eating anything at all. Her armswere folded, her lips were pursed, and she seemed tobe chewing her tongue, as though biting back thefurious diatribe she longed to throw at Harry.

Page | 43

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“They’ll be driving, of course?” Uncle Vernon barkedacross the table.

“Er,” said Harry.

He hadn’t thought of that. How were the Weasleysgoing to pick him up? They didn’t have a caranymore; the old Ford Anglia they had once ownedwas currently running wild in the Forbidden Forest atHogwarts. But Mr. Weasley had borrowed a Ministryof Magic car last year; possibly he would do the sametoday?

“I think so,” said Harry.

Uncle Vernon snorted into his mustache. Normally,Uncle Vernon would have asked what car Mr. Weasleydrove; he tended to judge other men by how big andexpensive their cars were. But Harry doubted whetherUncle Vernon would have taken to Mr. Weasley evenif he drove a Ferrari.

Harry spent most of the afternoon in his bedroom; hecouldn’t stand watching Aunt Petunia peer outthrough the net curtains every few seconds, asthough there had been a warning about an escapedrhinoceros. Finally, at a quarter to five, Harry wentback downstairs and into the living room.

Aunt Petunia was compulsively straighteningcushions. Uncle Vernon was pretending to read thepaper, but his tiny eyes were not moving, and Harrywas sure he was really listening with all his might forthe sound of an approaching car. Dudley wascrammed into an armchair, his porky hands beneathhim, clamped firmly around his bottom. Harrycouldn’t take the tension; he left the room and wentand sat on the stairs in the hall, his eyes on his

Page | 44

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

watch and his heart pumping fast from excitementand nerves.

But five o’clock came and then went. Uncle Vernon,perspiring slightly in his suit, opened the front door,peered up and down the street, then withdrew hishead quickly.

“They’re late!” he snarled at Harry.

“I know,” said Harry. “Maybe — er — the traffic’s bad,or something.”

Ten past five ... then a quarter past five ... Harry wasstarting to feel anxious himself now. At half past, heheard Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia conversing interse mutters in the living room.

“No consideration at all.”

“We might’ve had an engagement.”

“Maybe they think theyll get invited to dinner ifthey’re late.”

“Well, they most certainly won’t be,” said UncleVernon, and Harry heard him stand up and startpacing the living room. “They’ll take the boy and go,there 11 be no hanging around. That’s if they’re comingat all. Probably mistaken the day. I daresay their kinddon’t set much store by punctuality. Either that orthey drive some tin-pot car that’s broken d —AAAAAAAARRRRRGH! ”

Harry jumped up. From the other side of the livingroom door came the sounds of the three Dursleysscrambling, panic-stricken, across the room. Nextmoment Dudley came flying into the hall, lookingterrified.

Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What happened?” said Harry. “What’s the matter?”

But Dudley didn’t seem able to speak. Hands stillclamped over his buttocks, he waddled as fast as hecould into the kitchen. Harry hurried into the livingroom.

Loud hangings and scrapings were coming frombehind the Dursleys’ boarded-up fireplace, which hada fake coal fire plugged in front of it.

“What is it?” gasped Aunt Petunia, who had backedinto the wall and was staring, terrified, toward thefire. “What is it, Vernon?”

But they were left in doubt barely a second longer.Voices could be heard from inside the blockedfireplace.

“Ouch! Fred, no — go back, go back, there’s beensome kind of mistake — tell George not to — OUCH!George, no, there’s no room, go back quickly and tellRon —”

“Maybe Harry can hear us, Dad — maybe he’ll be ableto let us out —”

There was a loud hammering of fists on the boardsbehind the electric fire.

“Harry? Harry, can you hear us?”

The Dursleys rounded on Harry like a pair of angrywolverines.

“What is this?” growled Uncle Vernon. “What’s goingon?”

Page | 46

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“They — they’ve tried to get here by Floo powder,”said Harry, fighting a mad desire to laugh. “They cantravel by fire — only you’ve blocked the fireplace —hang on —”

He approached the fireplace and called through theboards.

“Mr. Weasley? Can you hear me?”

The hammering stopped. Somebody inside thechimney piece said, “Shh!”

“Mr. Weasley, it’s Harry ... the fireplace has beenblocked up. You won’t be able to get through there.”

“Damn!” said Mr. Weasley’s voice. “What on earth didthey want to block up the fireplace for?”

“They’ve got an electric fire,” Harry explained.

“Really?” said Mr. Weasley’s voice excitedly. “Eclectic,you say? With a plug? Gracious, I must see that. ...Let’s think ... ouch, Ron!”

Ron’s voice now joined the others’.

“What are we doing here? Has something gonewrong?”

“Oh no, Ron,” came Fred’s voice, very sarcastically.“No, this is exactly where we wanted to end up.”

“Yeah, we’re having the time of our lives here,” saidGeorge, whose voice sounded muffled, as though hewas squashed against the wall.

Page | 47

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Boys, boys ...” said Mr. Weasley vaguely. “I’m tryingto think what to do. ... Yes ... only way ... Stand back,Harry.”

Harry retreated to the sofa. Uncle Vernon, however,moved forward.

“Wait a moment!” he bellowed at the fire. “Whatexactly are you going to —”

BANG.

The electric fire shot across the room as the boarded-up fireplace burst outward, expelling Mr. Weasley,Fred, George, and Ron in a cloud of rubble and loosechippings. Aunt Petunia shrieked and fell backwardover the coffee table; Uncle Vernon caught her beforeshe hit the floor, and gaped, speechless, at theWeasleys, all of whom had bright red hair, includingFred and George, who were identical to the lastfreckle.

“That’s better,” panted Mr. Weasley, brushing dustfrom his long green robes and straightening hisglasses. “Ah — you must be Harry’s aunt and uncle!”

Tall, thin, and balding, he moved toward UncleVernon, his hand outstretched, but Uncle Vernonbacked away several paces, dragging Aunt Petunia.Words utterly failed Uncle Vernon. His best suit wascovered in white dust, which had settled in his hairand mustache and made him look as though he hadjust aged thirty years.

“Er — yes — sorry about that,” said Mr. Weasley,lowering his hand and looking over his shoulder atthe blasted fireplace. “It’s all my fault. It just didn’toccur to me that we wouldn’t be able to get out at theother end. I had your fireplace connected to the FlooPage | 48 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Network, you see — just for an afternoon, you know,so we could get Harry. Muggle fireplaces aren’tsupposed to be connected, strictly speaking — butI’ve got a useful contact at the Floo Regulation Paneland he fixed it for me. I can put it right in a jiffy,though, don’t worry. I’ll light a fire to send the boysback, and then I can repair your fireplace before IDisapparate.”

Harry was ready to bet that the Dursleys hadn’tunderstood a single word of this. They were stillgaping at Mr. Weasley, thunderstruck. Aunt Petuniastaggered upright again and hid behind UncleVernon.

“Hello, Harry!” said Mr. Weasley brightly. “Got yourtrunk ready?”

“It’s upstairs,” said Harry, grinning back.

“Well get it,” said Fred at once. Winking at Harry, heand George left the room. They knew where Harry’sbedroom was, having once rescued him from it in thedead of night. Harry suspected that Fred and Georgewere hoping for a glimpse of Dudley; they had heard alot about him from Harry.

“Well,” said Mr. Weasley, swinging his arms slightly,while he tried to find words to break the very nastysilence. “Very — erm — very nice place you’ve gothere.”

As the usually spotless living room was now coveredin dust and bits of brick, this remark didn’t go downtoo well with the Dursleys. Uncle Vernon’s facepurpled once more, and Aunt Petunia started chewingher tongue again. However, they seemed too scared toactually say anything.

Page | 49

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mr. Weasley was looking around. He loved everythingto do with Muggles. Harry could see him itching to goand examine the television and the video recorder.

“They run off eckeltricity, do they?” he saidknowledgeably. “Ah yes, I can see the plugs. I collectplugs,” he added to Uncle Vernon. “And batteries. Gota very large collection of batteries. My wife thinks I’mmad, but there you are.”

Uncle Vernon clearly thought Mr. Weasley was madtoo. He moved ever so slightly to the right, screeningAunt Petunia from view, as though he thought Mr.Weasley might suddenly run at them and attack.

Dudley suddenly reappeared in the room. Harry couldhear the clunk of his trunk on the stairs, and knewthat the sounds had scared Dudley out of the kitchen.Dudley edged along the wall, gazing at Mr. Weasleywith terrified eyes, and attempted to conceal himselfbehind his mother and father. Unfortunately, UncleVernon’s bulk, while sufficient to hide bony AuntPetunia, was nowhere near enough to conceal Dudley.

“Ah, this is your cousin, is it, Harry?” said Mr.Weasley, taking another brave stab at makingconversation.

“Yep,” said Harry, “that’s Dudley.”

He and Ron exchanged glances and then quicklylooked away from each other; the temptation to burstout laughing was almost overwhelming. Dudley wasstill clutching his bottom as though afraid it mightfall off. Mr. Weasley, however, seemed genuinelyconcerned at Dudley’s peculiar behavior. Indeed, fromthe tone of his voice when he next spoke, Harry wasquite sure that Mr. Weasley thought Dudley was quite

Page | 50

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

as mad as the Dursleys thought he was, except thatMr. Weasley felt sympathy rather than fear.

“Having a good holiday, Dudley?” he said kindly.

Dudley whimpered. Harry saw his hands tighten stillharder over his massive backside.

Fred and George came back into the room carryingHarry’s school trunk. They glanced around as theyentered and spotted Dudley. Their faces cracked intoidentical evil grins.

“Ah, right,” said Mr. Weasley. “Better get crackingthen.”

He pushed up the sleeves of his robes and took outhis wand. Harry saw the Dursleys draw back againstthe wall as one.

“Incendio\” said Mr. Weasley, pointing his wand at thehole in the wall behind him.

Flames rose at once in the fireplace, crackling merrilyas though they had been burning for hours. Mr.Weasley took a small drawstring bag from his pocket,untied it, took a pinch of the powder inside, andthrew it onto the flames, which turned emerald greenand roared higher than ever.

“Off you go then, Fred,” said Mr. Weasley.

“Coming,” said Fred. “Oh no — hang on —”

A bag of sweets had spilled out of Fred’s pocket andthe contents were now rolling in every direction —big, fat toffees in brightly colored wrappers.

Page | 51

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Fred scrambled around, cramming them back into hispocket, then gave the Dursleys a cheery wave,stepped forward, and walked right into the fire, saying“the Burrow!” Aunt Petunia gave a little shudderinggasp. There was a whooshing sound, and Fredvanished.

“Right then, George,” said Mr. Weasley, “you and thetrunk.”

Harry helped George carry the trunk forward into theflames and turn it onto its end so that he could holdit better. Then, with a second whoosh, George hadcried “the Burrow!” and vanished too.

“Ron, you next,” said Mr. Weasley.

“See you,” said Ron brightly to the Dursleys. Hegrinned broadly at Harry, then stepped into the fire,shouted “the Burrow!” and disappeared.

Now Harry and Mr. Weasley alone remained.

“Well ... T>ye then,” Harry said to the Dursleys.

They didn’t say anything at all. Harry moved towardthe fire, but just as he reached the edge of the hearth,Mr. Weasley put out a hand and held him back. Hewas looking at the Dursleys in amazement.

“Harry said good-bye to you,” he said. “Didn’t youhear him?”

“It doesn’t matter,” Harry muttered to Mr. Weasley.“Honestly, I don’t care.”

Mr. Weasley did not remove his hand from Harry’sshoulder.

Page | 52

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You aren’t going to see your nephew till nextsummer,” he said to Uncle Vernon in mildindignation. “Surely you’re going to say good-bye?”

Uncle Vernon’s face worked furiously. The idea ofbeing taught consideration by a man who had justblasted away half his living room wall seemed to becausing him intense suffering. But Mr. Weasley’swand was still in his hand, and Uncle Vernon’s tinyeyes darted to it once, before he said, very resentfully,“Good-bye, then.”

“See you,” said Harry, putting one foot forward intothe green flames, which felt pleasantly like warmbreath. At that moment, however, a horrible gaggingsound erupted behind him, and Aunt Petunia startedto scream.

Harry wheeled around. Dudley was no longerstanding behind his parents. He was kneeling besidethe coffee table, and he was gagging and sputteringon a foot-long, purple, slimy thing that wasprotruding from his mouth. One bewildered secondlater, Harry realized that the foot-long thing wasDudley’s tongue — and that a brightly colored toffeewrapper lay on the floor before him.

Aunt Petunia hurled herself onto the ground besideDudley, seized the end of his swollen tongue, andattempted to wrench it out of his mouth;unsurprisingly, Dudley yelled and sputtered worsethan ever, trying to fight her off. Uncle Vernon wasbellowing and waving his arms around, and Mr.Weasley had to shout to make himself heard.

“Not to worry, I can sort him out!” he yelled,advancing on Dudley with his wand outstretched, butAunt Petunia screamed worse than ever and threw

Page | 53

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

herself on top of Dudley, shielding him from Mr.Weasley.

“No, really!” said Mr. Weasley desperately. “It’s asimple process — it was the toffee — my son Fred —real practical joker — but it’s only an EngorgementCharm — at least, I think it is — please, I can correct

it —”

But far from being reassured, the Dursleys becamemore panic-stricken; Aunt Petunia was sobbinghysterically, tugging Dudley’s tongue as thoughdetermined to rip it out; Dudley appeared to besuffocating under the combined pressure of hismother and his tongue; and Uncle Vernon, who hadlost control completely, seized a china figure from ontop of the sideboard and threw it very hard at Mr.Weasley, who ducked, causing the ornament toshatter in the blasted fireplace.

“Now really!” said Mr. Weasley angrily, brandishinghis wand. “I’m trying to help\”

Bellowing like a wounded hippo, Uncle Vernonsnatched up another ornament.

“Harry, go! Just go!” Mr. Weasley shouted, his wandon Uncle Vernon. “I’ll sort this out!”

Harry didn’t want to miss the fun, but Uncle Vernon’ssecond ornament narrowly missed his left ear, and onbalance he thought it best to leave the situation toMr. Weasley. He stepped into the fire, looking over hisshoulder as he said “the Burrow!” His last fleetingglimpse of the living room was of Mr. Weasley blastinga third ornament out of Uncle Vernon’s hand with hiswand, Aunt Petunia screaming and lying on top ofDudley, and Dudley’s tongue lolling around like agreat slimy python. But next moment Harry hadPage | 54 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

begun to spin very fast, and the Dursleys’ living roomwas whipped out of sight in a rush of emerald-greenflames.

Page | 55

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



WEASLEYS’ WIZARD WHEEZES

Harry spun faster and faster, elbows tucked tightly tohis sides, blurred fireplaces flashing past him, untilhe started to feel sick and closed his eyes. Then,when at last he felt himself slowing down, he threwout his hands and came to a halt in time to preventhimself from falling face forward out of the Weasleys’kitchen fire.

“Did he eat it?” said Fred excitedly, holding out ahand to pull Harry to his feet.

“Yeah,” said Harry, straightening up. “What was it?”

“Ton-Tongue Toffee,” said Fred brightly. “George and Iinvented them, and we’ve been looking for someone totest them on all summer. ...”

The tiny kitchen exploded with laughter; Harry lookedaround and saw that Ron and George were sitting atthe scrubbed wooden table with two red-haired peopleHarry had never seen before, though he knew

Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

immediately who they must be: Bill and Charlie, thetwo eldest Weasley brothers.

“How’re you doing, Harry?” said the nearer of the two,grinning at him and holding out a large hand, whichHarry shook, feeling calluses and blisters under hisfingers. This had to be Charlie, who worked withdragons in Romania. Charlie was built like the twins,shorter and stockier than Percy and Ron, who wereboth long and lanky. He had a broad, good-naturedface, which was weather-beaten and so freckly that helooked almost tanned; his arms were muscular, andone of them had a large, shiny burn on it.

Bill got to his feet, smiling, and also shook Harry’shand. Bill came as something of a surprise. Harryknew that he worked for the wizarding bank,Gringotts, and that Bill had been Head Boy atHogwarts; Harry had always imagined Bill to be anolder version of Percy: fussy about rule-breaking andfond of bossing everyone around. However, Bill was —there was no other word for it — cool. He was tall,with long hair that he had tied back in a ponytail. Hewas wearing an earring with what looked like a fangdangling from it. Bill’s clothes would not have lookedout of place at a rock concert, except that Harryrecognized his boots to be made, not of leather, but ofdragon hide.

Before any of them could say anything else, there wasa faint popping noise, and Mr. Weasley appeared outof thin air at George’s shoulder. He was lookingangrier than Harry had ever seen him.

“That wasn’t funny, Fred!” he shouted. “What onearth did you give that Muggle boy?”

Page | 57

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I didn’t give him anything,” said Fred, with anotherevil grin. “I just dropped it. ... It was his fault he wentand ate it, I never told him to.”

“You dropped it on purpose!” roared Mr. Weasley.

“You knew he’d eat it, you knew he was on a diet —”

“How big did his tongue get?” George asked eagerly.

“It was four feet long before his parents would let meshrink it!”

Harry and the Weasleys roared with laughter again.

“It isn’t funny\” Mr. Weasley shouted. “That sort ofbehavior seriously undermines wizard-Mugglerelations! I spend half my life campaigning against themistreatment of Muggles, and my own sons —”

“We didn’t give it to him because he’s a Muggle!” saidFred indignantly.

“No, we gave it to him because he’s a great bullyinggit,” said George. “Isn’t he, Harry?”

“Yeah, he is, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry earnestly.

“That’s not the point!” raged Mr. Weasley. “You waituntil I tell your mother —”

“Tell me what?” said a voice behind them.

Mrs. Weasley had just entered the kitchen. She was ashort, plump woman with a very kind face, thoughher eyes were presently narrowed with suspicion.

“Oh hello, Harry, dear,” she said, spotting him andsmiling. Then her eyes snapped back to her husband.“Tell me what, Arthur?”

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mr. Weasley hesitated. Harry could tell that, howeverangry he was with Fred and George, he hadn’t reallyintended to tell Mrs. Weasley what had happened.There was a silence, while Mr. Weasley eyed his wifenervously. Then two girls appeared in the kitchendoorway behind Mrs. Weasley. One, with very bushybrown hair and rather large front teeth, was Harry’sand Ron’s friend, Hermione Granger. The other, whowas small and red-haired, was Ron’s younger sister,Ginny. Both of them smiled at Harry, who grinnedback, which made Ginny go scarlet — she had beenvery taken with Harry ever since his first visit to theBurrow.

“Tell me what, Arthur?” Mrs. Weasley repeated, in adangerous sort of voice.

“It’s nothing, Molly,” mumbled Mr. Weasley, “Fred andGeorge just — but I’ve had words with them —”

“What have they done this time?” said Mrs. Weasley.“If it’s got anything to do with Weasleys’ WizardWheezes —”

“Why don’t you show Harry where he’s sleeping,

Ron?” said Hermione from the doorway.

“He knows where he’s sleeping,” said Ron, “in myroom, he slept there last —”

“We can all go,” said Hermione pointedly.

“Oh,” said Ron, cottoning on. “Right.”

“Yeah, we’ll come too,” said George.

“You stay where you are!” snarled Mrs. Weasley.

Page | 59

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry and Ron edged out of the kitchen, and they,Hermione, and Ginny set off along the narrow hallwayand up the rickety staircase that zigzagged throughthe house to the upper stories.

“What are Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes?” Harry askedas they climbed.

Ron and Ginny both laughed, although Hermionedidn’t.

“Mum found this stack of order forms when she wascleaning Fred and George’s room,” said Ron quietly.“Great long price lists for stuff they’ve invented. Jokestuff, you know. Fake wands and trick sweets, loadsof stuff. It was brilliant, I never knew they’d beeninventing all that ...”

“We’ve been hearing explosions out of their room forages, but we never thought they were actually makingthings,” said Ginny. “We thought they just liked thenoise.”

“Only, most of the stuff — well, all of it, really — wasa bit dangerous,” said Ron, “and, you know, they wereplanning to sell it at Hogwarts to make some money,and Mum went mad at them. Told them they weren’tallowed to make any more of it, and burned all theorder forms. ... She’s furious at them anyway. Theydidn’t get as many O.W.L.s as she expected.”

O.W.L.s were Ordinary Wizarding Levels, theexaminations Hogwarts students took at the age offifteen.

“And then there was this big row,” Ginny said,“because Mum wants them to go into the Ministry ofMagic like Dad, and they told her all they want to dois open a joke shop.”

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Just then a door on the second landing opened, and aface poked out wearing horn-rimmed glasses and avery annoyed expression.

“Hi, Percy,” said Harry.

“Oh hello, Harry,” said Percy. “I was wondering whowas making all the noise. I’m trying to work in here,you know — I’ve got a report to finish for the office —and it’s rather difficult to concentrate when peoplekeep thundering up and down the stairs.”

“We’re not thundering,” said Ron irritably. “We’rewalking. Sorry if we’ve disturbed the top-secretworkings of the Ministry of Magic.”

“What are you working on?” said Harry.

“A report for the Department of International MagicalCooperation,” said Percy smugly. “We’re trying tostandardize cauldron thickness. Some of these foreignimports are just a shade too thin — leakages havebeen increasing at a rate of almost three percent ayear —”

“That’ll change the world, that report will,” said Ron.“Front page of the Daily Prophet, I expect, cauldronleaks.”

Percy went slightly pink.

“You might sneer, Ron,” he said heatedly, “but unlesssome sort of international law is imposed we mightwell find the market flooded with flimsy, shallow-bottomed products that seriously endanger —”

“Yeah, yeah, all right,” said Ron, and he started offupstairs again. Percy slammed his bedroom doorshut. As Harry, Hermione, and Ginny followed Ron up

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

three more flights of stairs, shouts from the kitchenbelow echoed up to them. It sounded as though Mr.Weasley had told Mrs. Weasley about the toffees.

The room at the top of the house where Ron sleptlooked much as it had the last time that Harry hadcome to stay: the same posters of Ron’s favoriteQuidditch team, the Chudley Cannons, were whirlingand waving on the walls and sloping ceiling, and thefish tank on the windowsill, which had previouslyheld frog spawn, now contained one extremely largefrog. Ron’s old rat, Scabbers, was here no more, butinstead there was the tiny gray owl that had deliveredRon’s letter to Harry in Privet Drive. It was hoppingup and down in a small cage and twittering madly.

“Shut up, Pig,” said Ron, edging his way between twoof the four beds that had been squeezed into theroom. “Fred and George are in here with us, becauseBill and Charlie are in their room,” he told Harry.“Percy gets to keep his room all to himself becausehe’s got to work.”

“Er — why are you calling that owl Pig?” Harry askedRon.

“Because he’s being stupid,” said Ginny. “Its propername is Pigwidgeon.”

“Yeah, and that’s not a stupid name at all,” said Ronsarcastically. “Ginny named him,” he explained toHarry. “She reckons it’s sweet. And I tried to changeit, but it was too late, he won’t answer to anythingelse. So now he’s Pig. I’ve got to keep him up herebecause he annoys Errol and Hermes. He annoys metoo, come to that.”

Pigwidgeon zoomed happily around his cage, hootingshrilly. Harry knew Ron too well to take him

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

seriously. He had moaned continually about his oldrat, Scabbers, but had been most upset whenHermione’s cat, Crookshanks, appeared to have eatenhim.

“Where’s Crookshanks?” Harry asked Hermione now.

“Out in the garden, I expect,” she said. “He likeschasing gnomes. He’s never seen any before.”

“Percy’s enjoying work, then?” said Harry, sittingdown on one of the beds and watching the ChudleyCannons zooming in and out of the posters on theceiling.

“Enjoying it?” said Ron darkly. “I don’t reckon he’dcome home if Dad didn’t make him. He’s obsessed.Just don’t get him onto the subject of his boss.According to Mr. Crouch ... as I was saying to Mr.Crouch ... Mr. Crouch is of the opinion ... Mr. Crouchwas telling me ... They 11 be announcing theirengagement any day now.”

“Have you had a good summer, Harry?” saidHermione. “Did you get our food parcels andeverything?”

“Yeah, thanks a lot,” said Harry. “They saved my life,those cakes.”

“And have you heard from — ?” Ron began, but at alook from Hermione he fell silent. Harry knew Ronhad been about to ask about Sirius. Ron andHermione had been so deeply involved in helpingSirius escape from the Ministry of Magic that theywere almost as concerned about Harry’s godfather ashe was. However, discussing him in front of Ginnywas a bad idea. Nobody but themselves and Professor

Page | 63

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore knew about how Sirius had escaped, orbelieved in his innocence.

“I think they’ve stopped arguing,” said Hermione, tocover the awkward moment, because Ginny waslooking curiously from Ron to Harry. “Shall we godown and help your mum with dinner?”

“Yeah, all right,” said Ron. The four of them left Ron’sroom and went back downstairs to find Mrs. Weasleyalone in the kitchen, looking extremely bad-tempered.

“We’re eating out in the garden,” she said when theycame in. “There’s just not room for eleven people inhere. Could you take the plates outside, girls? Billand Charlie are setting up the tables. Knives andforks, please, you two,” she said to Ron and Harry,pointing her wand a little more vigorously than shehad intended at a pile of potatoes in the sink, whichshot out of their skins so fast that they ricocheted offthe walls and ceiling.

“Oh for heaven’s sake,” she snapped, now directingher wand at a dustpan, which hopped off thesideboard and started skating across the floor,scooping up the potatoes. “Those two!” she burst outsavagely, now pulling pots and pans out of acupboard, and Harry knew she meant Fred andGeorge. “I don’t know what’s going to happen to them,I really don’t. No ambition, unless you count makingas much trouble as they possibly can. ...”

Mrs. Weasley slammed a large copper saucepan downon the kitchen table and began to wave her wandaround inside it. A creamy sauce poured from thewand tip as she stirred.

“It’s not as though they haven’t got brains,” shecontinued irritably, taking the saucepan over to the

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

stove and lighting it with a further poke of her wand,“but they’re wasting them, and unless they pullthemselves together soon, they’ll be in real trouble.I’ve had more owls from Hogwarts about them thanthe rest put together. If they carry on the way they’regoing, they’ll end up in front of the Improper Use ofMagic Office.”

Mrs. Weasley jabbed her wand at the cutlery drawer,which shot open. Harry and Ron both jumped out ofthe way as several knives soared out of it, flew acrossthe kitchen, and began chopping the potatoes, whichhad just been tipped back into the sink by thedustpan.

“I don’t know where we went wrong with them,” saidMrs. Weasley, putting down her wand and starting topull out still more saucepans. “It’s been the same foryears, one thing after another, and they won’t listento — OH NOT AGAIN.”

She had picked up her wand from the table, and ithad emitted a loud squeak and turned into a giantrubber mouse.

“One of their fake wands again!” she shouted. “Howmany times have I told them not to leave them lyingaround?”

She grabbed her real wand and turned around to findthat the sauce on the stove was smoking.

“C’mon,” Ron said hurriedly to Harry, seizing ahandful of cutlery from the open drawer, “let’s go andhelp Bill and Charlie.”

They left Mrs. Weasley and headed out the back doorinto the yard.

Page | 65

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

They had only gone a few paces when Hermione’sbandy-legged ginger cat, Crookshanks, came peltingout of the garden, bottle-brush tail held high in theair, chasing what looked like a muddy potato on legs.Harry recognized it instantly as a gnome. Barely teninches high, its horny little feet pattered very fast as itsprinted across the yard and dived headlong into oneof the Wellington boots that lay scattered around thedoor. Harry could hear the gnome giggling madly asCrookshanks inserted a paw into the boot, trying toreach it. Meanwhile, a very loud crashing noise wascoming from the other side of the house. The sourceof the commotion was revealed as they entered thegarden, and saw that Bill and Charlie both had theirwands out, and were making two battered old tablesfly high above the lawn, smashing into each other,each attempting to knock the other’s out of the air.Fred and George were cheering, Ginny was laughing,and Hermione was hovering near the hedge,apparently torn between amusement and anxiety.

Bill’s table caught Charlie’s with a huge bang andknocked one of its legs off. There was a clatter fromoverhead, and they all looked up to see Percy’s headpoking out of a window on the second floor.

“Will you keep it down?!” he bellowed.

“Sorry, Perce,” said Bill, grinning. “How’re thecauldron bottoms coming on?”

“Very badly,” said Percy peevishly, and he slammedthe window shut. Chuckling, Bill and Charlie directedthe tables safely onto the grass, end to end, and then,with a flick of his wand, Bill reattached the table legand conjured tablecloths from nowhere.

By seven o’clock, the two tables were groaning underdishes and dishes of Mrs. Weasley’s excellent cooking,

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

and the nine Weasleys, Harry, and Hermione weresettling themselves down to eat beneath a clear, deep-blue sky. To somebody who had been living on mealsof increasingly stale cake all summer, this wasparadise, and at first, Harry listened rather thantalked as he helped himself to chicken and ham pie,boiled potatoes, and salad.

At the far end of the table, Percy was telling his fatherall about his report on cauldron bottoms.

“I’ve told Mr. Crouch that I’ll have it ready byTuesday,” Percy was saying pompously. “That’s a bitsooner than he expected it, but I like to keep on top ofthings. I think he’ll be grateful I’ve done it in goodtime, I mean, it’s extremely busy in our departmentjust now, what with all the arrangements for theWorld Cup. We’re just not getting the support weneed from the Department of Magical Games andSports. Ludo Bagman —”

“I like Ludo,” said Mr. Weasley mildly. “He was theone who got us such good tickets for the Cup. I didhim a bit of a favor: His brother, Otto, got into a spotof trouble — a lawnmower with unnatural powers — Ismoothed the whole thing over.”

“Oh Bagman’s likable enough, of course,” said Percydismissively, “but how he ever got to be Head ofDepartment ... when I compare him to Mr. Crouch! Ican’t see Mr. Crouch losing a member of ourdepartment and not trying to find out what’shappened to them. You realize Bertha Jorkins hasbeen missing for over a month now? Went on holidayto Albania and never came back?”

“Yes, I was asking Ludo about that,” said Mr.

Weasley, frowning. “He says Bertha’s gotten lost

Page | 67

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

plenty of times before now — though I must say, if itwas someone in my department, I’d be worried. ...”

“Oh Bertha’s hopeless, all right,” said Percy. “I hearshe’s been shunted from department to departmentfor years, much more trouble than she’s worth ... butall the same, Bagman ought to be trying to find her.Mr. Crouch has been taking a personal interest, sheworked in our department at one time, you know, andI think Mr. Crouch was quite fond of her — butBagman just keeps laughing and saying she probablymisread the map and ended up in Australia instead ofAlbania. However” — Percy heaved an impressive sighand took a deep swig of elderflower wine — “we’ve gotquite enough on our plates at the Department ofInternational Magical Cooperation without trying tofind members of other departments too. As you know,we’ve got another big event to organize right after theWorld Cup.”

Percy cleared his throat significantly and looked downtoward the end of the table where Harry, Ron, andHermione were sitting. “ You know the one I’m talkingabout, Father.” He raised his voice slightly. “The top-secret one.”

Ron rolled his eyes and muttered to Harry andHermione, “He’s been trying to get us to ask what thatevent is ever since he started work. Probably anexhibition of thick-bottomed cauldrons.”

In the middle of the table, Mrs. Weasley was arguingwith Bill about his earring, which seemed to be arecent acquisition.

“... with a horrible great fang on it. Really, Bill, whatdo they say at the bank?”

Page | 68

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Mum, no one at the bank gives a damn how I dressas long as I bring home plenty of treasure,” said Billpatiently.

“And your hair’s getting silly, dear,” said Mrs.

Weasley, fingering her wand lovingly. “I wish you’d letme give it a trim. ...”

“I like it,” said Ginny, who was sitting beside Bill.“You’re so old-fashioned, Mum. Anyway, it’s nowherenear as long as Professor Dumbledore’s. ...”

Next to Mrs. Weasley, Fred, George, and Charlie wereall talking spiritedly about the World Cup.

“It’s got to be Ireland,” said Charlie thickly, through amouthful of potato. “They flattened Peru in thesemifinals.”

“Bulgaria has got Viktor Krum, though,” said Fred.

“Krum’s one decent player, Ireland has got seven,”said Charlie shortly. “I wish England had got through.That was embarrassing, that was.”

“What happened?” said Harry eagerly, regretting morethan ever his isolation from the wizarding world whenhe was stuck on Privet Drive.

“Went down to Transylvania, three hundred andninety to ten,” said Charlie gloomily. “Shockingperformance. And Wales lost to Uganda, and Scotlandwas slaughtered by Luxembourg.”

Harry had been on the Gryffindor House Quidditchteam ever since his first year at Hogwarts and ownedone of the best racing brooms in the world, a Firebolt.Flying came more naturally to Harry than anything

Page | 69

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

else in the magical world, and he played in theposition of Seeker on the Gryffindor House team.

Mr. Weasley conjured up candles to light thedarkening garden before they had their homemadestrawberry ice cream, and by the time they hadfinished, moths were fluttering low over the table, andthe warm air was perfumed with the smells of grassand honeysuckle. Harry was feeling extremely well fedand at peace with the world as he watched severalgnomes sprinting through the rosebushes, laughingmadly and closely pursued by Crookshanks.

Ron looked carefully up the table to check that therest of the family were all busy talking, then he saidvery quietly to Harry, “So — have you heard fromSirius lately?”

Hermione looked around, listening closely.

“Yeah,” said Harry softly, “twice. He sounds okay. Iwrote to him yesterday. He might write back while I’mhere.”

He suddenly remembered the reason he had writtento Sirius, and for a moment was on the verge of tellingRon and Hermione about his scar hurting again, andabout the dream that had awoken him ... but hereally didn’t want to worry them just now, not whenhe himself was feeling so happy and peaceful.

“Look at the time,” Mrs. Weasley said suddenly,checking her wristwatch. “You really should be inbed, the whole lot of you — you’ll be up at the crackof dawn to get to the Cup. Harry, if you leave yourschool list out, I’ll get your things for you tomorrow inDiagon Alley. I’m getting everyone else’s. There mightnot be time after the World Cup, the match went onfor five days last time.”

Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

“Wow — hope it does this time!” said Harryenthusiastically.

“Well, I certainly don’t,” said Percy sanctimoniously. “Ishudder to think what the state of my in-tray wouldbe if I was away from work for five days.”

“Yeah, someone might slip dragon dung in it again,eh, Perce?” said Fred.

“That was a sample of fertilizer from Norway!” saidPercy, going very red in the face. “It was nothingpersonall”

“It was,” Fred whispered to Harry as they got up fromthe table. “We sent it.”

Page | 71

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE PORTKEY

Harry felt as though he had barely lain down to sleepin Ron’s room when he was being shaken awake byMrs. Weasley.

“Time to go, Harry, dear,” she whispered, movingaway to wake Ron.

Harry felt around for his glasses, put them on, andsat up. It was still dark outside. Ron mutteredindistinctly as his mother roused him. At the foot ofHarry’s mattress he saw two large, disheveled shapesemerging from tangles of blankets.

“ ’S’ time already?” said Fred groggily.

They dressed in silence, too sleepy to talk, then,yawning and stretching, the four of them headeddownstairs into the kitchen.

Mrs. Weasley was stirring the contents of a large poton the stove, while Mr. Weasley was sitting at thetable, checking a sheaf of large parchment tickets. He

Page | 72 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

looked up as the boys entered and spread his arms sothat they could see his clothes more clearly. He waswearing what appeared to be a golfing sweater and avery old pair of jeans, slightly too big for him and heldup with a thick leather belt.

“What d’you think?” he asked anxiously. “We’resupposed to go incognito — do I look like a Muggle,Harry?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, smiling, “very good.”

“Where’re Bill and Charlie and Per-Per-Percy?” saidGeorge, failing to stifle a huge yawn.

“Well, they’re Apparating, aren’t they?” said Mrs.Weasley, heaving the large pot over to the table andstarting to ladle porridge into bowls. “So they canhave a bit of a lie-in.”

Harry knew that Apparating meant disappearing fromone place and reappearing almost instantly inanother, but had never known any Hogwarts studentto do it, and understood that it was very difficult.

“So they’re still in bed?” said Fred grumpily, pullinghis bowl of porridge toward him. “Why can’t weApparate too?”

“Because you’re not of age and you haven’t passedyour test,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “And where havethose girls got to?”

She bustled out of the kitchen and they heard herclimbing the stairs.

“You have to pass a test to Apparate?” Harry asked.

Page | 73

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh yes,” said Mr. Weasley, tucking the tickets safelyinto the back pocket of his jeans. “The Department ofMagical Transportation had to fine a couple of peoplethe other day for Apparating without a license. It’s noteasy, Apparition, and when it’s not done properly itcan lead to nasty complications. This pair I’m talkingabout went and splinched themselves.”

Everyone around the table except Harry winced.

“Er — splinched?” said Harry.

“They left half of themselves behind,” said Mr.

Weasley, now spooning large amounts of treacle ontohis porridge. “So, of course, they were stuck. Couldn’tmove either way. Had to wait for the Accidental MagicReversal Squad to sort them out. Meant a fair old bitof paperwork, I can tell you, what with the Muggleswho spotted the body parts they’d left behind. ...”

Harry had a sudden vision of a pair of legs and aneyeball lying abandoned on the pavement of PrivetDrive.

“Were they okay?” he asked, startled.

“Oh yes,” said Mr. Weasley matter-of-factly. “But theygot a heavy fine, and I don’t think they’ll be trying itagain in a hurry. You don’t mess around withApparition. There are plenty of adult wizards whodon’t bother with it. Prefer brooms — slower, butsafer.”

“But Bill and Charlie and Percy can all do it?”

“Charlie had to take the test twice,” said Fred,grinning. “He failed the first time, Apparated fivemiles south of where he meant to, right on top ofsome poor old dear doing her shopping, remember?”

Page | 74 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, well, he passed the second time,” said Mrs.Weasley, marching back into the kitchen amid heartysniggers.

“Percy only passed two weeks ago,” said George. “He’sbeen Apparating downstairs every morning since, justto prove he can.”

There were footsteps down the passageway andHermione and Ginny came into the kitchen, bothlooking pale and drowsy.

“Why do we have to be up so early?” Ginny said,rubbing her eyes and sitting down at the table.

“We’ve got a bit of a walk,” said Mr. Weasley.

“Walk?” said Harry. “What, are we walking to theWorld Cup?”

“No, no, that’s miles away,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling.“We only need to walk a short way. It’s just that it’svery difficult for a large number of wizards tocongregate without attracting Muggle attention. Wehave to be very careful about how we travel at thebest of times, and on a huge occasion like theQuidditch World Cup —”

“George!” said Mrs. Weasley sharply, and they alljumped.

“What?” said George, in an innocent tone thatdeceived nobody.

“What is that in your pocket?”

“Nothing!”

“Don’t you lie to me!”

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley pointed her wand at George’s pocketand said, “Acciol”

Several small, brightly colored objects zoomed out ofGeorge’s pocket; he made a grab for them but missed,and they sped right into Mrs. Weasley’s outstretchedhand.

“We told you to destroy them!” said Mrs. Weasleyfuriously, holding up what were unmistakably moreTon-Tongue Toffees. “We told you to get rid of the lot!Empty your pockets, go on, both of you!”

It was an unpleasant scene; the twins had evidentlybeen trying to smuggle as many toffees out of thehouse as possible, and it was only by using herSummoning Charm that Mrs. Weasley managed tofind them all.

“Acciol Acciol Acciol” she shouted, and toffees zoomedfrom all sorts of unlikely places, including the liningof George’s jacket and the turn-ups of Fred’s jeans.

“We spent six months developing those!” Fredshouted at his mother as she threw the toffees away.

“Oh a fine way to spend six months!” she shrieked.

“No wonder you didn’t get more O.W.L.s!”

All in all, the atmosphere was not very friendly asthey took their departure. Mrs. Weasley was stillglowering as she kissed Mr. Weasley on the cheek,though not nearly as much as the twins, who hadeach hoisted their rucksacks onto their backs andwalked out without a word to her.

“Well, have a lovely time,” said Mrs. Weasley, “andbehave yourselves,” she called after the twins’retreating backs, but they did not look back or

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

answer. “I’ll send Bill, Charlie, and Percy alongaround midday,” Mrs. Weasley said to Mr. Weasley, ashe, Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Ginny set off acrossthe dark yard after Fred and George.

It was chilly and the moon was still out. Only a dull,greenish tinge along the horizon to their right showedthat daybreak was drawing closer. Harry, having beenthinking about thousands of wizards speeding towardthe Quidditch World Cup, sped up to walk with Mr.Weasley.

“So how does everyone get there without all theMuggles noticing?” he asked.

“It’s been a massive organizational problem,” sighedMr. Weasley. “The trouble is, about a hundredthousand wizards turn up at the World Cup, and ofcourse, we just haven’t got a magical site big enoughto accommodate them all. There are places Mugglescan’t penetrate, but imagine trying to pack a hundredthousand wizards into Diagon Alley or platform nineand three-quarters. So we had to find a nice desertedmoor, and set up as many anti-Muggle precautions aspossible. The whole Ministry’s been working on it formonths. First, of course, we have to stagger thearrivals. People with cheaper tickets have to arrivetwo weeks beforehand. A limited number use Muggletransport, but we can’t have too many clogging uptheir buses and trains — remember, wizards arecoming from all over the world. Some Apparate, ofcourse, but we have to set up safe points for them toappear, well away from Muggles. I believe there’s ahandy wood they’re using as the Apparition point. Forthose who don’t want to Apparate, or can’t, we usePortkeys. They’re objects that are used to transportwizards from one spot to another at a prearrangedtime. You can do large groups at a time if you need to.There have been two hundred Portkeys placed atPage | 77 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

strategic points around Britain, and the nearest oneto us is up at the top of Stoatshead Hill, so that’swhere we’re headed.”

Mr. Weasley pointed ahead of them, where a largeblack mass rose beyond the village of Ottery St.Catchpole.

“What sort of objects are Portkeys?” said Harrycuriously.

“Well, they can be anything,” said Mr. Weasley.“Unobtrusive things, obviously, so Muggles don’t gopicking them up and playing with them ... stuff they’lljust think is litter. ...”

They trudged down the dark, dank lane toward thevillage, the silence broken only by their footsteps. Thesky lightened very slowly as they made their waythrough the village, its inky blackness diluting todeepest blue. Harry’s hands and feet were freezing.

Mr. Weasley kept checking his watch.

They didn’t have breath to spare for talking as theybegan to climb Stoatshead Hill, stumblingoccasionally in hidden rabbit holes, slipping on thickblack tuffets of grass. Each breath Harry took wassharp in his chest and his legs were starting to seizeup when, at last, his feet found level ground.

“Whew,” panted Mr. Weasley, taking off his glassesand wiping them on his sweater. “Well, we’ve madegood time — we’ve got ten minutes. ...”

Hermione came over the crest of the hill last,clutching a stitch in her side.

Page | 78

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Now we just need the Portkey,” said Mr. Weasley,replacing his glasses and squinting around at theground. “It won’t be big. ... Come on ...”

They spread out, searching. They had only been at itfor a couple of minutes, however, when a shout rentthe still air.

“Over here, Arthur! Over here, son, we’ve got it!”

Two tall figures were silhouetted against the starrysky on the other side of the hilltop.

“Amos!” said Mr. Weasley, smiling as he strode over tothe man who had shouted. The rest of them followed.

Mr. Weasley was shaking hands with a ruddy-facedwizard with a scrubby brown beard, who was holdinga moldy-looking old boot in his other hand.

“This is Amos Diggory, everyone,” said Mr. Weasley.“He works for the Department for the Regulation andControl of Magical Creatures. And I think you knowhis son, Cedric?”

Cedric Diggory was an extremely handsome boy ofaround seventeen. He was Captain and Seeker of theHufflepuff House Quidditch team at Hogwarts.

“Hi,” said Cedric, looking around at them all.

Everybody said hi back except Fred and George, whomerely nodded. They had never quite forgiven Cedricfor beating their team, Gryffindor, in the firstQuidditch match of the previous year.

“Long walk, Arthur?” Cedric’s father asked.

Page | 79

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Not too bad,” said Mr. Weasley. “We live just on theother side of the village there. You?”

“Had to get up at two, didn’t we, Ced? I tell you, I’ll beglad when he’s got his Apparition test. Still ... notcomplaining ... Quidditch World Cup, wouldn’t miss itfor a sackful of Galleons — and the tickets cost aboutthat. Mind you, looks like I got off easy. ...” AmosDiggory peered good-naturedly around at the threeWeasley boys, Harry, Hermione, and Ginny. “All theseyours, Arthur?”

“Oh no, only the redheads,” said Mr. Weasley,pointing out his children. “This is Hermione, friend ofRon’s — and Harry, another friend —”

“Merlin’s beard,” said Amos Diggory, his eyeswidening. “Harry? Harry Potter?”

“Er — yeah,” said Harry.

Harry was used to people looking curiously at himwhen they met him, used to the way their eyes movedat once to the lightning scar on his forehead, but italways made him feel uncomfortable.

“Ced’s talked about you, of course,” said AmosDiggory. “Told us all about playing against you lastyear. ... I said to him, I said — Ced, that’ll besomething to tell your grandchildren, that will. ... Youbeat Harry Potterl”

Harry couldn’t think of any reply to this, so heremained silent. Fred and George were both scowlingagain. Cedric looked slightly embarrassed.

“Harry fell off his broom, Dad,” he muttered. “I toldyou ... it was an accident. ...”

Page | 80

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, but you didn’t fall off, did you?” roared Amosgenially, slapping his son on his back. “Alwaysmodest, our Ced, always the gentleman ... but thebest man won, I’m sure Harry’d say the same,wouldn’t you, eh? One falls off his broom, one stayson, you don’t need to be a genius to tell which one’sthe better flier!”

“Must be nearly time,” said Mr. Weasley quickly,pulling out his watch again. “Do you know whetherwe’re waiting for any more, Amos?”

“No, the Lovegoods have been there for a week alreadyand the Fawcetts couldn’t get tickets,” said Mr.Diggory. “There aren’t any more of us in this area, arethere?”

“Not that I know of,” said Mr. Weasley. “Yes, it’s aminute off. ... We’d better get ready. ...”

He looked around at Harry and Hermione.

“You just need to touch the Portkey, that’s all, afinger will do —”

With difficulty, owing to their bulky backpacks, thenine of them crowded around the old boot held out byAmos Diggory.

They all stood there, in a tight circle, as a chill breezeswept over the hilltop. Nobody spoke. It suddenlyoccurred to Harry how odd this would look if aMuggle were to walk up here now ... nine people, twoof them grown men, clutching this manky old boot inthe semidarkness, waiting. ...

“Three ...” muttered Mr. Weasley, one eye still on hiswatch, “two ... one ...”

Page | 81

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

It happened immediately: Harry felt as though a hookjust behind his navel had been suddenly jerkedirresistibly forward. His feet left the ground; he couldfeel Ron and Hermione on either side of him, theirshoulders banging into his; they were all speedingforward in a howl of wind and swirling color; hisforefinger was stuck to the boot as though it waspulling him magnetically onward and then —

His feet slammed into the ground; Ron staggered intohim and he fell over; the Portkey hit the ground nearhis head with a heavy thud.

Harry looked up. Mr. Weasley, Mr. Diggory, andCedric were still standing, though looking verywindswept; everybody else was on the ground.

“Seven past five from Stoatshead Hill,” said a voice.

Page | 82

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



BAGMAN AND CROUCH

Harry disentangled himself from Ron and got to hisfeet. They had arrived on what appeared to be adeserted stretch of misty moor. In front of them was apair of tired and grumpy-looking wizards, one ofwhom was holding a large gold watch, the other athick roll of parchment and a quill. Both were dressedas Muggles, though very inexpertly: The man with thewatch wore a tweed suit with thigh-length galoshes;his colleague, a kilt and a poncho.

“Morning, Basil,” said Mr. Weasley, picking up theboot and handing it to the kilted wizard, who threw itinto a large box of used Portkeys beside him; Harrycould see an old newspaper, an empty drinks can,and a punctured football.

“Hello there, Arthur,” said Basil wearily. “Not on duty,eh? It’s all right for some. ... We’ve been here allnight. ... You’d better get out of the way, we’ve got abig party coming in from the Black Forest at five-fifteen. Hang on, I’ll find your campsite. ... Weasley ...Weasley ...” He consulted his parchment list. “About aPage | 83 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

quarter of a mile’s walk over there, first field youcome to. Site manager’s called Mr. Roberts. Diggory ...second field ... ask for Mr. Payne.”

“Thanks, Basil,” said Mr. Weasley, and he beckonedeveryone to follow him.

They set off across the deserted moor, unable to makeout much through the mist. After about twentyminutes, a small stone cottage next to a gate swaminto view. Beyond it, Harry could just make out theghostly shapes of hundreds and hundreds of tents,rising up the gentle slope of a large field toward adark wood on the horizon. They said good-bye to theDiggorys and approached the cottage door.

A man was standing in the doorway, looking out atthe tents. Harry knew at a glance that this was theonly real Muggle for several acres. When he heardtheir footsteps, he turned his head to look at them.

“Morning!” said Mr. Weasley brightly.

“Morning,” said the Muggle.

“Would you be Mr. Roberts?”

“Aye, I would,” said Mr. Roberts. “And who’re you?”

“Weasley — two tents, booked a couple of days ago?”

“Aye,” said Mr. Roberts, consulting a list tacked to thedoor. “You’ve got a space up by the wood there. Justthe one night?”

“That’s it,” said Mr. Weasley.

“You’ll be paying now, then?” said Mr. Roberts.

Page | 84

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Ah — right — certainly —” said Mr. Weasley. Heretreated a short distance from the cottage andbeckoned Harry toward him. “Help me, Harry,” hemuttered, pulling a roll of Muggle money from hispocket and starting to peel the notes apart. “Thisone’s a — a — a ten? Ah yes, I see the little numberon it now. ... So this is a five?”

“A twenty,” Harry corrected him in an undertone,uncomfortably aware of Mr. Roberts trying to catchevery word.

“Ah yes, so it is. ... I don’t know, these little bits ofpaper ...”

“You foreign?” said Mr. Roberts as Mr. Weasleyreturned with the correct notes.

“Foreign?” repeated Mr. Weasley, puzzled.

“You’re not the first one who’s had trouble withmoney,” said Mr. Roberts, scrutinizing Mr. Weasleyclosely. “I had two try and pay me with great goldcoins the size of hubcaps ten minutes ago.”

“Did you really?” said Mr. Weasley nervously.

Mr. Roberts rummaged around in a tin for somechange.

“Never been this crowded,” he said suddenly, lookingout over the misty field again. “Hundreds of pre-bookings. People usually just turn up. ...”

“Is that right?” said Mr. Weasley, his hand held outfor his change, but Mr. Roberts didn’t give it to him.

“Aye,” he said thoughtfully. “People from all over.Loads of foreigners. And not just foreigners. Weirdos,

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

you know? There’s a bloke walking ’round in a kiltand a poncho.”

“Shouldn’t he?” said Mr. Weasley anxiously.

“It’s like some sort of ... I dunno ... like some sort ofrally,” said Mr. Roberts. “They all seem to know eachother. Like a big party.”

At that moment, a wizard in plus-fours appeared outof thin air next to Mr. Roberts’s front door.

“Obliviate\” he said sharply, pointing his wand at Mr.Roberts.

Instantly, Mr. Roberts’s eyes slid out of focus, hisbrows unknitted, and a look of dreamy unconcern fellover his face. Harry recognized the symptoms of onewho had just had his memory modified.

“A map of the campsite for you,” Mr. Roberts saidplacidly to Mr. Weasley. “And your change.”

“Thanks very much,” said Mr. Weasley.

The wizard in plus-fours accompanied them towardthe gate to the campsite. He looked exhausted: Hischin was blue with stubble and there were deeppurple shadows under his eyes. Once out of earshotof Mr. Roberts, he muttered to Mr. Weasley, “Beenhaving a lot of trouble with him. Needs a MemoryCharm ten times a day to keep him happy. And LudoBagman’s not helping. Trotting around talking aboutBludgers and Quaffles at the top of his voice, not aworry about anti-Muggle security. Blimey, I’ll be gladwhen this is over. See you later, Arthur.”

He Disapparated.

Page | 86

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I thought Mr. Bagman was Head of Magical Gamesand Sports,” said Ginny, looking surprised. “Heshould know better than to talk about Bludgers nearMuggles, shouldn’t he?”

“He should,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling, and leadingthem through the gates into the campsite, “but Ludo’salways been a bit ... well ... lax about security. Youcouldn’t wish for a more enthusiastic head of thesports department though. He played Quidditch forEngland himself, you know. And he was the bestBeater the Wimbourne Wasps ever had.”

They trudged up the misty field between long rows oftents. Most looked almost ordinary; their owners hadclearly tried to make them as Muggle-like as possible,but had slipped up by adding chimneys, or bellpulls,or weather vanes. However, here and there was a tentso obviously magical that Harry could hardly besurprised that Mr. Roberts was getting suspicious.Halfway up the field stood an extravagant confectionof striped silk like a miniature palace, with severallive peacocks tethered at the entrance. A little fartheron they passed a tent that had three floors andseveral turrets; and a short way beyond that was atent that had a front garden attached, complete withbirdbath, sundial, and fountain.

“Always the same,” said Mr. Weasley, smiling. “Wecan’t resist showing off when we get together. Ah,here we are, look, this is us.”

They had reached the very edge of the wood at the topof the field, and here was an empty space, with asmall sign hammered into the ground that readWEEZLY.

“Couldn’t have a better spot!” said Mr. Weasleyhappily. “The field is just on the other side of the

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

wood there, we’re as close as we could be.” He hoistedhis backpack from his shoulders. “Right,” he saidexcitedly, “no magic allowed, strictly speaking, notwhen we’re out in these numbers on Muggle land.We’ll be putting these tents up by hand! Shouldn’t betoo difficult. ... Muggles do it all the time. ... Here,Harry, where do you reckon we should start?”

Harry had never been camping in his life; theDursleys had never taken him on any kind of holiday,preferring to leave him with Mrs. Figg, an oldneighbor. However, he and Hermione worked outwhere most of the poles and pegs should go, andthough Mr. Weasley was more of a hindrance than ahelp, because he got thoroughly overexcited when itcame to using the mallet, they finally managed toerect a pair of shabby two-man tents.

All of them stood back to admire their handiwork.Nobody looking at these tents would guess theybelonged to wizards, Harry thought, but the troublewas that once Bill, Charlie, and Percy arrived, theywould be a party of ten. Hermione seemed to havespotted this problem too; she gave Harry a quizzicallook as Mr. Weasley dropped to his hands and kneesand entered the first tent.

“Well be a bit cramped,” he called, “but I think we’llall squeeze in. Come and have a look.”

Harry bent down, ducked under the tent flap, and felthis jaw drop. He had walked into what looked like anold-fashioned, three-room flat, complete withbathroom and kitchen. Oddly enough, it wasfurnished in exactly the same sort of style as Mrs.Figg’s house: There were crocheted covers on themismatched chairs and a strong smell of cats.

Page | 88

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Well, it’s not for long,” said Mr. Weasley, mopping hisbald patch with a handkerchief and peering in at thefour bunk beds that stood in the bedroom. “Iborrowed this from Perkins at the office. Doesn’tcamp much anymore, poor fellow, he’s got lumbago.”

He picked up the dusty kettle and peered inside it.“Well need water. ...”

“There’s a tap marked on this map the Muggle gaveus,” said Ron, who had followed Harry inside the tentand seemed completely unimpressed by itsextraordinary inner proportions. “It’s on the otherside of the field.”

“Well, why don’t you, Harry, and Hermione go and getus some water then” — Mr. Weasley handed over thekettle and a couple of saucepans — “and the rest ofus will get some wood for a fire?”

“But we’ve got an oven,” said Ron. “Why can’t we just

“Ron, anti-Muggle security!” said Mr. Weasley, hisface shining with anticipation. “When real Mugglescamp, they cook on fires outdoors. I’ve seen them at

it!

After a quick tour of the girls’ tent, which was slightlysmaller than the boys’, though without the smell ofcats, Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off across thecampsite with the kettle and saucepans.

Now, with the sun newly risen and the mist lifting,they could see the city of tents that stretched in everydirection. They made their way slowly through therows, staring eagerly around. It was only justdawning on Harry how many witches and wizards

Page | 89

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

there must be in the world; he had never reallythought much about those in other countries.

Their fellow campers were starting to wake up. Firstto stir were the families with small children; Harryhad never seen witches and wizards this youngbefore. A tiny boy no older than two was crouchedoutside a large pyramid-shaped tent, holding a wandand poking happily at a slug in the grass, which wasswelling slowly to the size of a salami. As they drewlevel with him, his mother came hurrying out of thetent.

“How ma.ny times, Kevin? You don’t— touch —Daddy’s — wand — yecchh!”

She had trodden on the giant slug, which burst. Herscolding carried after them on the still air, minglingwith the little boy’s yells — “You bust slug! You bustslug!”

A short way farther on, they saw two little witches,barely older than Kevin, who were riding toybroomsticks that rose only high enough for the girls’toes to skim the dewy grass. A Ministry wizard hadalready spotted them; as he hurried past Harry, Ron,and Hermione he muttered distractedly, “In broaddaylight! Parents having a lie-in, I suppose —”

Here and there adult wizards and witches wereemerging from their tents and starting to cookbreakfast. Some, with furtive looks around them,conjured fires with their wands; others were strikingmatches with dubious looks on their faces, as thoughsure this couldn’t work. Three African wizards sat inserious conversation, all of them wearing long whiterobes and roasting what looked like a rabbit on abright purple fire, while a group of middle-agedAmerican witches sat gossiping happily beneath aPage | 90 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

spangled banner stretched between their tents thatread: THE SALEM WITCHES’ INSTITUTE. Harrycaught snatches of conversation in strange languagesfrom the inside of tents they passed, and though hecouldn’t understand a word, the tone of every singlevoice was excited.

“Er — is it my eyes, or has everything gone green?”said Ron.

It wasn’t just Ron’s eyes. They had walked into apatch of tents that were all covered with a thickgrowth of shamrocks, so that it looked as thoughsmall, oddly shaped hillocks had sprouted out of theearth. Grinning faces could be seen under those thathad their flaps open. Then, from behind them, theyheard their names.

“Harry! Ron! Hermione!”

It was Seamus Finnigan, their fellow Gryffindor fourthyear. He was sitting in front of his own shamrock-covered tent, with a sandy-haired woman who had tobe his mother, and his best friend, Dean Thomas,also of Gryffindor.

“Like the decorations?” said Seamus, grinning. “TheMinistry’s not too happy.”

“Ah, why shouldn’t we show our colors?” said Mrs.Finnigan. “You should see what the Bulgarians havegot dangling all over their tents. You’ll be supportingIreland, of course?” she added, eyeing Harry, Ron,and Hermione beadily. When they had assured herthat they were indeed supporting Ireland, they set offagain, though, as Ron said, “Like we’d say anythingelse surrounded by that lot.”

Page | 91

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I wonder what the Bulgarians have got dangling allover their tents?” said Hermione.

“Let’s go and have a look,” said Harry, pointing to alarge patch of tents upheld, where the Bulgarian flag— white, green, and red — was fluttering in thebreeze.

The tents here had not been bedecked with plant life,but each and every one of them had the same posterattached to it, a poster of a very surly face with heavyblack eyebrows. The picture was, of course, moving,but all it did was blink and scowl.

“Krum,” said Ron quietly.

“What?” said Hermione.

“Krum!” said Ron. “Viktor Krum, the BulgarianSeeker!”

“He looks really grumpy,” said Hermione, lookingaround at the many Krums blinking and scowling atthem.

“ ‘Really grumpy’?” Ron raised his eyes to theheavens. “Who cares what he looks like? He’sunbelievable. He’s really young too. Only just eighteenor something. He’s a genius, you wait until tonight,you’ll see.”

There was already a small queue for the tap in thecorner of the field. Harry, Ron, and Hermione joinedit, right behind a pair of men who were having aheated argument. One of them was a very old wizardwho was wearing a long flowery nightgown. The otherwas clearly a Ministry wizard; he was holding out apair of pinstriped trousers and almost crying withexasperation.

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Just put them on, Archie, there’s a good chap. Youcan’t walk around like that, the Muggle at the gate’salready getting suspicious —”

“I bought this in a Muggle shop,” said the old wizardstubbornly. “Muggles wear them.”

“Muggle women wear them, Archie, not the men, theywear these,” said the Ministry wizard, and hebrandished the pinstriped trousers.

“I’m not putting them on,” said old Archie inindignation. “I like a healthy breeze ’round myprivates, thanks.”

Hermione was overcome with such a strong fit of thegiggles at this point that she had to duck out of thequeue and only returned when Archie had collectedhis water and moved away.

Walking more slowly now, because of the weight ofthe water, they made their way back through thecampsite. Here and there, they saw more familiarfaces: other Hogwarts students with their families.Oliver Wood, the old captain of Harry’s HouseQuidditch team, who had just left Hogwarts, draggedHarry over to his parents’ tent to introduce him, andtold him excitedly that he had just been signed to thePuddlemere United reserve team. Next they werehailed by Ernie Macmillan, a Hufflepuff fourth year,and a little farther on they saw Cho Chang, a verypretty girl who played Seeker on the Ravenclaw team.She waved and smiled at Harry, who slopped quite alot of water down his front as he waved back. More tostop Ron from smirking than anything, Harryhurriedly pointed out a large group of teenagerswhom he had never seen before.

Page | 93

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Who d’you reckon they are?” he said. “They don’t goto Hogwarts, do they?”

“ ’Spect they go to some foreign school,” said Ron. “Iknow there are others. Never met anyone who went toone, though. Bill had a penfriend at a school in Brazil... this was years and years ago ... and he wanted togo on an exchange trip but Mum and Dad couldn’tafford it. His penfriend got all offended when he saidhe wasn’t going and sent him a cursed hat. It madehis ears shrivel up.”

Harry laughed but didn’t voice the amazement he feltat hearing about other wizarding schools. Hesupposed, now that he saw representatives of somany nationalities in the campsite, that he had beenstupid never to realize that Hogwarts couldn’t be theonly one. He glanced at Hermione, who looked utterlyunsurprised by the information. No doubt she hadrun across the news about other wizarding schools insome book or other.

“You’ve been ages,” said George when they finally gotback to the Weasleys’ tents.

“Met a few people,” said Ron, setting the water down.“You not got that fire started yet?”

“Dad’s having fun with the matches,” said Fred.

Mr. Weasley was having no success at all in lightingthe fire, but it wasn’t for lack of trying. Splinteredmatches littered the ground around him, but helooked as though he was having the time of his life.

“Oops!” he said as he managed to light a match andpromptly dropped it in surprise.

Page | 94

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Come here, Mr. Weasley,” said Hermione kindly,taking the box from him, and showing him how to doit properly.

At last they got the fire lit, though it was at leastanother hour before it was hot enough to cookanything. There was plenty to watch while theywaited, however. Their tent seemed to be pitched rightalongside a kind of thoroughfare to the field, andMinistry members kept hurrying up and down it,greeting Mr. Weasley cordially as they passed. Mr.Weasley kept up a running commentary, mainly forHarry’s and Hermione’s benefit; his own childrenknew too much about the Ministry to be greatlyinterested.

“That was Cuthbert Mockridge, Head of the GoblinLiaison Office. ... Here comes Gilbert Wimple; he’swith the Committee on Experimental Charms; he’shad those horns for awhile now. ... Hello, Arnie ...Arnold Peasegood, he’s an Obliviator — member of theAccidental Magic Reversal Squad, you know. ... andthat’s Bode and Croaker ... they’re Unspeakables. ...”

“They’re what?”

“From the Department of Mysteries, top secret, noidea what they get up to. ...”

At last, the fire was ready, and they had just startedcooking eggs and sausages when Bill, Charlie, andPercy came strolling out of the woods toward them.

“Just Apparated, Dad,” said Percy loudly. “Ah,excellent, lunch!”

They were halfway through their plates of eggs andsausages when Mr. Weasley jumped to his feet,waving and grinning at a man who was striding

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

toward them. “Aha!” he said. “The man of themoment! Ludo!”

Ludo Bagman was easily the most noticeable personHarry had seen so far, even including old Archie inhis flowered nightdress. He was wearing longQuidditch robes in thick horizontal stripes of brightyellow and black. An enormous picture of a wasp wassplashed across his chest. He had the look of apowerfully built man gone slightly to seed; the robeswere stretched tightly across a large belly he surelyhad not had in the days when he had playedQuidditch for England. His nose was squashed(probably broken by a stray Bludger, Harry thought),but his round blue eyes, short blond hair, and rosycomplexion made him look like a very overgrownschoolboy.

“Ahoy there!” Bagman called happily. He was walkingas though he had springs attached to the balls of hisfeet and was plainly in a state of wild excitement.

“Arthur, old man,” he puffed as he reached thecampfire, “what a day, eh? What a day! Could wehave asked for more perfect weather? A cloudlessnight coming ... and hardly a hiccough in thearrangements. ... Not much for me to do!”

Behind him, a group of haggard-looking Ministrywizards rushed past, pointing at the distant evidenceof some sort of a magical fire that was sending violetsparks twenty feet into the air.

Percy hurried forward with his hand outstretched.Apparently his disapproval of the way Ludo Bagmanran his department did not prevent him from wantingto make a good impression.

Page | 96

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Ah — yes,” said Mr. Weasley, grinning, “this is myson Percy. He’s just started at the Ministry — andthis is Fred — no, George, sorry — that’s Fred — Bill,Charlie, Ron — my daughter, Ginny — and Ron’sfriends, Hermione Granger and Harry Potter.”

Bagman did the smallest of double takes when heheard Harry’s name, and his eyes performed thefamiliar flick upward to the scar on Harry’s forehead.

“Everyone,” Mr. Weasley continued, “this is LudoBagman, you know who he is, it’s thanks to him we’vegot such good tickets —”

Bagman beamed and waved his hand as if to say ithad been nothing.

“Fancy a flutter on the match, Arthur?” he saideagerly, jingling what seemed to be a large amount ofgold in the pockets of his yellow-and-black robes. “I’vealready got Roddy Pontner betting me Bulgaria willscore first — I offered him nice odds, consideringIreland’s front three are the strongest I’ve seen inyears — and little Agatha Timms has put up halfshares in her eel farm on a week-long match.”

“Oh ... go on then,” said Mr. Weasley. “Let’s see ... aGalleon on Ireland to win?”

“A Galleon?” Ludo Bagman looked slightlydisappointed, but recovered himself. “Very well, verywell ... any other takers?”

“They’re a bit young to be gambling,” said Mr.

Weasley. “Molly wouldn’t like —”

“Well bet thirty-seven Galleons, fifteen Sickles, threeKnuts,” said Fred as he and George quickly pooled all

Page | 97

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

their money, “that Ireland wins — but Viktor Krumgets the Snitch. Oh and we’ll throw in a fake wand.”

“You don’t want to go showing Mr. Bagman rubbishlike that —” Percy hissed, but Bagman didn’t seem tothink the wand was rubbish at all; on the contrary,his boyish face shone with excitement as he took itfrom Fred, and when the wand gave a loud squawkand turned into a rubber chicken, Bagman roaredwith laughter.

“Excellent! I haven’t seen one that convincing inyears! I’d pay five Galleons for that!”

Percy froze in an attitude of stunned disapproval.

“Boys,” said Mr. Weasley under his breath, “I don’twant you betting. ... That’s all your savings. ... Yourmother —”

“Don’t be a spoilsport, Arthur!” boomed LudoBagman, rattling his pockets excitedly. “They’re oldenough to know what they want! You reckon Irelandwill win but Krum’ll get the Snitch? Not a chance,boys, not a chance. ... I’ll give you excellent odds onthat one. ... We’ll add five Galleons for the funnywand, then, shall we. ...”

Mr. Weasley looked on helplessly as Ludo Bagmanwhipped out a notebook and quill and began jottingdown the twins’ names.

“Cheers,” said George, taking the slip of parchmentBagman handed him and tucking it away carefully.Bagman turned most cheerfully back to Mr. Weasley.

“Couldn’t do me a brew, I suppose? I’m keeping aneye out for Barty Crouch. My Bulgarian oppositenumber’s making difficulties, and I can’t understand

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

a word he’s saying. Barty’ll be able to sort it out. Hespeaks about a hundred and fifty languages.”

“Mr. Crouch?” said Percy, suddenly abandoning hislook of poker-stiff disapproval and positively writhingwith excitement. “He speaks over two hundred!Mermish and Gobbledegook and Troll ...”

“Anyone can speak Troll,” said Fred dismissively. “Allyou have to do is point and grunt.”

Percy threw Fred an extremely nasty look and stokedthe fire vigorously to bring the kettle back to the boil.

“Any news of Bertha Jorkins yet, Ludo?” Mr. Weasleyasked as Bagman settled himself down on the grassbeside them all.

“Not a dicky bird,” said Bagman comfortably. “Butshe’ll turn up. Poor old Bertha ... memory like a leakycauldron and no sense of direction. Lost, you take myword for it. She’ll wander back into the officesometime in October, thinking it’s still July.”

“You don’t think it might be time to send someone tolook for her?” Mr. Weasley suggested tentatively asPercy handed Bagman his tea.

“Barty Crouch keeps saying that,” said Bagman, hisround eyes widening innocently, “but we really can’tspare anyone at the moment. Oh — talk of the devil!Barty!”

A wizard had just Apparated at their fireside, and hecould not have made more of a contrast with LudoBagman, sprawled on the grass in his old Wasprobes. Barty Crouch was a stiff, upright, elderly man,dressed in an impeccably crisp suit and tie. Theparting in his short gray hair was almost unnaturallyPage | 99 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

straight, and his narrow toothbrush mustache lookedas though he trimmed it using a slide rule. His shoeswere very highly polished. Harry could see at oncewhy Percy idolized him. Percy was a great believer inrigidly following rules, and Mr. Crouch had compliedwith the rule about Muggle dressing so thoroughlythat he could have passed for a bank manager; Harrydoubted even Uncle Vernon would have spotted himfor what he really was.

“Pull up a bit of grass, Barty,” said Ludo brightly,patting the ground beside him.

“No thank you, Ludo,” said Crouch, and there was abite of impatience in his voice. “I’ve been looking foryou everywhere. The Bulgarians are insisting we addanother twelve seats to the Top Box.”

“Oh is that what they’re after?” said Bagman. “Ithought the chap was asking to borrow a pair oftweezers. Bit of a strong accent.”

“Mr. Crouch!” said Percy breathlessly, sunk into akind of half-bow that made him look like ahunchback. “Would you like a cup of tea?”

“Oh,” said Mr. Crouch, looking over at Percy in mildsurprise. “Yes — thank you, Weatherby.”

Fred and George choked into their own cups. Percy,very pink around the ears, busied himself with thekettle.

“Oh and I’ve been wanting a word with you too,Arthur,” said Mr. Crouch, his sharp eyes falling uponMr. Weasley. “Ali Bashir’s on the warpath. He wants aword with you about your embargo on flying carpets.”

Mr. Weasley heaved a deep sigh.

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I sent him an owl about that just last week. If I’vetold him once I’ve told him a hundred times: Carpetsare defined as a Muggle Artifact by the Registry ofProscribed Charmable Objects, but will he listen?”

“I doubt it,” said Mr. Crouch, accepting a cup fromPercy. “He’s desperate to export here.”

“Well, they’ll never replace brooms in Britain, willthey?” said Bagman.

“Ali thinks there’s a niche in the market for a familyvehicle,” said Mr. Crouch. “I remember mygrandfather had an Axminster that could seat twelve— but that was before carpets were banned, ofcourse.”

He spoke as though he wanted to leave nobody in anydoubt that all his ancestors had abided strictly by thelaw.

“So, been keeping busy, Barty?” said Bagmanbreezily.

“Fairly,” said Mr. Crouch dryly. “Organizing Portkeysacross five continents is no mean feat, Ludo.”

“I expect you’ll both be glad when this is over?” saidMr. Weasley.

Ludo Bagman looked shocked.

“Glad! Don’t know when I’ve had more fun. ... Still,it’s not as though we haven’t got anything to lookforward to, eh, Barty? Eh? Plenty left to organize, eh?”

Mr. Crouch raised his eyebrows at Bagman.

Page | 101

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“We agreed not to make the announcement until allthe details —”

“Oh details!” said Bagman, waving the word away likea cloud of midges. “They’ve signed, haven’t they?They’ve agreed, haven’t they? I bet you anything thesekids’ll know soon enough anyway. I mean, it’shappening at Hogwarts —”

“Ludo, we need to meet the Bulgarians, you know,”said Mr. Crouch sharply, cutting Bagman’s remarksshort. “Thank you for the tea, Weatherby.”

He pushed his undrunk tea back at Percy and waitedfor Ludo to rise; Bagman struggled to his feet,swigging down the last of his tea, the gold in hispockets chinking merrily.

“See you all later!” he said. “You’ll be up in the TopBox with me — I’m commentating!” He waved, BartyCrouch nodded curtly, and both of themDisapparated.

“What’s happening at Hogwarts, Dad?” said Fred atonce. “What were they talking about?”

“You’ll find out soon enough,” said Mr.Weasley,smiling.

“It’s classified information, until such time as theMinistry decides to release it,” said Percy stiffly. “Mr.Crouch was quite right not to disclose it.”

“Oh shut up, Weatherby,” said Fred.

A sense of excitement rose like a palpable cloud overthe campsite as the afternoon wore on. By dusk, thestill summer air itself seemed to be quivering withanticipation, and as darkness spread like a curtain

Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

over the thousands of waiting wizards, the lastvestiges of pretence disappeared: the Ministry seemedto have bowed to the inevitable and stopped fightingthe signs of blatant magic now breaking outeverywhere.

Salesmen were Apparating every few feet, carryingtrays and pushing carts full of extraordinarymerchandise. There were luminous rosettes — greenfor Ireland, red for Bulgaria — which were squealingthe names of the players, pointed green hatsbedecked with dancing shamrocks, Bulgarian scarvesadorned with lions that really roared, flags from bothcountries that played their national anthems as theywere waved; there were tiny models of Firebolts thatreally flew, and collectible figures of famous players,which strolled across the palm of your hand, preeningthemselves.

“Been saving my pocket money all summer for this,”Ron told Harry as they and Hermione strolled throughthe salesmen, buying souvenirs. Though Ronpurchased a dancing shamrock hat and a large greenrosette, he also bought a small figure of Viktor Krum,the Bulgarian Seeker. The miniature Krum walkedbackward and forward over Ron’s hand, scowling upat the green rosette above him.

“Wow, look at these!” said Harry, hurrying over to acart piled high with what looked like brassbinoculars, except that they were covered with allsorts of weird knobs and dials.

“Omnioculars,” said the saleswizard eagerly. “You canreplay action ... slow everything down ... and theyflash up a play-by-play breakdown if you need it.Bargain — ten Galleons each.”

Page | 103

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Wish I hadn’t bought this now,” said Ron, gesturingat his dancing shamrock hat and gazing longingly atthe Omnioculars.

“Three pairs,” said Harry firmly to the wizard.

“No — don’t bother,” said Ron, going red. He wasalways touchy about the fact that Harry, who hadinherited a small fortune from his parents, had muchmore money than he did.

“You won’t be getting anything for Christmas,” Harrytold him, thrusting Omnioculars into his andHermione’s hands. “For about ten years, mind.”

“Fair enough,” said Ron, grinning.

“Oooh, thanks, Harry,” said Hermione. “And I’ll get ussome programs, look —”

Their money bags considerably lighter, they wentback to the tents. Bill, Charlie, and Ginny were allsporting green rosettes too, and Mr. Weasley wascarrying an Irish flag. Fred and George had nosouvenirs as they had given Bagman all their gold.

And then a deep, booming gong sounded somewherebeyond the woods, and at once, green and redlanterns blazed into life in the trees, lighting a path tothe field.

“It’s time!” said Mr. Weasley, looking as excited as anyof them. “Come on, let’s go!”

Page | 104

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



-4

THE QUIDDITCH WORLD CUP

Clutching their purchases, Mr. Weasley in the lead,they all hurried into the wood, following the lantern-lit trail. They could hear the sounds of thousands ofpeople moving around them, shouts and laughter,snatches of singing. The atmosphere of feverishexcitement was highly infectious; Harry couldn’t stopgrinning. They walked through the wood for twentyminutes, talking and joking loudly, until at last theyemerged on the other side and found themselves inthe shadow of a gigantic stadium. Though Harrycould see only a fraction of the immense gold wallssurrounding the field, he could tell that tencathedrals would fit comfortably inside it.

“Seats a hundred thousand,” said Mr. Weasley,spotting the awestruck look on Harry’s face. “Ministrytask force of five hundred have been working on it allyear. Muggle Repelling Charms on every inch of it.Every time Muggles have got anywhere near here allyear, they’ve suddenly remembered urgentappointments and had to dash away again ... blessthem,” he added fondly, leading the way toward thePage | 105 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



nearest entrance, which was already surrounded by aswarm of shouting witches and wizards.

“Prime seats!” said the Ministry witch at the entrancewhen she checked their tickets. “Top Box! Straightupstairs, Arthur, and as high as you can go.”

The stairs into the stadium were carpeted in richpurple. They clambered upward with the rest of thecrowd, which slowly filtered away through doors intothe stands to their left and right. Mr. Weasley’s partykept climbing, and at last they reached the top of thestaircase and found themselves in a small box, set atthe highest point of the stadium and situated exactlyhalfway between the golden goal posts. About twentypurple-and-gilt chairs stood in two rows here, andHarry, filing into the front seats with the Weasleys,looked down upon a scene the likes of which he couldnever have imagined.

A hundred thousand witches and wizards were takingtheir places in the seats, which rose in levels aroundthe long oval field. Everything was suffused with amysterious golden light, which seemed to come fromthe stadium itself. The field looked smooth as velvetfrom their lofty position. At either end of the fieldstood three goal hoops, fifty feet high; right oppositethem, almost at Harry’s eye level, was a giganticblackboard. Gold writing kept dashing across it asthough an invisible giant’s hand were scrawling uponthe blackboard and then wiping it off again; watchingit, Harry saw that it was flashing advertisementsacross the field.

The Bluebottle: A Broom for All the Family — safe,reliable, and with Built-in Anti-Burglar Buzzer ... Mrs.Skower’s All-Purpose Magical Mess Remover: No Pain,No Stain! ... Gladrags Wizardwear — London, Paris,Hogsmeade ...

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry tore his eyes away from the sign and lookedover his shoulder to see who else was sharing the boxwith them. So far it was empty, except for a tinycreature sitting in the second from last seat at theend of the row behind them. The creature, whose legswere so short they stuck out in front of it on thechair, was wearing a tea towel draped like a toga, andit had its face hidden in its hands. Yet those long,batlike ears were oddly familiar. ...

“Dobby?” said Harry incredulously.

The tiny creature looked up and stretched its fingers,revealing enormous brown eyes and a nose the exactsize and shape of a large tomato. It wasn’t Dobby — itwas, however, unmistakably a house-elf, as Harry’sfriend Dobby had been. Harry had set Dobby freefrom his old owners, the Malfoy family.

“Did sir just call me Dobby?” squeaked the elfcuriously from between its fingers. Its voice washigher even than Dobby’s had been, a teeny,quivering squeak of a voice, and Harry suspected —though it was very hard to tell with a house-elf — thatthis one might just be female. Ron and Hermionespun around in their seats to look. Though they hadheard a lot about Dobby from Harry, they had neveractually met him. Even Mr. Weasley looked around ininterest.

“Sorry,” Harry told the elf, “I just thought you weresomeone I knew.”

“But I knows Dobby too, sir!” squeaked the elf. Shewas shielding her face, as though blinded by light,though the Top Box was not brightly lit. “My name isWinky, sir — and you, sir —” Her dark brown eyeswidened to the size of side plates as they rested uponHarry’s scar. “You is surely Harry Potter!”

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, I am,” said Harry.

“But Dobby talks of you all the time, sir!” she said,lowering her hands very slightly and lookingawestruck.

“How is he?” said Harry. “How’s freedom suitinghim?”

“Ah, sir,” said Winky, shaking her head, “ah sir,meaning no disrespect, sir, but I is not sure you didDobby a favor, sir, when you is setting him free.”

“Why?” said Harry, taken aback. “What’s wrong withhim?”

“Freedom is going to Dobby’s head, sir,” said Winkysadly. “Ideas above his station, sir. Can’t get anotherposition, sir.”

“Why not?” said Harry.

Winky lowered her voice by a half-octave andwhispered, “He is wanting paying for his work, sir.”

“Paying?” said Harry blankly. “Well — why shouldn’the be paid?”

Winky looked quite horrified at the idea and closedher fingers slightly so that her face was half-hiddenagain.

“House-elves is not paid, sir!” she said in a muffledsqueak. “No, no, no. I says to Dobby, I says, go findyourself a nice family and settle down, Dobby. He isgetting up to all sorts of high jinks, sir, what isunbecoming to a house-elf. You goes racketingaround like this, Dobby, I says, and next thing I hearyou’s up in front of the Department for the RegulationPage | 108 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

and Control of Magical Creatures, like some commongoblin.”

“Well, it’s about time he had a bit of fun,” said Harry.

“House-elves is not supposed to have fun, HarryPotter,” said Winky firmly, from behind her hands.“House-elves does what they is told. I is not likingheights at all, Harry Potter” — she glanced toward theedge of the box and gulped — “but my master sendsme to the Top Box and I comes, sir.”

“Why’s he sent you up here, if he knows you don’t likeheights?” said Harry, frowning.

“Master — master wants me to save him a seat, HarryPotter. He is very busy,” said Winky, tilting her headtoward the empty space beside her. “Winky is wishingshe is back in master’s tent, Harry Potter, but Winkydoes what she is told. Winky is a good house-elf.”

She gave the edge of the box another frightened lookand hid her eyes completely again. Harry turned backto the others.

“So that’s a house-elf?” Ron muttered. “Weird things,aren’t they?”

“Dobby was weirder,” said Harry fervently.

Ron pulled out his Omnioculars and started testingthem, staring down into the crowd on the other sideof the stadium.

“Wild!” he said, twiddling the replay knob on the side.“I can make that old bloke down there pick his noseagain ... and again ... and again ...”

Page | 109

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hermione, meanwhile, was skimming eagerly throughher velvet-covered, tasseled program.

“ ‘A display from the team mascots will precede thematch,’ ” she read aloud.

“Oh that’s always worth watching,” said Mr. Weasley.“National teams bring creatures from their nativeland, you know, to put on a bit of a show.”

The box filled gradually around them over the nexthalf hour. Mr. Weasley kept shaking hands withpeople who were obviously very important wizards.Percy jumped to his feet so often that he looked asthough he were trying to sit on a hedgehog. WhenCornelius Fudge, the Minister of Magic himself,arrived, Percy bowed so low that his glasses fell offand shattered. Highly embarrassed, he repaired themwith his wand and thereafter remained in his seat,throwing jealous looks at Harry, whom CorneliusFudge had greeted like an old friend. They had metbefore, and Fudge shook Harry’s hand in a fatherlyfashion, asked how he was, and introduced him tothe wizards on either side of him.

“Harry Potter, you know,” he told the Bulgarianminister loudly, who was wearing splendid robes ofblack velvet trimmed with gold and didn’t seem tounderstand a word of English. “Harry Potter ... ohcome on now, you know who he is ... the boy whosurvived You-Know-Who ... you do know who he is —”

The Bulgarian wizard suddenly spotted Harry’s scarand started gabbling loudly and excitedly, pointing atit.

“Knew we’d get there in the end,” said Fudge wearilyto Harry. “I’m no great shakes at languages; I needBarty Crouch for this sort of thing. Ah, I see his

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

house-elf’s saving him a seat. ... Good job too, theseBulgarian blighters have been trying to cadge all thebest places ... ah, and here’s Lucius!”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned quickly. Edgingalong the second row to three still-empty seats rightbehind Mr. Weasley were none other than Dobby thehouse-elf’s former owners: Lucius Malfoy; his son,Draco; and a woman Harry supposed must be Draco’smother.

Harry and Draco Malfoy had been enemies ever sincetheir very first journey to Hogwarts. A pale boy with apointed face and white-blond hair, Draco greatlyresembled his father. His mother was blonde too; talland slim, she would have been nice-looking if shehadn’t been wearing a look that suggested there wasa nasty smell under her nose.

“Ah, Fudge,” said Mr. Malfoy, holding out his hand ashe reached the Minister of Magic. “How are you? Idon’t think you’ve met my wife, Narcissa? Or our son,Draco?”

“How do you do, how do you do?” said Fudge, smilingand bowing to Mrs. Malfoy. “And allow me tointroduce you to Mr. Oblansk — Obalonsk — Mr. —well, he’s the Bulgarian Minister of Magic, and hecan’t understand a word I’m saying anyway, so nevermind. And let’s see who else — you know ArthurWeasley, I daresay?”

It was a tense moment. Mr. Weasley and Mr. Malfoylooked at each other and Harry vividly recalled thelast time they had come face-to-face: It had been inFlourish and Blotts’ bookshop, and they had had afight. Mr. Malfoy’s cold gray eyes swept over Mr.Weasley, and then up and down the row.

Page | 111

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Good lord, Arthur,” he said softly. “What did youhave to sell to get seats in the Top Box? Surely yourhouse wouldn’t have fetched this much?”

Fudge, who wasn’t listening, said, “Lucius has justgiven a very generous contribution to St. Mungo’sHospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries, Arthur.He’s here as my guest.”

“How — how nice,” said Mr. Weasley, with a verystrained smile.

Mr. Malfoy’s eyes had returned to Hermione, whowent slightly pink, but stared determinedly back athim. Harry knew exactly what was making Mr.Malfoy’s lip curl like that. The Malfoys pridedthemselves on being purebloods; in other words, theyconsidered anyone of Muggle descent, like Hermione,second-class. However, under the gaze of the Ministerof Magic, Mr. Malfoy didn’t dare say anything. Henodded sneeringly to Mr. Weasley and continueddown the line to his seats. Draco shot Harry, Ron,and Hermione one contemptuous look, then settledhimself between his mother and father.

“Slimy gits,” Ron muttered as he, Harry, andHermione turned to face the field again. Nextmoment, Ludo Bagman charged into the box.

“Everyone ready?” he said, his round face gleaminglike a great, excited Edam. “Minister — ready to go?”

“Ready when you are, Ludo,” said Fudge comfortably.

Ludo whipped out his wand, directed it at his ownthroat, and said “Sonorusl” and then spoke over theroar of sound that was now filling the packedstadium; his voice echoed over them, booming intoevery corner of the stands.

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Ladies and gentlemen ... welcome! Welcome to thefinal of the four hundred and twenty-secondQuidditch World Cup!”

The spectators screamed and clapped. Thousands offlags waved, adding their discordant nationalanthems to the racket. The huge blackboard oppositethem was wiped clear of its last message (Bertie Bott’sEvery Flavor Beans — A Risk With Every Mouthfull)and now showed BULGARIA: 0, IRELAND: 0.

“And now, without further ado, allow me to introduce... the Bulgarian National Team Mascots!”

The right-hand side of the stands, which was a solidblock of scarlet, roared its approval.

“I wonder what they’ve brought,” said Mr. Weasley,leaning forward in his seat. “Aaah!” He suddenlywhipped off his glasses and polished them hurriedlyon his robes. “Veelal”

“What are veel — ?”

But a hundred veela were now gliding out onto thefield, and Harry’s question was answered for him.Veela were women ... the most beautiful women Harryhad ever seen ... except that they weren’t — theycouldn’t be — human. This puzzled Harry for amoment while he tried to guess what exactly theycould be; what could make their skin shine moon-bright like that, or their white-gold hair fan outbehind them without wind ... but then the musicstarted, and Harry stopped worrying about them notbeing human — in fact, he stopped worrying aboutanything at all.

The veela had started to dance, and Harry’s mind hadgone completely and blissfully blank. All that

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

mattered in the world was that he kept watching theveela, because if they stopped dancing, terrible thingswould happen. ...

And as the veela danced faster and faster, wild, half-formed thoughts started chasing through Harry’sdazed mind. He wanted to do something veryimpressive, right now. Jumping from the box into thestadium seemed a good idea ... but would it be goodenough?

“Harry, what are you doing?” said Hermione’s voicefrom a long way off.

The music stopped. Harry blinked. He was standingup, and one of his legs was resting on the wall of thebox. Next to him, Ron was frozen in an attitude thatlooked as though he were about to dive from aspringboard.

Angry yells were filling the stadium. The crowd didn’twant the veela to go. Harry was with them; he would,of course, be supporting Bulgaria, and he wonderedvaguely why he had a large green shamrock pinned tohis chest. Ron, meanwhile, was absent-mindedlyshredding the shamrocks on his hat. Mr. Weasley,smiling slightly, leaned over to Ron and tugged thehat out of his hands.

“You’ll be wanting that,” he said, “once Ireland havehad their say.”

“Huh?” said Ron, staring openmouthed at the veela,who had now lined up along one side of the field.

Hermione made a loud tutting noise. She reached upand pulled Harry back into his seat. “Honestlyl” shesaid.

Page | 114

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“And now,” roared Ludo Bagman’s voice, “kindly putyour wands in the air ... for the Irish National TeamMascots!”

Next moment, what seemed to be a great green-and-gold comet came zooming into the stadium. It did onecircuit of the stadium, then split into two smallercomets, each hurtling toward the goal posts. Arainbow arced suddenly across the field, connectingthe two balls of light. The crowd oooohed andaaaaahed, as though at a fireworks display. Now therainbow faded and the balls of light reunited andmerged; they had formed a great shimmeringshamrock, which rose up into the sky and began tosoar over the stands. Something like golden rainseemed to be falling from it —

“Excellent!” yelled Ron as the shamrock soared overthem, and heavy gold coins rained from it, bouncingoff their heads and seats. Squinting up at theshamrock, Harry realized that it was actuallycomprised of thousands of tiny little bearded menwith red vests, each carrying a minute lamp of gold orgreen.

“Leprechauns!” said Mr. Weasley over the tumultuousapplause of the crowd, many of whom were stillfighting and rummaging around under their chairs toretrieve the gold.

“There you go,” Ron yelled happily, stuffing a fistful ofgold coins into Harry’s hand, “for the Omnioculars!Now you’ve got to buy me a Christmas present, ha!”

The great shamrock dissolved, the leprechaunsdrifted down onto the field on the opposite side fromthe veela, and settled themselves cross-legged towatch the match.

Page | 115

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“And now, ladies and gentlemen, kindly welcome —the Bulgarian National Quidditch Team! I give you —Dimitrov!”

A scarlet-clad figure on a broomstick, moving so fastit was blurred, shot out onto the field from anentrance far below, to wild applause from theBulgarian supporters.

“Ivanova!”

A second scarlet-robed player zoomed out.

“Zograf! Levski! Vulchanov! Volkov! Aaaaaaand —Krum\”

“That’s him, that’s him!” yelled Ron, following Krumwith his Omnioculars. Harry quickly focused his own.

Viktor Krum was thin, dark, and sallow-skinned, witha large curved nose and thick black eyebrows. Helooked like an overgrown bird of prey. It was hard tobelieve he was only eighteen.

“And now, please greet — the Irish National QuidditchTeam!” yelled Bagman. “Presenting — Connolly! Ryan!Troy! Mullet! Moran! Quigley! Aaaaaand — Lynch).”

Seven green blurs swept onto the field; Harry spun asmall dial on the side of his Omnioculars and slowedthe players down enough to read the word “Firebolt”on each of their brooms and see their names,embroidered in silver, upon their backs.

“And here, all the way from Egypt, our referee,acclaimed Chairwizard of the InternationalAssociation of Quidditch, Hassan Mostafa!”

Page | 116

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

A small and skinny wizard, completely bald but witha mustache to rival Uncle Vernon’s, wearing robes ofpure gold to match the stadium, strode out onto thefield. A silver whistle was protruding from under themustache, and he was carrying a large wooden crateunder one arm, his broomstick under the other.

Harry spun the speed dial on his Omnioculars backto normal, watching closely as Mostafa mounted hisbroomstick and kicked the crate open — four ballsburst into the air: the scarlet Quaffle, the two blackBludgers, and (Harry saw it for the briefest moment,before it sped out of sight) the minuscule, wingedGolden Snitch. With a sharp blast on his whistle,Mostafa shot into the air after the balls.

“Theeeeeeeey’re OFF!” screamed Bagman. “And it’sMullet! Troy! Moran! Dimitrov! Back to Mullet! Troy!Levski! Moran!”

It was Quidditch as Harry had never seen it playedbefore. He was pressing his Omnioculars so hard tohis glasses that they were cutting into the bridge ofhis nose. The speed of the players was incredible —the Chasers were throwing the Quaffle to one anotherso fast that Bagman only had time to say theirnames. Harry spun the slow dial on the right of hisOmnioculars again, pressed the play-by-play buttonon the top, and he was immediately watching in slowmotion, while glittering purple lettering flashed acrossthe lenses and the noise of the crowd poundedagainst his eardrums.

Hawkshead Attacking Formation, he read as hewatched the three Irish Chasers zoom closelytogether, Troy in the center, slightly ahead of Mulletand Moran, bearing down upon the Bulgarians.Porskoff Ploy flashed up next, as Troy made as thoughto dart upward with the Quaffle, drawing away theBulgarian Chaser Ivanova and dropping the Quaffle toPage | 117 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Moran. One of the Bulgarian Beaters, Volkov, swunghard at a passing Bludger with his small club,knocking it into Moran’s path; Moran ducked to avoidthe Bludger and dropped the Quaffle; and Levski,soaring beneath, caught it —

“TROY SCORES!” roared Bagman, and the stadiumshuddered with a roar of applause and cheers. “Tenzero to Ireland!”

“What?” Harry yelled, looking wildly around throughhis Omnioculars. “But Levski’s got the Quaffle!”

“Harry, if you’re not going to watch at normal speed,you’re going to miss things!” shouted Hermione, whowas dancing up and down, waving her arms in the airwhile Troy did a lap of honor around the field. Harrylooked quickly over the top of his Omni-oculars andsaw that the leprechauns watching from the sidelineshad all risen into the air again and formed the great,glittering shamrock. Across the field, the veela werewatching them sulkily.

Furious with himself, Harry spun his speed dial backto normal as play resumed.

Harry knew enough about Quidditch to see that theIrish Chasers were superb. They worked as aseamless team, their movements so well coordinatedthat they appeared to be reading one another’s mindsas they positioned themselves, and the rosette onHarry’s chest kept squeaking their names: “Troy —Mullet— Moran).” And within ten minutes, Ireland hadscored twice more, bringing their lead to thirty-zeroand causing a thunderous tide of roars and applausefrom the green-clad supporters.

The match became still faster, but more brutal.

Volkov and Vulchanov, the Bulgarian Beaters, were

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

whacking the Bludgers as fiercely as possible at theIrish Chasers, and were starting to prevent them fromusing some of their best moves; twice they were forcedto scatter, and then, finally, Ivanova managed tobreak through their ranks; dodge the Keeper, Ryan;and score Bulgaria’s first goal.

“Fingers in your ears!” bellowed Mr. Weasley as theveela started to dance in celebration. Harry screwedup his eyes too; he wanted to keep his mind on thegame. After a few seconds, he chanced a glance at thefield. The veela had stopped dancing, and Bulgariawas again in possession of the Quaffle.

“Dimitrov! Levski! Dimitrov! Ivanova — oh I say!”roared Bagman.

One hundred thousand wizards gasped as the twoSeekers, Krum and Lynch, plummeted through thecenter of the Chasers, so fast that it looked as thoughthey had just jumped from airplanes withoutparachutes. Harry followed their descent through hisOmnioculars, squinting to see where the Snitch was

“They’re going to crash!” screamed Hermione next toHarry.

She was half right — at the very last second, ViktorKrum pulled out of the dive and spiraled off. Lynch,however, hit the ground with a dull thud that couldbe heard throughout the stadium. A huge groan rosefrom the Irish seats.

“Fool!” moaned Mr. Weasley. “Krum was feinting!”

“It’s time-out!” yelled Bagman’s voice, “as trainedmediwizards hurry onto the field to examine AidanLynch!”

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“He’ll be okay, he only got ploughed!” Charlie saidreassuringly to Ginny, who was hanging over the sideof the box, looking horror-struck. “Which is whatKrum was after, of course. ...”

Harry hastily pressed the replay and play-by-playbuttons on his Omnioculars, twiddled the speed dial,and put them back up to his eyes.

He watched as Krum and Lynch dived again in slowmotion. Wronski Defensive Feint — dangerous Seekerdiversion read the shining purple lettering across hislenses. He saw Krum’s face contorted withconcentration as he pulled out of the dive just intime, while Lynch was flattened, and he understood— Krum hadn’t seen the Snitch at all, he was justmaking Lynch copy him. Harry had never seenanyone fly like that; Krum hardly looked as though hewas using a broomstick at all; he moved so easilythrough the air that he looked unsupported andweightless. Harry turned his Omnioculars back tonormal and focused them on Krum. He was nowcircling high above Lynch, who was being revived bymediwizards with cups of potion. Harry, focusing stillmore closely upon Krum’s face, saw his dark eyesdarting all over the ground a hundred feet below. Hewas using the time while Lynch was revived to lookfor the Snitch without interference.

Lynch got to his feet at last, to loud cheers from thegreen-clad supporters, mounted his Firebolt, andkicked back off into the air. His revival seemed to giveIreland new heart. When Mostafa blew his whistleagain, the Chasers moved into action with a skillunrivaled by anything Harry had seen so far.

After fifteen more fast and furious minutes, Irelandhad pulled ahead by ten more goals. They were now

Page | 120

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

leading by one hundred and thirty points to ten, andthe game was starting to get dirtier.

As Mullet shot toward the goal posts yet again,clutching the Quaffle tightly under her arm, theBulgarian Keeper, Zograf, flew out to meet her.Whatever happened was over so quickly Harry didn’tcatch it, but a scream of rage from the Irish crowd,and Mostafa’s long, shrill whistle blast, told him ithad been a foul.

“And Mostafa takes the Bulgarian Keeper to task forcobbing — excessive use of elbows!” Bagman informedthe roaring spectators. “And — yes, it’s a penalty toIreland!”

The leprechauns, who had risen angrily into the airlike a swarm of glittering hornets when Mullet hadbeen fouled, now darted together to form the words“HA, HA, HA!” The veela on the other side of the fieldleapt to their feet, tossed their hair angrily, andstarted to dance again.

As one, the Weasley boys and Harry stuffed theirfingers into their ears, but Hermione, who hadn’tbothered, was soon tugging on Harry’s arm. Heturned to look at her, and she pulled his fingersimpatiently out of his ears.

“Look at the referee!” she said, giggling.

Harry looked down at the field. Hassan Mostafa hadlanded right in front of the dancing veela, and wasacting very oddly indeed. He was flexing his musclesand smoothing his mustache excitedly.

“Now, we can’t have that!” said Ludo Bagman, thoughhe sounded highly amused. “Somebody slap thereferee!”

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

A mediwizard came tearing across the field, hisfingers stuffed into his own ears, and kicked Mostafahard in the shins. Mostafa seemed to come to himself;Harry, watching through the Omnioculars again, sawthat he looked exceptionally embarrassed and hadstarted shouting at the veela, who had stoppeddancing and were looking mutinous.

“And unless I’m much mistaken, Mostafa is actuallyattempting to send off the Bulgarian team mascots!”said Bagman’s voice. “Now there’s something wehaven’t seen before. ... Oh this could turn nasty. ...”

It did: The Bulgarian Beaters, Volkov and Vulchanov,landed on either side of Mostafa and began arguingfuriously with him, gesticulating toward theleprechauns, who had now gleefully formed the words“HEE, HEE, HEE.” Mostafa was not impressed by theBulgarians’ arguments, however; he was jabbing hisfinger into the air, clearly telling them to get flyingagain, and when they refused, he gave two shortblasts on his whistle.

“Two penalties for Ireland!” shouted Bagman, and theBulgarian crowd howled with anger. “And Volkov andVulchanov had better get back on those brooms ...yes ... there they go ... and Troy takes the Quaffle ...”

Play now reached a level of ferocity beyond anythingthey had yet seen. The Beaters on both sides wereacting without mercy: Volkov and Vulchanov inparticular seemed not to care whether their clubsmade contact with Bludger or human as they swungthem violently through the air. Dimitrov shot straightat Moran, who had the Quaffle, nearly knocking heroff her broom.

“Foul\” roared the Irish supporters as one, allstanding up in a great wave of green.

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Foul!” echoed Ludo Bagman’s magically magnifiedvoice. “Dimitrov skins Moran — deliberately flying tocollide there — and it’s got to be another penalty —yes, there’s the whistle!”

The leprechauns had risen into the air again, and thistime, they formed a giant hand, which was making avery rude sign indeed at the veela across the field. Atthis, the veela lost control. Instead of dancing, theylaunched themselves across the field and beganthrowing what seemed to be handfuls of fire at theleprechauns. Watching through his Omnioculars,Harry saw that they didn’t look remotely beautifulnow. On the contrary, their faces were elongating intosharp, cruel-beaked bird heads, and long, scaly wingswere bursting from their shoulders —

“And that, boys,” yelled Mr. Weasley over the tumultof the crowd below, “is why you should never go forlooks alone!”

Ministry wizards were flooding onto the field toseparate the veela and the leprechauns, but with littlesuccess; meanwhile, the pitched battle below wasnothing to the one taking place above. Harry turnedthis way and that, staring through his Omnioculars,as the Quaffle changed hands with the speed of abullet.

“Levski — Dimitrov — Moran — Troy — Mullet —Ivanova — Moran again — Moran — MORANSCORES!”

But the cheers of the Irish supporters were barelyheard over the shrieks of the veela, the blasts nowissuing from the Ministry members’ wands, and thefurious roars of the Bulgarians. The gamerecommenced immediately; now Levski had theQuaffle, now Dimitrov —

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The Irish Beater Quigley swung heavily at a passingBludger, and hit it as hard as possible toward Krum,who did not duck quickly enough. It hit him full inthe face.

There was a deafening groan from the crowd; Krum’snose looked broken, there was blood everywhere, butHassan Mostafa didn’t blow his whistle. He hadbecome distracted, and Harry couldn’t blame him;one of the veela had thrown a handful of fire and sethis broom tail alight.

Harry wanted someone to realize that Krum wasinjured; even though he was supporting Ireland,

Krum was the most exciting player on the field. Ronobviously felt the same.

“Time-out! Ah, come on, he can’t play like that, lookat him —”

“Look at Lynch1” Harry yelled.

For the Irish Seeker had suddenly gone into a dive,and Harry was quite sure that this was no WronskiFeint; this was the real thing. ...

“He’s seen the Snitch!” Harry shouted. “He’s seen it!Look at him go!”

Half the crowd seemed to have realized what washappening; the Irish supporters rose in another greatwave of green, screaming their Seeker on ... but Krumwas on his tail. How he could see where he was going,Harry had no idea; there were flecks of blood flyingthrough the air behind him, but he was drawing levelwith Lynch now as the pair of them hurtled towardthe ground again —

“They’re going to crash!” shrieked Hermione.

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“They’re not!” roared Ron.

“Lynch is!” yelled Harry.

And he was right — for the second time, Lynch hit theground with tremendous force and was immediatelystampeded by a horde of angry veela.

“The Snitch, where’s the Snitch?” bellowed Charlie,along the row.

“He’s got it — Krum’s got it — it’s all over!” shoutedHarry.

Krum, his red robes shining with blood from his nose,was rising gently into the air, his fist held high, a glintof gold in his hand.

The scoreboard was flashing BULGARIA: 160,IRELAND: 170 across the crowd, who didn’t seem tohave realized what had happened. Then, slowly, asthough a great jumbo jet were revving up, therumbling from the Ireland supporters grew louder andlouder and erupted into screams of delight.

“IRELAND WINS!” Bagman shouted, who like theIrish, seemed to be taken aback by the sudden end ofthe match. “KRUM GETS THE SNITCH — BUTIRELAND WINS — good lord, I don’t think any of uswere expecting that!”

“What did he catch the Snitch for?” Ron bellowed,even as he jumped up and down, applauding with hishands over his head. “He ended it when Ireland werea hundred and sixty points ahead, the idiot!”

“He knew they were never going to catch up!” Harryshouted back over all the noise, also applauding

Page | 125

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

loudly. “The Irish Chasers were too good. ... Hewanted to end it on his terms, that’s all. ...”

“He was very brave, wasn’t he?” Hermione said,leaning forward to watch Krum land as a swarm ofmediwizards blasted a path through the battlingleprechauns and veela to get to him. “He looks aterrible mess. ...”

Harry put his Omnioculars to his eyes again. It washard to see what was happening below, becauseleprechauns were zooming delightedly all over thefield, but he could just make out Krum, surroundedby mediwizards. He looked surlier than ever andrefused to let them mop him up. His team memberswere around him, shaking their heads and lookingdejected; a short way away, the Irish players weredancing gleefully in a shower of gold descending fromtheir mascots. Flags were waving all over the stadium,the Irish national anthem blared from all sides; theveela were shrinking back into their usual, beautifulselves now, though looking dispirited and forlorn.

“Veil, ve fought bravely,” said a gloomy voice behindHarry. He looked around; it was the BulgarianMinister of Magic.

“You can speak English!” said Fudge, soundingoutraged. “And you’ve been letting me mimeeverything all day!”

“Veil, it vos very funny,” said the Bulgarian minister,shrugging.

“And as the Irish team performs a lap of honor,flanked by their mascots, the Quidditch World Cupitself is brought into the Top Box!” roared Bagman.

Page | 126

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s eyes were suddenly dazzled by a blindingwhite light, as the Top Box was magically illuminatedso that everyone in the stands could see the inside.Squinting toward the entrance, he saw two pantingwizards carrying a vast golden cup into the box,which they handed to Cornelius Fudge, who was stilllooking very disgruntled that he’d been using signlanguage all day for nothing.

“Let’s have a really loud hand for the gallant losers —Bulgaria!” Bagman shouted.

And up the stairs into the box came the sevendefeated Bulgarian players. The crowd below wasapplauding appreciatively; Harry could see thousandsand thousands of Omniocular lenses flashing andwinking in their direction.

One by one, the Bulgarians filed between the rows ofseats in the box, and Bagman called out the name ofeach as they shook hands with their own ministerand then with Fudge. Krum, who was last in line,looked a real mess. Two black eyes were bloomingspectacularly on his bloody face. He was still holdingthe Snitch. Harry noticed that he seemed much lesscoordinated on the ground. He was slightly duck-footed and distinctly round-shouldered. But whenKrum’s name was announced, the whole stadiumgave him a resounding, earsplitting roar.

And then came the Irish team. Aidan Lynch was beingsupported by Moran and Connolly; the second crashseemed to have dazed him and his eyes lookedstrangely unfocused. But he grinned happily as Troyand Quigley lifted the Cup into the air and the crowdbelow thundered its approval. Harry’s hands werenumb with clapping.

Page | 127

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

At last, when the Irish team had left the box toperform another lap of honor on their brooms (AidanLynch on the back of Connolly’s, clutching hardaround his waist and still grinning in a bemused sortof way), Bagman pointed his wand at his throat andmuttered, “Quietus.”

“They’ll be talking about this one for years,” he saidhoarsely, “a really unexpected twist, that. ... shame itcouldn’t have lasted longer. ... Ah yes. ... yes, I oweyou ... how much?”

For Fred and George had just scrambled over thebacks of their seats and were standing in front ofLudo Bagman with broad grins on their faces, theirhands outstretched.

Page | 128

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



THE DARK MARK

“Don’t tell your mother you’ve been gambling,” Mr.Weasley implored Fred and George as they all madetheir way slowly down the purple-carpeted stairs.

“Don’t worry, Dad,” said Fred gleefully, “we’ve got bigplans for this money. We don’t want it confiscated.”

Mr. Weasley looked for a moment as though he wasgoing to ask what these big plans were, but seemed todecide, upon reflection, that he didn’t want to know.

They were soon caught up in the crowds now floodingout of the stadium and back to their campsites.Raucous singing was borne toward them on the nightair as they retraced their steps along the lantern-litpath, and leprechauns kept shooting over their heads,cackling and waving their lanterns. When they finallyreached the tents, nobody felt like sleeping at all, andgiven the level of noise around them, Mr. Weasleyagreed that they could all have one last cup of cocoatogether before turning in. They were soon arguingenjoyably about the match; Mr. Weasley got drawn

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

into a disagreement about cobbing with Charlie, andit was only when Ginny fell asleep right at the tinytable and spilled hot chocolate all over the floor thatMr. Weasley called a halt to the verbal replays andinsisted that everyone go to bed. Hermione and Ginnywent into the next tent, and Harry and the rest of theWeasleys changed into pajamas and clambered intotheir bunks. From the other side of the campsite theycould still hear much singing and the odd echoingbang.

“Oh I am glad I’m not on duty,” muttered Mr. Weasleysleepily. “I wouldn’t fancy having to go and tell theIrish they’ve got to stop celebrating.”

Harry, who was on a top bunk above Ron, lay staringup at the canvas ceiling of the tent, watching the glowof an occasional leprechaun lantern flying overhead,and picturing again some of Krum’s more spectacularmoves. He was itching to get back on his own Fireboltand try out the Wronski Feint. ... Somehow OliverWood had never managed to convey with all hiswriggling diagrams what that move was supposed tolook like. ... Harry saw himself in robes that had hisname on the back, and imagined the sensation ofhearing a hundred-thousand-strong crowd roar, asLudo Bagman’s voice echoed throughout the stadium,“I give you ... PotteA.”

Harry never knew whether or not he had actuallydropped off to sleep — his fantasies of flying likeKrum might well have slipped into actual dreams —all he knew was that, quite suddenly, Mr. Weasleywas shouting.

“Get up! Ron — Harry — come on now, get up, this isurgent!”

Page | 130

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry sat up quickly and the top of his head hitcanvas.

“ ’S’ matter?” he said.

Dimly, he could tell that something was wrong. Thenoises in the campsite had changed. The singing hadstopped. He could hear screams, and the sound ofpeople running. He slipped down from the bunk andreached for his clothes, but Mr. Weasley, who hadpulled on his jeans over his own pajamas, said, “Notime, Harry —just grab a jacket and get outside —quickly!”

Harry did as he was told and hurried out of the tent,Ron at his heels.

By the light of the few fires that were still burning, hecould see people running away into the woods, fleeingsomething that was moving across the field towardthem, something that was emitting odd flashes oflight and noises like gunfire. Loud jeering, roars oflaughter, and drunken yells were drifting towardthem; then came a burst of strong green light, whichilluminated the scene.

A crowd of wizards, tightly packed and movingtogether with wands pointing straight upward, wasmarching slowly across the field. Harry squinted atthem. ... They didn’t seem to have faces. ... Then herealized that their heads were hooded and their facesmasked. High above them, floating along in midair,four struggling figures were being contorted intogrotesque shapes. It was as though the maskedwizards on the ground were puppeteers, and thepeople above them were marionettes operated byinvisible strings that rose from the wands into the air.Two of the figures were very small.

Page | 131

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

More wizards were joining the marching group,laughing and pointing up at the floating bodies. Tentscrumpled and fell as the marching crowd swelled.Once or twice Harry saw one of the marchers blast atent out of his way with his wand. Several caught fire.The screaming grew louder.

The floating people were suddenly illuminated as theypassed over a burning tent and Harry recognized oneof them: Mr. Roberts, the campsite manager. Theother three looked as though they might be his wifeand children. One of the marchers below flipped Mrs.Roberts upside down with his wand; her nightdressfell down to reveal voluminous drawers and shestruggled to cover herself up as the crowd below herscreeched and hooted with glee.

“That’s sick,” Ron muttered, watching the smallestMuggle child, who had begun to spin like a top, sixtyfeet above the ground, his head flopping limply fromside to side. “That is really sick. ...”

Hermione and Ginny came hurrying toward them,pulling coats over their nightdresses, with Mr.

Weasley right behind them. At the same moment, Bill,Charlie, and Percy emerged from the boys’ tent, fullydressed, with their sleeves rolled up and their wandsout.

“We’re going to help the Ministry!” Mr. Weasleyshouted over all the noise, rolling up his own sleeves.“You lot — get into the woods, and stick together. I’llcome and fetch you when we’ve sorted this out!”

Bill, Charlie, and Percy were already sprinting awaytoward the oncoming marchers; Mr. Weasley toreafter them. Ministry wizards were dashing from everydirection toward the source of the trouble. The crowdbeneath the Roberts family was coming ever closer.Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“C’mon,” said Fred, grabbing Ginny’s hand andstarting to pull her toward the wood. Harry, Ron,Hermione, and George followed. They all looked backas they reached the trees. The crowd beneath theRoberts family was larger than ever; they could seethe Ministry wizards trying to get through it to thehooded wizards in the center, but they were havinggreat difficulty. It looked as though they were scaredto perform any spell that might make the Robertsfamily fall.

The colored lanterns that had lit the path to thestadium had been extinguished. Dark figures wereblundering through the trees; children were crying;anxious shouts and panicked voices werereverberating around them in the cold night air.

Harry felt himself being pushed hither and thither bypeople whose faces he could not see. Then he heardRon yell with pain.

“What happened?” said Hermione anxiously, stoppingso abruptly that Harry walked into her. “Ron, whereare you? Oh this is stupid — lumos\”

She illuminated her wand and directed its narrowbeam across the path. Ron was lying sprawled on theground.

“Tripped over a tree root,” he said angrily, getting tohis feet again.

“Well, with feet that size, hard not to,” said a drawlingvoice from behind them.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned sharply. DracoMalfoy was standing alone nearby, leaning against atree, looking utterly relaxed. His arms folded, heseemed to have been watching the scene at thecampsite through a gap in the trees.

Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Ron told Malfoy to do something that Harry knew hewould never have dared say in front of Mrs. Weasley

“Language, Weasley,” said Malfoy, his pale eyesglittering. “Hadn’t you better be hurrying along, now?You wouldn’t like her spotted, would you?”

He nodded at Hermione, and at the same moment, ablast like a bomb sounded from the campsite, and aflash of green light momentarily lit the trees aroundthem.

“What’s that supposed to mean?” said Hermionedefiantly.

“Granger, they’re after Muggles,” said Malfoy. “D’youwant to be showing off your knickers in midair?Because if you do, hang around ... they’re moving thisway, and it would give us all a laugh.”

“Hermione’s a witch,” Harry snarled.

“Have it your own way, Potter,” said Malfoy, grinningmaliciously. “If you think they can’t spot a Mudblood,stay where you are.”

“You watch your mouth!” shouted Ron. Everybodypresent knew that “Mudblood” was a very offensiveterm for a witch or wizard of Muggle parentage.

“Never mind, Ron,” said Hermione quickly, seizingRon’s arm to restrain him as he took a step towardMalfoy.

There came a bang from the other side of the treesthat was louder than anything they had heard.

Several people nearby screamed. Malfoy chuckledsoftly.

Page | 134

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Scare easily, don’t they?” he said lazily. “I supposeyour daddy told you all to hide? What’s he up to —trying to rescue the Muggles?”

“Where’re your parents?” said Harry, his temperrising. “Out there wearing masks, are they?”

Malfoy turned his face to Harry, still smiling.

“Well ... if they were, I wouldn’t be likely to tell you,would I, Potter?”

“Oh come on,” said Hermione, with a disgusted lookat Malfoy, “let’s go and find the others.”

“Keep that big bushy head down, Granger,” sneeredMalfoy.

“Come on,” Hermione repeated, and she pulled Harryand Ron up the path again.

“I’ll bet you anything his dad is one of that maskedlot!” said Ron hotly.

“Well, with any luck, the Ministry will catch him!”said Hermione fervently. “Oh I can’t believe this.

Where have the others got to?”

Fred, George, and Ginny were nowhere to be seen,though the path was packed with plenty of otherpeople, all looking nervously over their shoulderstoward the commotion back at the campsite. A huddleof teenagers in pajamas was arguing vociferously alittle way along the path. When they saw Harry, Ron,and Hermione, a girl with thick curly hair turned andsaid quickly, “Ou est Madame Maxime? Nous Vavonsperdue —”

“Er — what?” said Ron.

Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh ...” The girl who had spoken turned her back onhim, and as they walked on they distinctly heard hersay, “ ’Ogwarts.”

“Beauxbatons,” muttered Hermione.

“Sorry?” said Harry.

“They must go to Beauxbatons,” said Hermione. “Youknow ... Beauxbatons Academy of Magic ... I readabout it in An Appraisal of Magical Education inEurope.”

“Oh ... yeah ... right,” said Harry.

“Fred and George can’t have gone that far,” said Ron,pulling out his wand, lighting it like Hermione’s, andsquinting up the path. Harry dug in the pockets of hisjacket for his own wand — but it wasn’t there. Theonly thing he could find was his Omnioculars.

“Ah, no, I don’t believe it ... I’ve lost my wand!”

“You’re kidding!”

Ron and Hermione raised their wands high enough tospread the narrow beams of light farther on theground; Harry looked all around him, but his wandwas nowhere to be seen.

“Maybe it’s back in the tent,” said Ron.

“Maybe it fell out of your pocket when we wererunning?” Hermione suggested anxiously.

“Yeah,” said Harry, “maybe ...”

He usually kept his wand with him at all times in thewizarding world, and finding himself without it in the

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

midst of a scene like this made him feel veryvulnerable.

A rustling noise nearby made all three of them jump.Winky the house-elf was fighting her way out of aclump of bushes nearby. She was moving in a mostpeculiar fashion, apparently with great difficulty; itwas as though someone invisible were trying to holdher back.

“There is bad wizards about!” she squeakeddistractedly as she leaned forward and labored tokeep running. “People high — high in the air! Winkyis getting out of the way!”

And she disappeared into the trees on the other sideof the path, panting and squeaking as she fought theforce that was restraining her.

“What’s up with her?” said Ron, looking curiouslyafter Winky. “Why can’t she run properly?”

“Bet she didn’t ask permission to hide,” said Harry.

He was thinking of Dobby: Every time he had tried todo something the Malfoys wouldn’t like, the house-elfhad been forced to start beating himself up.

“You know, house-elves get a very raw deal!” saidHermione indignantly. “It’s slavery, that’s what it is!That Mr. Crouch made her go up to the top of thestadium, and she was terrified, and he’s got herbewitched so she can’t even run when they starttrampling tents! Why doesn’t anyone do somethingabout it?”

“Well, the elves are happy, aren’t they?” Ron said.

“You heard old Winky back at the match ... ‘House-elves is not supposed to have fun’ ... that’s what shelikes, being bossed around. ...”

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“It’s people like you, Ron,” Hermione began hotly,

“who prop up rotten and unjust systems, justbecause they’re too lazy to —”

Another loud bang echoed from the edge of the wood.

“Let’s just keep moving, shall we?” said Ron, andHarry saw him glance edgily at Hermione. Perhapsthere was truth in what Malfoy had said; perhapsHermione was in more danger than they were. Theyset off again, Harry still searching his pockets, eventhough he knew his wand wasn’t there.

They followed the dark path deeper into the wood,still keeping an eye out for Fred, George, and Ginny.They passed a group of goblins who were cacklingover a sack of gold that they had undoubtedly wonbetting on the match, and who seemed quiteunperturbed by the trouble at the campsite. Fartherstill along the path, they walked into a patch of silverylight, and when they looked through the trees, theysaw three tall and beautiful veela standing in aclearing, surrounded by a gaggle of young wizards, allof whom were talking very loudly.

“I pull down about a hundred sacks of Galleons ayear!” one of them shouted. “I’m a dragon killer forthe Committee for the Disposal of DangerousCreatures.”

“No, you’re not!” yelled his friend. “You’re adishwasher at the Leaky Cauldron. ... but I’m avampire hunter, I’ve killed about ninety so far —”

A third young wizard, whose pimples were visible evenby the dim, silvery light of the veela, now cut in, “I’mabout to become the youngest ever Minister of Magic,

I am.”

Page | 138

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry snorted with laughter. He recognized thepimply wizard: His name was Stan Shunpike, and hewas in fact a conductor on the triple-decker KnightBus. He turned to tell Ron this, but Ron’s face hadgone oddly slack, and next second Ron was yelling,“Did I tell you I’ve invented a broomstick that’ll reachJupiter?”

“Honestly\” said Hermione, and she and Harrygrabbed Ron firmly by the arms, wheeled him around,and marched him away. By the time the sounds ofthe veela and their admirers had faded completely,they were in the very heart of the wood. They seemedto be alone now; everything was much quieter.

Harry looked around. “I reckon we can just wait here,you know. Well hear anyone coming a mile off.”

The words were hardly out of his mouth, when LudoBagman emerged from behind a tree right ahead ofthem.

Even by the feeble light of the two wands, Harry couldsee that a great change had come over Bagman. Heno longer looked buoyant and rosy-faced; there wasno more spring in his step. He looked very white andstrained.

“Who’s that?” he said, blinking down at them, tryingto make out their faces. “What are you doing in here,all alone?”

They looked at one another, surprised.

“Well — there’s a sort of riot going on,” said Ron.Bagman stared at him.

“What?”

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“At the campsite ... some people have got hold of afamily of Muggles. ...”

Bagman swore loudly.

“Damn them!” he said, looking quite distracted, andwithout another word, he Disapparated with a smallpop\

“Not exactly on top of things, Mr. Bagman, is he?”said Hermione, frowning.

“He was a great Beater, though,” said Ron, leadingthe way off the path into a small clearing, and sittingdown on a patch of dry grass at the foot of a tree.

“The Wimbourne Wasps won the league three times ina row while he was with them.”

He took his small figure of Krum out of his pocket, setit down on the ground, and watched it walk around.Like the real Krum, the model was slightly duck-footed and round-shouldered, much less impressiveon his splayed feet than on his broomstick. Harry waslistening for noise from the campsite. Everythingseemed much quieter; perhaps the riot was over.

“I hope the others are okay,” said Hermione after awhile.

“They’ll be fine,” said Ron.

“Imagine if your dad catches Lucius Malfoy,” saidHarry, sitting down next to Ron and watching thesmall figure of Krum slouching over the fallen leaves.“He’s always said he’d like to get something on him.”

“That’d wipe the smirk off old Draco’s face, all right,”said Ron.

Page | 140

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Those poor Muggles, though,” said Hermionenervously. “What if they can’t get them down?”

“They will,” said Ron reassuringly. “They’ll find away.”

“Mad, though, to do something like that when thewhole Ministry of Magic’s out here tonight!” saidHermione. “I mean, how do they expect to get awaywith it? Do you think they’ve been drinking, or arethey just —”

But she broke off abruptly and looked over hershoulder. Harry and Ron looked quickly around too.

It sounded as though someone was staggering towardtheir clearing. They waited, listening to the sounds ofthe uneven steps behind the dark trees. But thefootsteps came to a sudden halt.

“Hello?” called Harry.

There was silence. Harry got to his feet and peeredaround the tree. It was too dark to see very far, but hecould sense somebody standing just beyond the rangeof his vision.

“Who’s there?” he said.

And then, without warning, the silence was rent by avoice unlike any they had heard in the wood; and ituttered, not a panicked shout, but what sounded likea spell.

“MORSMORDREl ”

And something vast, green, and glittering eruptedfrom the patch of darkness Harry’s eyes had beenstruggling to penetrate; it flew up over the treetopsand into the sky.

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What the — ?” gasped Ron as he sprang to his feetagain, staring up at the thing that had appeared.

For a split second, Harry thought it was anotherleprechaun formation. Then he realized that it was acolossal skull, comprised of what looked like emeraldstars, with a serpent protruding from its mouth like atongue. As they watched, it rose higher and higher,blazing in a haze of greenish smoke, etched againstthe black sky like a new constellation.

Suddenly, the wood all around them erupted withscreams. Harry didn’t understand why, but the onlypossible cause was the sudden appearance of theskull, which had now risen high enough to illuminatethe entire wood like some grisly neon sign. Hescanned the darkness for the person who hadconjured the skull, but he couldn’t see anyone.

“Who’s there?” he called again.

“Harry, come on, move\” Hermione had seized thecollar of his jacket and was tugging him backward.

“What’s the matter?” Harry said, startled to see herface so white and terrified.

“It’s the Dark Mark, Harry!” Hermione moaned,pulling him as hard as she could. “You-Know-Who’ssign!”

“Voldemort’s — ?”

“Harry, come on!”

Harry turned — Ron was hurriedly scooping up hisminiature Krum — the three of them started acrossthe clearing — but before they had taken a fewhurried steps, a series of popping noises announced

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the arrival of twenty wizards, appearing from thin air,surrounding them.

Harry whirled around, and in an instant, heregistered one fact: Each of these wizards had hiswand out, and every wand was pointing right athimself, Ron, and Hermione.

Without pausing to think, he yelled, “DUCK!”

He seized the other two and pulled them down ontothe ground.

“STUPEFYl” roared twenty voices — there was ablinding series of flashes and Harry felt the hair onhis head ripple as though a powerful wind had sweptthe clearing. Raising his head a fraction of an inch hesaw jets of fiery red light flying over them from thewizards’wands, crossing one another, bouncing offtree trunks, rebounding into the darkness —

“Stop!” yelled a voice he recognized. “STOP! That’s myson\”

Harry’s hair stopped blowing about. He raised hishead a little higher. The wizard in front of him hadlowered his wand. He rolled over and saw Mr. Weasleystriding toward them, looking terrified.

“Ron — Harry” — his voice sounded shaky —“Hermione — are you all right?”

“Out of the way, Arthur,” said a cold, curt voice.

It was Mr. Crouch. He and the other Ministry wizardswere closing in on them. Harry got to his feet to facethem. Mr. Crouch’s face was taut with rage.

Page | 143

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Which of you did it?” he snapped, his sharp eyesdarting between them. “Which of you conjured theDark Mark?”

“We didn’t do that!” said Harry, gesturing up at theskull.

“We didn’t do anything!” said Ron, who was rubbinghis elbow and looking indignantly at his father. “Whatdid you want to attack us for?”

“Do not lie, sir!” shouted Mr. Crouch. His wand wasstill pointing directly at Ron, and his eyes werepopping — he looked slightly mad. “You have beendiscovered at the scene of the crime!”

“Barty,” whispered a witch in a long woolen dressinggown, “they’re kids, Barty, they’d never have beenable to —”

“Where did the Mark come from, you three?” said Mr.Weasley quickly.

“Over there,” said Hermione shakily, pointing at theplace where they had heard the voice. “There wassomeone behind the trees ... they shouted words —an incantation —”

“Oh, stood over there, did they?” said Mr. Crouch,turning his popping eyes on Hermione now, disbeliefetched all over his face. “Said an incantation, didthey? You seem very well informed about how thatMark is summoned, missy —”

But none of the Ministry wizards apart from Mr.Crouch seemed to think it remotely likely that Harry,Ron, or Hermione had conjured the skull; on thecontrary, at Hermione’s words, they had all raised

Page | 144

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

their wands again and were pointing in the directionshe had indicated, squinting through the dark trees.

“We’re too late,” said the witch in the woolen dressinggown, shaking her head. “They’ll have Disapparated.”

“I don’t think so,” said a wizard with a scrubby brownbeard. It was Amos Diggory, Cedric’s father. “OurStunners went right through those trees. ... There’s agood chance we got them. ...”

“Amos, be careful!” said a few of the wizardswarningly as Mr. Diggory squared his shoulders,raised his wand, marched across the clearing, anddisappeared into the darkness. Hermione watchedhim vanish with her hands over her mouth.

A few seconds later, they heard Mr. Diggory shout.

“Yes! We got them! There’s someone here!Unconscious! It’s — but — blimey ...”

“You’ve got someone?” shouted Mr. Crouch, soundinghighly disbelieving. “Who? Who is it?”

They heard snapping twigs, the rustling of leaves, andthen crunching footsteps as Mr. Diggory reemergedfrom behind the trees. He was carrying a tiny, limpfigure in his arms. Harry recognized the tea towel atonce. It was Winky.

Mr. Crouch did not move or speak as Mr. Diggorydeposited his elf on the ground at his feet. The otherMinistry wizards were all staring at Mr. Crouch. For afew seconds Crouch remained transfixed, his eyesblazing in his white face as he stared down at Winky.Then he appeared to come to life again.

“This — cannot — be,” he said jerkily. “No —”

Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He moved quickly around Mr. Diggory and strode offtoward the place where he had found Winky.

“No point, Mr. Crouch,” Mr. Diggory called after him.“There’s no one else there.”

But Mr. Crouch did not seem prepared to take hisword for it. They could hear him moving around andthe rustling of leaves as he pushed the bushes aside,searching.

“Bit embarrassing,” Mr. Diggory said grimly, lookingdown at Winky’s unconscious form. “Barty Crouch’shouse-elf ... I mean to say ...”

“Come off it, Amos,” said Mr. Weasley quietly, “youdon’t seriously think it was the elf? The Dark Mark’s awizard’s sign. It requires a wand.”

“Yeah,” said Mr. Diggory, “and she had a wand.”

“What?” said Mr. Weasley.

“Here, look.” Mr. Diggory held up a wand and showedit to Mr. Weasley. “Had it in her hand. So that’sclause three of the Code of Wand Use broken, for astart. No non-human creature is permitted to carry oruse a wand.”

Just then there was another pop, and Ludo BagmanApparated right next to Mr. Weasley. Lookingbreathless and disorientated, he spun on the spot,goggling upward at the emerald-green skull.

“The Dark Mark!” he panted, almost trampling Winkyas he turned inquiringly to his colleagues. “Who didit? Did you get them? Barty! What’s going on?”

Page | 146

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mr. Crouch had returned empty-handed. His face wasstill ghostly white, and his hands and his toothbrushmustache were both twitching.

“Where have you been, Barty?” said Bagman. “Whyweren’t you at the match? Your elf was saving you aseat too — gulping gargoyles!” Bagman had justnoticed Winky lying at his feet. “What happened toher?”

“I have been busy, Ludo,” said Mr. Crouch, stilltalking in the same jerky fashion, barely moving hislips. “And my elf has been stunned.”

“Stunned? By you lot, you mean? But why — ?”

Comprehension dawned suddenly on Bagman’sround, shiny face; he looked up at the skull, down atWinky, and then at Mr. Crouch.

“iVo!” he said. “Winky? Conjure the Dark Mark? Shewouldn’t know how! She’d need a wand, for a start!”

“And she had one,” said Mr. Diggory. “I found herholding one, Ludo. If it’s all right with you, Mr.

Crouch, I think we should hear what she’s got to sayfor herself.”

Crouch gave no sign that he had heard Mr. Diggory,but Mr. Diggory seemed to take his silence for assent.He raised his own wand, pointed it at Winky, andsaid, “Rennervatel”

Winky stirred feebly. Her great brown eyes openedand she blinked several times in a bemused sort ofway. Watched by the silent wizards, she raised herselfshakily into a sitting position. She caught sight of Mr.Diggory’s feet, and slowly, tremulously, raised hereyes to stare up into his face; then, more slowly still,Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

she looked up into the sky. Harry could see thefloating skull reflected twice in her enormous, glassyeyes. She gave a gasp, looked wildly around thecrowded clearing, and burst into terrified sobs.

“Elf!” said Mr. Diggory sternly. “Do you know who Iam? I’m a member of the Department for theRegulation and Control of Magical Creatures!”

Winky began to rock backward and forward on theground, her breath coming in sharp bursts. Harrywas reminded forcibly of Dobby in his moments ofterrified disobedience.

“As you see, elf, the Dark Mark was conjured here ashort while ago,” said Mr. Diggory. “And you werediscovered moments later, right beneath it! Anexplanation, if you please!”

“I — I — I is not doing it, sir!” Winky gasped. “I is notknowing how, sir!”

“You were found with a wand in your hand!” barkedMr. Diggory, brandishing it in front of her. And as thewand caught the green light that was filling theclearing from the skull above, Harry recognized it.

“Hey — that’s mine!” he said.

Everyone in the clearing looked at him.

“Excuse me?” said Mr. Diggory, incredulously.

“That’s my wand!” said Harry. “I dropped it!”

“You dropped it?” repeated Mr. Diggory in disbelief.

“Is this a confession? You threw it aside after youconjured the Mark?”

Page | 148

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Amos, think who you’re talking to!” said Mr. Weasley,very angrily. “Is Harry Potter likely to conjure theDark Mark?”

“Er — of course not,” mumbled Mr. Diggory. “Sorry ...carried away ...”

“I didn’t drop it there, anyway,” said Harry, jerkinghis thumb toward the trees beneath the skull. “Imissed it right after we got into the wood.”

“So,” said Mr. Diggory, his eyes hardening as heturned to look at Winky again, cowering at his feet.“You found this wand, eh, elf? And you picked it upand thought you’d have some fun with it, did you?”

“I is not doing magic with it, sir!” squealed Winky,tears streaming down the sides of her squashed andbulbous nose. “I is ... I is ... I is just picking it up, sir!

I is not making the Dark Mark, sir, I is not knowinghow!”

“It wasn’t her!” said Hermione. She looked verynervous, speaking up in front of all these Ministrywizards, yet determined all the same. “Winky’s got asqueaky little voice, and the voice we heard doing theincantation was much deeper!” She looked around atHarry and Ron, appealing for their support. “It didn’tsound anything like Winky, did it?”

“No,” said Harry, shaking his head. “It definitely didn’tsound like an elf.”

“Yeah, it was a human voice,” said Ron.

“Well, we’ll soon see,” growled Mr. Diggory, lookingunimpressed. “There’s a simple way of discovering thelast spell a wand performed, elf, did you know that?”

Page | 149

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Winky trembled and shook her head frantically, herears flapping, as Mr. Diggory raised his own wandagain and placed it tip to tip with Harry’s.

“Prior Incantatol” roared Mr. Diggory.

Harry heard Hermione gasp, horrified, as a giganticserpent-tongued skull erupted from the point wherethe two wands met, but it was a mere shadow of thegreen skull high above them; it looked as though itwere made of thick gray smoke: the ghost of a spell.

“Deletrius\” Mr. Diggory shouted, and the smoky skullvanished in a wisp of smoke.

“So,” said Mr. Diggory with a kind of savage triumph,looking down upon Winky, who was still shakingconvulsively.

“I is not doing it!” she squealed, her eyes rolling interror. “I is not, I is not, I is not knowing how! I is agood elf, I isn’t using wands, I isn’t knowing how!”

“ You’ve been caught red-handed, elf.” Mr. Diggoryroared. “Caught with the guilty wand in your hand\”

“Amos,” said Mr. Weasley loudly, “think about it ...precious few wizards know how to do that spell. ...Where would she have learned it?”

“Perhaps Amos is suggesting,” said Mr. Crouch, coldanger in every syllable, “that I routinely teach myservants to conjure the Dark Mark?”

There was a deeply unpleasant silence. Amos Diggorylooked horrified. “Mr. Crouch ... not ... not at all ...”

“You have now come very close to accusing the twopeople in this clearing who are least likely to conjure

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

that Mark!” barked Mr. Crouch. “Harry Potter — andmyself! I suppose you are familiar with the boy’sstory, Amos?”

“Of course — everyone knows —” muttered Mr.Diggory, looking highly discomforted.

“And I trust you remember the many proofs I havegiven, over a long career, that I despise and detest theDark Arts and those who practice them?” Mr. Crouchshouted, his eyes bulging again.

“Mr. Crouch, I — I never suggested you had anythingto do with it!” Amos Diggory muttered again, nowreddening behind his scrubby brown beard.

“If you accuse my elf, you accuse me, Diggory!”shouted Mr. Crouch. “Where else would she havelearned to conjure it?”

“She — she might’ve picked it up anywhere —”

“Precisely, Amos,” said Mr. Weasley. “She might havepicked it up anywhere. ... Winky?” he said kindly,turning to the elf, but she flinched as though he toowas shouting at her. “Where exactly did you findHarry’s wand?”

Winky was twisting the hem of her tea towel soviolently that it was fraying beneath her fingers.

“I — I is finding it ... finding it there, sir. ...” shewhispered, “there ... in the trees, sir. ...”

“You see, Amos?” said Mr. Weasley. “Whoeverconjured the Mark could have Disapparated rightafter they’d done it, leaving Harry’s wand behind. Aclever thing to do, not using their own wand, whichcould have betrayed them. And Winky here had thePage | 151 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

misfortune to come across the wand moments laterand pick it up.”

“But then, she’d have been only a few feet away fromthe real culprit!” said Mr. Diggory impatiently. “Elf?Did you see anyone?”

Winky began to tremble worse than ever. Her gianteyes flickered from Mr. Diggory, to Ludo Bagman, andonto Mr. Crouch. Then she gulped and said, “I isseeing no one, sir ... no one ...”

“Amos,” said Mr. Crouch curtly, “I am fully awarethat, in the ordinary course of events, you would wantto take Winky into your department for questioning. Iask you, however, to allow me to deal with her.”

Mr. Diggory looked as though he didn’t think much ofthis suggestion at all, but it was clear to Harry thatMr. Crouch was such an important member of theMinistry that he did not dare refuse him.

“You may rest assured that she will be punished,” Mr.Crouch added coldly.

“M-m-master ...” Winky stammered, looking up at Mr.Crouch, her eyes brimming with tears. “M-m-master,p-p-please ...”

Mr. Crouch stared back, his face somehowsharpened, each line upon it more deeply etched.There was no pity in his gaze.

“Winky has behaved tonight in a manner I would nothave believed possible,” he said slowly. “I told her toremain in the tent. I told her to stay there while Iwent to sort out the trouble. And I find that shedisobeyed me. This means clothes.”

Page | 152

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No!” shrieked Winky, prostrating herself at Mr.Crouch’s feet. “No, master! Not clothes, not clothes!”

Harry knew that the only way to turn a house-elf freewas to present it with proper garments. It was pitifulto see the way Winky clutched at her tea towel as shesobbed over Mr. Crouch’s feet.

“But she was frightened!” Hermione burst out angrily,glaring at Mr. Crouch. “Your elf’s scared of heights,and those wizards in masks were levitating people!

You can’t blame her for wanting to get out of theirway!”

Mr. Crouch took a step backward, freeing himselffrom contact with the elf, whom he was surveying asthough she were something filthy and rotten that wascontaminating his over-shined shoes.

“I have no use for a house-elf who disobeys me,” hesaid coldly, looking over at Hermione. “I have no usefor a servant who forgets what is due to her master,and to her master’s reputation.”

Winky was crying so hard that her sobs echoedaround the clearing. There was a very nasty silence,which was ended by Mr. Weasley, who said quietly,“Well, I think I’ll take my lot back to the tent, ifnobody’s got any objections. Amos, that wand’s toldus all it can — if Harry could have it back, please —”

Mr. Diggory handed Harry his wand and Harrypocketed it.

“Come on, you three,” Mr. Weasley said quietly. ButHermione didn’t seem to want to move; her eyes werestill upon the sobbing elf. “Hermione!” Mr. Weasleysaid, more urgently. She turned and followed Harryand Ron out of the clearing and off through the trees.Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What’s going to happen to Winky?” said Hermione,the moment they had left the clearing.

“I don’t know,” said Mr. Weasley.

“The way they were treating her!” said Hermionefuriously. “Mr. Diggory, calling her ‘elf’ all the time ...and Mr. Crouch! He knows she didn’t do it and he’sstill going to sack her! He didn’t care how frightenedshe’d been, or how upset she was — it was like shewasn’t even human!”

“Well, she’s not,” said Ron.

Hermione rounded on him.

“That doesn’t mean she hasn’t got feelings, Ron. It’sdisgusting the way —”

“Hermione, I agree with you,” said Mr. Weasleyquickly, beckoning her on, “but now is not the time todiscuss elf rights. I want to get back to the tent asfast as we can. What happened to the others?”

“We lost them in the dark,” said Ron. “Dad, why waseveryone so uptight about that skull thing?”

“I’ll explain everything back at the tent,” said Mr.Weasley tensely.

But when they reached the edge of the wood, theirprogress was impeded. A large crowd of frightened-looking witches and wizards was congregated there,and when they saw Mr. Weasley coming toward them,many of them surged forward.

“What’s going on in there?”

“Who conjured it?”

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Arthur — it’s not — Him?”

“Of course it’s not Him,” said Mr. Weasleyimpatiently. “We don’t know who it was; it looks likethey Disapparated. Now excuse me, please, I want toget to bed.”

He led Harry, Ron, and Hermione through the crowdand back into the campsite. All was quiet now; therewas no sign of the masked wizards, though severalruined tents were still smoking.

Charlie’s head was poking out of the boys’ tent.

“Dad, what’s going on?” he called through the dark.“Fred, George, and Ginny got back okay, but theothers —”

“I’ve got them here,” said Mr. Weasley, bending downand entering the tent. Harry, Ron, and Hermioneentered after him.

Bill was sitting at the small kitchen table, holding abedsheet to his arm, which was bleeding profusely.Charlie had a large rip in his shirt, and Percy wassporting a bloody nose. Fred, George, and Ginnylooked unhurt, though shaken.

“Did you get them, Dad?” said Bill sharply. “Theperson who conjured the Mark?”

“No,” said Mr. Weasley. “We found Barty Crouch’s elfholding Harry’s wand, but we’re none the wiser aboutwho actually conjured the Mark.”

“What?” said Bill, Charlie, and Percy together.

“Harry’s wand?” said Fred.

Page | 155

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Mr. Crouch’s elf?” said Percy, soundingthunderstruck.

With some assistance from Harry, Ron, andHermione, Mr. Weasley explained what had happenedin the woods. When they had finished their story,Percy swelled indignantly.

“Well, Mr. Crouch is quite right to get rid of an elf likethat!” he said. “Running away when he’d expresslytold her not to ... embarrassing him in front of thewhole Ministry ... how would that have looked, ifshe’d been brought up in front of the Department forthe Regulation and Control —”

“She didn’t do anything — she was just in the wrongplace at the wrong time!” Hermione snapped at Percy,who looked very taken aback. Hermione had alwaysgot on fairly well with Percy — better, indeed, thanany of the others.

“Hermione, a wizard in Mr. Crouch’s position can’tafford a house-elf who’s going to run amok with awand!” said Percy pompously, recovering himself.

“She didn’t run amok!” shouted Hermione. “She justpicked it up off the ground!”

“Look, can someone just explain what that skull thingwas?” said Ron impatiently. “It wasn’t hurtinganyone. ... Why’s it such a big deal?”

“I told you, it’s You-Know-Who’s symbol, Ron,” saidHermione, before anyone else could answer. “I readabout it in The Rise and Fall of the Dark Arts.”

“And it hasn’t been seen for thirteen years,” said Mr.Weasley quietly. “Of course people panicked ... it wasalmost like seeing You-Know-Who back again.”

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t get it,” said Ron, frowning. “I mean ... it’s stillonly a shape in the sky. ...”

“Ron, You-Know-Who and his followers sent the DarkMark into the air whenever they killed,” said Mr.Weasley. “The terror it inspired ... you have no idea,you’re too young. Just picture coming home andfinding the Dark Mark hovering over your house, andknowing what you’re about to find inside. ...” Mr.Weasley winced. “Everyone’s worst fear ... the veryworst ...”

There was silence for a moment. Then Bill, removingthe sheet from his arm to check on his cut, said,

“Well, it didn’t help us tonight, whoever conjured it. Itscared the Death Eaters away the moment they sawit. They all Disapparated before we’d got near enoughto unmask any of them. We caught the Robertsesbefore they hit the ground, though. They’re havingtheir memories modified right now.”

“Death Eaters?” said Harry. “What are Death Eaters?”

“It’s what You-Know-Who’s supporters calledthemselves,” said Bill. “I think we saw what’s left ofthem tonight — the ones who managed to keepthemselves out of Azkaban, anyway.”

“We can’t prove it was them, Bill,” said Mr. Weasley.“Though it probably was,” he added hopelessly.

“Yeah, I bet it was!” said Ron suddenly. “Dad, we metDraco Malfoy in the woods, and he as good as told ushis dad was one of those nutters in masks! And we allknow the Malfoys were right in with You-Know-Who!”

“But what were Voldemort’s supporters —” Harrybegan. Everybody flinched — like most of thewizarding world, the Weasleys always avoided saying

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort’s name. “Sorry,” said Harry quickly. “Whatwere You-Know-Who’s supporters up to, levitatingMuggles? I mean, what was the point?”

“The point?” said Mr. Weasley with a hollow laugh.“Harry, that’s their idea of fun. Half the Mugglekillings back when You-Know-Who was in power weredone for fun. I suppose they had a few drinks tonightand couldn’t resist reminding us all that lots of themare still at large. A nice little reunion for them,” hefinished disgustedly.

“But if they were the Death Eaters, why did theyDisapparate when they saw the Dark Mark?” saidRon. “They’d have been pleased to see it, wouldn’tthey?”

“Use your brains, Ron,” said Bill. “If they really wereDeath Eaters, they worked very hard to keep out ofAzkaban when You-Know-Who lost power, and told allsorts of lies about him forcing them to kill and torturepeople. I bet they’d be even more frightened than therest of us to see him come back. They denied they’dever been involved with him when he lost his powers,and went back to their daily lives. ... I don’t reckonhe’d be over-pleased with them, do you?”

“So ... whoever conjured the Dark Mark ...” saidHermione slowly, “were they doing it to show supportfor the Death Eaters, or to scare them away?”

“Your guess is as good as ours, Hermione,” said Mr.Weasley. “But I’ll tell you this ... it was only the DeathEaters who ever knew how to conjure it. I’d be verysurprised if the person who did it hadn’t been a DeathEater once, even if they’re not now. ... Listen, it’s verylate, and if your mother hears what’s happened she’llbe worried sick. We’ll get a few more hours sleep andthen try and get an early Portkey out of here.”

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry got back into his bunk with his head buzzing.He knew he ought to feel exhausted: It was nearlythree in the morning, but he felt wide-awake — wide-awake, and worried.

Three days ago — it felt like much longer, but it hadonly been three days — he had awoken with his scarburning. And tonight, for the first time in thirteenyears, Lord Voldemort’s mark had appeared in thesky. What did these things mean?

He thought of the letter he had written to Siriusbefore leaving Privet Drive. Would Sirius have gottenit yet? When would he reply? Harry lay looking up atthe canvas, but no flying fantasies came to him nowto ease him to sleep, and it was a long time afterCharlie’s snores filled the tent that Harry finally dozedoff.

Page | 159

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



MAYHEM AT THE MINISTRY

Mr. Weasley woke them after only a few hours sleep.He used magic to pack up the tents, and they left thecampsite as quickly as possible, passing Mr. Robertsat the door of his cottage. Mr. Roberts had a strange,dazed look about him, and he waved them off with avague “Merry Christmas.”

“Hell be all right,” said Mr. Weasley quietly as theymarched off onto the moor. “Sometimes, when aperson’s memory’s modified, it makes him a bitdisorientated for a while ... and that was a big thingthey had to make him forget.”

They heard urgent voices as they approached the spotwhere the Portkeys lay, and when they reached it,they found a great number of witches and wizardsgathered around Basil, the keeper of the Portkeys, allclamoring to get away from the campsite as quickly aspossible. Mr. Weasley had a hurried discussion withBasil; they joined the queue, and were able to take anold rubber tire back to Stoatshead Hill before the sunhad really risen. They walked back through Ottery St.Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Catchpole and up the damp lane toward the Burrowin the dawn light, talking very little because they wereso exhausted, and thinking longingly of theirbreakfast. As they rounded the corner and theBurrow came into view, a cry echoed along the lane.

“Oh thank goodness, thank goodness!”

Mrs. Weasley, who had evidently been waiting forthem in the front yard, came running toward them,still wearing her bedroom slippers, her face pale andstrained, a rolled-up copy of the Daily Prophetclutched in her hand.

“Arthur — I’ve been so worried — so worried —”

She flung her arms around Mr. Weasley’s neck, andthe Daily Prophet fell out of her limp hand onto theground. Looking down, Harry saw the headline:SCENES OF TERROR AT THE QUIDDITCH WORLDCUP, complete with a twinkling black-and-whitephotograph of the Dark Mark over the treetops.

“You’re all right,” Mrs. Weasley muttered distractedly,releasing Mr. Weasley and staring around at them allwith red eyes, “you’re alive. ... Oh boys ...”

And to everybody’s surprise, she seized Fred andGeorge and pulled them both into such a tight hugthat their heads banged together.

“Ouch\ Mum — you’re strangling us —”

“I shouted at you before you left!” Mrs. Weasley said,starting to sob. “It’s all I’ve been thinking about! Whatif You-Know-Who had got you, and the last thing Iever said to you was that you didn’t get enoughO.W.L.s? Oh Fred ... George ...”

Page | 161

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Come on, now, Molly, we’re all perfectly okay,” saidMr. Weasley soothingly, prising her off the twins andleading her back toward the house. “Bill,” he added inan undertone, “pick up that paper, I want to see whatit says. ...”

When they were all crammed into the tiny kitchen,and Hermione had made Mrs. Weasley a cup of verystrong tea, into which Mr. Weasley insisted onpouring a shot of Ogdens Old Firewhiskey, Billhanded his father the newspaper. Mr. Weasleyscanned the front page while Percy looked over hisshoulder.

“I knew it,” said Mr. Weasley heavily. “Ministryblunders ... culprits not apprehended ... lax security ...Dark wizards running unchecked ... national disgrace... Who wrote this? Ah ... of course ... Rita Skeeter.”

“That woman’s got it in for the Ministry of Magic!”said Percy furiously. “Last week she was saying we’rewasting our time quibbling about cauldron thickness,when we should be stamping out vampires! As if itwasn’t specifically stated in paragraph twelve of theGuidelines for the Treatment of Non-Wizard Part-Humans —”

“Do us a favor, Perce,” said Bill, yawning, “and shutup.”

“I’m mentioned,” said Mr. Weasley, his eyes wideningbehind his glasses as he reached the bottom of theDaily Prophet article.

“Where?” spluttered Mrs. Weasley, choking on her teaand whiskey. “If I’d seen that, I’d have known youwere alive!”

Page | 162

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Not by name,” said Mr. Weasley. “Listen to this: ‘Ifthe terrified wizards and witches who waitedbreathlessly for news at the edge of the wood expectedreassurance from the Ministry of Magic, they weresadly disappointed. A Ministry official emerged sometime after the appearance of the Dark Mark allegingthat nobody had been hurt, but refusing to give anymore information. Whether this statement will beenough to quash the rumors that several bodies wereremoved from the woods an hour later, remains to beseen.’ Oh really,” said Mr. Weasley in exasperation,handing the paper to Percy. “Nobody was hurt. Whatwas I supposed to say? Rumors that several bodieswere removed from the woods ... well, there certainlywill be rumors now she’s printed that.”

He heaved a deep sigh. “Molly, I’m going to have to gointo the office; this is going to take some smoothingover.”

“I’ll come with you, Father,” said Percy importantly.“Mr. Crouch will need all hands on deck. And I cangive him my cauldron report in person.”

He bustled out of the kitchen. Mrs. Weasley lookedmost upset.

“Arthur, you’re supposed to be on holiday! This hasn’tgot anything to do with your office; surely they canhandle this without you?”

“I’ve got to go, Molly,” said Mr. Weasley. “I’ve madethings worse. I’ll just change into my robes and I’ll beoff. ...”

“Mrs. Weasley,” said Harry suddenly, unable tocontain himself, “Hedwig hasn’t arrived with a letterfor me, has she?”

Page | 163

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Hedwig, dear?” said Mrs. Weasley distractedly. “No ...no, there hasn’t been any post at all.”

Ron and Hermione looked curiously at Harry. With ameaningful look at both of them he said, “All right if Igo and dump my stuff in your room, Ron?”

“Yeah ... think I will too,” said Ron at once.“Hermione?”

“Yes,” she said quickly, and the three of themmarched out of the kitchen and up the stairs.

“What’s up, Harry?” said Ron, the moment they hadclosed the door of the attic room behind them.

“There’s something I haven’t told you,” Harry said.

“On Saturday morning, I woke up with my scarhurting again.”

Ron’s and Hermione’s reactions were almost exactlyas Harry had imagined them back in his bedroom onPrivet Drive. Hermione gasped and started makingsuggestions at once, mentioning a number ofreference books, and everybody from AlbusDumbledore to Madam Pomfrey, the Hogwarts nurse.Ron simply looked dumbstruck.

“But — he wasn’t there, was he? You-Know-Who? Imean — last time your scar kept hurting, he was atHogwarts, wasn’t he?”

“I’m sure he wasn’t on Privet Drive,” said Harry. “But Iwas dreaming about him ... him and Peter — youknow, Wormtail. I can’t remember all of it now, butthey were plotting to kill ... someone.”

Page | 164

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He had teetered for a moment on the verge of saying“me,” but couldn’t bring himself to make Hermionelook any more horrified than she already did.

“It was only a dream,” said Ron bracingly. “Just anightmare.”

“Yeah, but was it, though?” said Harry, turning tolook out of the window at the brightening sky. “It’sweird, isn’t it? ... My scar hurts, and three days laterthe Death Eaters are on the march, and Voldemort’ssign’s up in the sky again.”

“Don’t — say — his — name!” Ron hissed throughgritted teeth.

“And remember what Professor Trelawney said?”

Harry went on, ignoring Ron. “At the end of lastyear?”

Professor Trelawney was their Divination teacher atHogwarts. Hermione’s terrified look vanished as shelet out a derisive snort.

“Oh Harry, you aren’t going to pay attention toanything that old fraud says?”

“You weren’t there,” said Harry. “You didn’t hear her.This time was different. I told you, she went into atrance — a real one. And she said the Dark Lordwould rise again ... greater and more terrible than everbefore ... and he’d manage it because his servant wasgoing to go back to him ... and that night Wormtailescaped.”

There was a silence in which Ron fidgetedabsentmindedly with a hole in his Chudley Cannonsbedspread.

Page | 165

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Why were you asking if Hedwig had come, Harry?”Hermione asked. “Are you expecting a letter?”

“I told Sirius about my scar,” said Harry, shrugging.“I’m waiting for his answer.”

“Good thinking!” said Ron, his expression clearing. “Ibet Sirius’ll know what to do!”

“I hoped he’d get back to me quickly,” said Harry.

“But we don’t know where Sirius is ... he could be inAfrica or somewhere, couldn’t he?” said Hermionereasonably. “Hedwig’s not going to manage thatjourney in a few days.”

“Yeah, I know,” said Harry, but there was a leadenfeeling in his stomach as he looked out of the windowat the Hedwig-free sky.

“Come and have a game of Quidditch in the orchard,Harry,” said Ron. “Come on — three on three, Bill andCharlie and Fred and George will play. ... You can tryout the Wronski Feint. ...”

“Ron,” said Hermione, in an I-don’t-think-you’re-being-very-sensitive sort of voice, “Harry doesn’t wantto play Quidditch right now. ... He’s worried, and he’stired. ... We all need to go to bed. ...”

“Yeah, I want to play Quidditch,” said Harrysuddenly. “Hang on, I’ll get my Firebolt.”

Hermione left the room, muttering something thatsounded very much like “Boys.”

k k k

Page | 166

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Neither Mr. Weasley nor Percy was at home muchover the following week. Both left the house eachmorning before the rest of the family got up, andreturned well after dinner every night.

“It’s been an absolute uproar,” Percy told themimportantly the Sunday evening before they were dueto return to Hogwarts. “I’ve been putting out fires allweek. People keep sending Howlers, and of course, ifyou don’t open a Howler straight away, it explodes.Scorch marks all over my desk and my best quillreduced to cinders.”

“Why are they all sending Howlers?” asked Ginny,who was mending her copy of One Thousand MagicalHerbs and Fungi with Spellotape on the rug in front ofthe living room fire.

“Complaining about security at the World Cup,” saidPercy. “They want compensation for their ruinedproperty. Mundungus Fletcher’s put in a claim for atwelve-bedroomed tent with en-suite Jacuzzi, but I’vegot his number. I know for a fact he was sleepingunder a cloak propped on sticks.”

Mrs. Weasley glanced at the grandfather clock in thecorner. Harry liked this clock. It was completelyuseless if you wanted to know the time, but otherwisevery informative. It had nine golden hands, and eachof them was engraved with one of the Weasley family’snames. There were no numerals around the face, butdescriptions of where each family member might be.“Home,” “school,” and “work” were there, but therewas also “traveling,” “lost,” “hospital,” “prison,” and,in the position where the number twelve would be ona normal clock, “mortal peril.”

Eight of the hands were currently pointing to the“home” position, but Mr. Weasley’s, which was the

Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

longest, was still pointing to “work.” Mrs. Weasleysighed.

“Your father hasn’t had to go into the office onweekends since the days of You-Know-Who,” she said.“They’re working him far too hard. His dinner’s goingto be mined if he doesn’t come home soon.”

“Well, Father feels he’s got to make up for his mistakeat the match, doesn’t he?” said Percy. “If truth betold, he was a tad unwise to make a public statementwithout clearing it with his Head of Department first

“Don’t you dare blame your father for what thatwretched Skeeter woman wrote!” said Mrs. Weasley,flaring up at once.

“If Dad hadn’t said anything, old Rita would just havesaid it was disgraceful that nobody from the Ministryhad commented,” said Bill, who was playing chesswith Ron. “Rita Skeeter never makes anyone lookgood. Remember, she interviewed all the Gringotts’Charm Breakers once, and called me ‘a long-hairedpillock’?”

“Well, it is a bit long, dear,” said Mrs. Weasley gently.“If you’d just let me —”

“No, Mum.”

Rain lashed against the living room window.

Hermione was immersed in The Standard Book ofSpells, Grade 4, copies of which Mrs. Weasley hadbought for her, Harry, and Ron in Diagon Alley.Charlie was darning a fireproof balaclava. Harry waspolishing his Firebolt, the broomstick servicing kitHermione had given him for his thirteenth birthdayopen at his feet. Fred and George were sitting in a farPage | 168 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

corner, quills out, talking in whispers, their headsbent over a piece of parchment.

“What are you two up to?” said Mrs. Weasley sharply,her eyes on the twins.

“Homework,” said Fred vaguely.

“Don’t be ridiculous, you’re still on holiday,” said Mrs.Weasley.

“Yeah, we’ve left it a bit late,” said George.

“You’re not by any chance writing out a new orderform, are you?” said Mrs. Weasley shrewdly. “Youwouldn’t be thinking of restarting Weasleys’ WizardWheezes, by any chance?”

“Now, Mum,” said Fred, looking up at her, a painedlook on his face. “If the Hogwarts Express crashedtomorrow, and George and I died, how would you feelto know that the last thing we ever heard from youwas an unfounded accusation?”

Everyone laughed, even Mrs. Weasley.

“Oh your father’s coming!” she said suddenly, lookingup at the clock again.

Mr. Weasley’s hand had suddenly spun from “work”to “traveling”; a second later it had shuddered to ahalt on “home” with the others, and they heard himcalling from the kitchen.

“Coming, Arthur!” called Mrs. Weasley, hurrying outof the room.

Page | 169

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

A few moments later, Mr. Weasley came into thewarm living room carrying his dinner on a tray. Helooked completely exhausted.

“Well, the fat’s really in the fire now,” he told Mrs.Weasley as he sat down in an armchair near thehearth and toyed unenthusiastically with hissomewhat shriveled cauliflower. “Rita Skeeter’s beenferreting around all week, looking for more Ministrymess-ups to report. And now she’s found out aboutpoor old Bertha going missing, so that’ll be theheadline in the Prophet tomorrow. I told Bagman heshould have sent someone to look for her ages ago.”

“Mr. Crouch has been saying it for weeks and weeks,”said Percy swiftly.

“Crouch is very lucky Rita hasn’t found out aboutWinky,” said Mr. Weasley irritably. “There’d be aweek’s worth of headlines in his house-elf beingcaught holding the wand that conjured the DarkMark.”

“I thought we were all agreed that that elf, whileirresponsible, did not conjure the Mark?” said Percyhotly.

“If you ask me, Mr. Crouch is very lucky no one at theDaily Prophet knows how mean he is to elves!” saidHermione angrily.

“Now look here, Hermione!” said Percy. “A high-ranking Ministry official like Mr. Crouch deservesunswerving obedience from his servants —”

“His slave, you mean!” said Hermione, her voice risingpassionately, “because he didn’t pay Winky, did he?”

Page | 170

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I think you’d all better go upstairs and check thatyou’ve packed properly!” said Mrs. Weasley, breakingup the argument. “Come on now, all of you. ...”

Harry repacked his broomstick servicing kit, put hisFirebolt over his shoulder, and went back upstairswith Ron. The rain sounded even louder at the top ofthe house, accompanied by loud whistlings andmoans from the wind, not to mention sporadic howlsfrom the ghoul who lived in the attic. Pigwidgeonbegan twittering and zooming around his cage whenthey entered. The sight of the half-packed trunksseemed to have sent him into a frenzy of excitement.

“Bung him some Owl Treats,” said Ron, throwing apacket across to Harry. “It might shut him up.”

Harry poked a few Owl Treats through the bars ofPigwidgeon’s cage, then turned to his trunk. Hedwig’scage stood next to it, still empty.

“It’s been over a week,” Harry said, looking atHedwig’s deserted perch. “Ron, you don’t reckonSirius has been caught, do you?”

“Nah, it would’ve been in the Daily Prophet,” said Ron.“The Ministry would want to show they’d caughtsomeone, wouldn’t they?”

“Yeah, I suppose. ...”

“Look, here’s the stuff Mum got for you in DiagonAlley. And she’s got some gold out of your vault foryou ... and she’s washed all your socks.”

He heaved a pile of parcels onto Harry’s camp bedand dropped the money bag and a load of socks nextto it. Harry started unwrapping the shopping. Apartfrom The Standard Book of Spells, Grade 4, by

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Miranda Goshawk, he had a handful of new quills, adozen rolls of parchment, and refills for his potion-making kit — he had been running low on spine oflionfish and essence of belladonna. He was just pilingunderwear into his cauldron when Ron made a loudnoise of disgust behind him.

“What is that supposed to be?”

He was holding up something that looked to Harrylike a long, maroon velvet dress. It had a moldy-looking lace frill at the collar and matching lace cuffs.

There was a knock on the door, and Mrs. Weasleyentered, carrying an armful of freshly launderedHogwarts robes.

“Here you are,” she said, sorting them into two piles.“Now, mind you pack them properly so they don’tcrease.”

“Mum, you’ve given me Ginny’s new dress,” said Ron,handing it out to her.

“Of course I haven’t,” said Mrs. Weasley. “That’s foryou. Dress robes.”

“What?” said Ron, looking horror-struck.

“Dress robes!” repeated Mrs. Weasley. “It says on yourschool list that you’re supposed to have dress robesthis year ... robes for formal occasions.”

“You’ve got to be kidding,” said Ron in disbelief. “I’mnot wearing that, no way.”

“Everyone wears them, Ron!” said Mrs. Weasleycrossly. “They’re all like that! Your father’s got somefor smart parties!”

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll go starkers before I put that on,” said Ronstubbornly.

“Don’t be so silly,” said Mrs. Weasley. “You’ve got tohave dress robes, they’re on your list! I got some forHarry too ... show him, Harry. ...”

In some trepidation, Harry opened the last parcel onhis camp bed. It wasn’t as bad as he had expected,however; his dress robes didn’t have any lace on themat all — in fact, they were more or less the same ashis school ones, except that they were bottle greeninstead of black.

“I thought they’d bring out the color of your eyes,dear,” said Mrs. Weasley fondly.

“Well, they’re okay!” said Ron angrily, looking atHarry’s robes. “Why couldn’t I have some like that?”

“Because ... well, I had to get yours secondhand, andthere wasn’t a lot of choice!” said Mrs. Weasley,flushing.

Harry looked away. He would willingly have split allthe money in his Gringotts vault with the Weasleys,but he knew they would never take it.

“I’m never wearing them,” Ron was saying stubbornly.“Never.”

“Fine,” snapped Mrs. Weasley. “Go naked. And, Harry,make sure you get a picture of him. Goodness knowsI could do with a laugh.”

She left the room, slamming the door behind her.There was a funny spluttering noise from behindthem. Pigwidgeon was choking on an overlarge OwlTreat.

Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Why is everything I own rubbish?” said Ronfuriously, striding across the room to unstickPigwidgeon’s beak.

Page | 174

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





ABOARD THE HOGWARTS EXPRESS

There was a definite end-of-the-holidays gloom in theair when Harry awoke next morning. Heavy rain wasstill splattering against the window as he got dressedin jeans and a sweatshirt; they would change intotheir school robes on the Hogwarts Express.

He, Ron, Fred, and George had just reached the first-floor landing on their way down to breakfast, whenMrs. Weasley appeared at the foot of the stairs,looking harassed.

“Arthur!” she called up the staircase. “Arthur! Urgentmessage from the Ministry!”

Harry flattened himself against the wall as Mr.Weasley came clattering past with his robes on back-to-front and hurtled out of sight. When Harry and theothers entered the kitchen, they saw Mrs. Weasleyrummaging anxiously in the drawers — “I’ve got aquill here somewhere!” — and Mr. Weasley bendingover the fire, talking to —

Page | 175

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



Harry shut his eyes hard and opened them again tomake sure that they were working properly.

Amos Diggory’s head was sitting in the middle of theflames like a large, bearded egg. It was talking veryfast, completely unperturbed by the sparks flyingaround it and the flames licking its ears.

"... Muggle neighbors heard bangs and shouting, sothey went and called those what-d’you-call-’ems —please-men. Arthur, you’ve got to get over there —”

“Here!” said Mrs. Weasley breathlessly, pushing apiece of parchment, a bottle of ink, and a crumpledquill into Mr. Weasley’s hands.

“— it’s a real stroke of luck I heard about it,” said Mr.Diggory’s head. “I had to come into the office early tosend a couple of owls, and I found the Improper Useof Magic lot all setting off — if Rita Skeeter gets holdof this one, Arthur —”

“What does Mad-Eye say happened?” asked Mr.Weasley, unscrewing the ink bottle, loading up hisquill, and preparing to take notes.

Mr. Diggory’s head rolled its eyes. “Says he heard anintruder in his yard. Says he was creeping toward thehouse, but was ambushed by his dustbins.”

“What did the dustbins do?” asked Mr. Weasley,scribbling frantically.

“Made one hell of a noise and fired rubbisheverywhere, as far as I can tell,” said Mr. Diggory.“Apparently one of them was still rocketing aroundwhen the please-men turned up —”

Mr. Weasley groaned.

Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“And what about the intruder?”

“Arthur, you know Mad-Eye,” said Mr. Diggory’s head,rolling its eyes again. “Someone creeping into his yardin the dead of night? More likely there’s a very shell-shocked cat wandering around somewhere, covered inpotato peelings. But if the Improper Use of Magic lotget their hands on Mad-Eye, he’s had it — think ofhis record — we’ve got to get him off on a minorcharge, something in your department — what areexploding dustbins worth?”

“Might be a caution,” said Mr. Weasley, still writingvery fast, his brow furrowed. “Mad-Eye didn’t use hiswand? He didn’t actually attack anyone?”

“I’ll bet he leapt out of bed and started jinxingeverything he could reach through the window,” saidMr. Diggory, “but they’ll have a job proving it, therearen’t any casualties.”

“All right, I’m off,” Mr. Weasley said, and he stuffedthe parchment with his notes on it into his pocketand dashed out of the kitchen again.

Mr. Diggory’s head looked around at Mrs. Weasley.

“Sorry about this, Molly,” it said, more calmly,“bothering you so early and everything ... but Arthur’sthe only one who can get Mad-Eye off, and Mad-Eye’ssupposed to be starting his new job today. Why hehad to choose last night ...”

“Never mind, Amos,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Sure youwon’t have a bit of toast or anything before you go?”

“Oh go on, then,” said Mr. Diggory.

Page | 177

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley took a piece of buttered toast from astack on the kitchen table, put it into the fire tongs,and transferred it into Mr. Diggory’s mouth.

“Fanks,” he said in a muffled voice, and then, with asmall pop, vanished.

Harry could hear Mr. Weasley calling hurried good-byes to Bill, Charlie, Percy, and the girls. Within fiveminutes, he was back in the kitchen, his robes on theright way now, dragging a comb through his hair.

“I’d better hurry — you have a good term, boys,” saidMr. Weasley to Harry, Ron, and the twins, fastening acloak over his shoulders and preparing toDisapparate. “Molly, are you going to be all righttaking the kids to King’s Cross?”

“Of course I will,” she said. “You just look after Mad-Eye, we’ll be fine.”

As Mr. Weasley vanished, Bill and Charlie entered thekitchen.

“Did someone say Mad-Eye?” Bill asked. “What’s hebeen up to now?

“He says someone tried to break into his house lastnight,” said Mrs. Weasley.

“Mad-Eye Moody?” said George thoughtfully,spreading marmalade on his toast. “Isn’t he thatnutter —”

“Your father thinks very highly of Mad-Eye Moody,”said Mrs. Weasley sternly.

Page | 178

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, well, Dad collects plugs, doesn’t he?” said Fredquietly as Mrs. Weasley left the room. “Birds of afeather ...”

“Moody was a great wizard in his time,” said Bill.

“He’s an old friend of Dumbledore’s, isn’t he?” saidCharlie.

“Dumbledore’s not what you’d call normal, though, ishe?” said Fred. “I mean, I know he’s a genius andeverything ...”

“Who is Mad-Eye?” asked Harry.

“He’s retired, used to work at the Ministry,” saidCharlie. “I met him once when Dad took me into workwith him. He was an Auror — one of the best ... aDark wizard catcher,” he added, seeing Harry’s blanklook. “Half the cells in Azkaban are full because ofhim. He made himself loads of enemies, though ... thefamilies of people he caught, mainly ... and I heardhe’s been getting really paranoid in his old age.Doesn’t trust anyone anymore. Sees Dark wizardseverywhere.”

Bill and Charlie decided to come and see everyone offat King’s Cross station, but Percy, apologizing mostprofusely, said that he really needed to get to work.

“I just can’t justify taking more time off at themoment,” he told them. “Mr. Crouch is really startingto rely on me.”

“Yeah, you know what, Percy?” said George seriously.“I reckon he’ll know your name soon.”

Page | 179

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley had braved the telephone in the villagepost office to order three ordinary Muggle taxis to takethem into London.

“Arthur tried to borrow Ministry cars for us,” Mrs.Weasley whispered to Harry as they stood in the rain-washed yard, watching the taxi drivers heaving sixheavy Hogwarts trunks into their cars. “But thereweren’t any to spare. ... Oh dear, they don’t lookhappy, do they?”

Harry didn’t like to tell Mrs. Weasley that Muggle taxidrivers rarely transported overexcited owls, andPigwidgeon was making an earsplitting racket. Nordid it help that a number of Filibuster’s FabulousWet-Start, No-Heat Fireworks went off unexpectedlywhen Fred’s trunk sprang open, causing the drivercarrying it to yell with fright and pain as Crookshanksclawed his way up the man’s leg.

The journey was uncomfortable, owing to the fact thatthey were jammed in the back of the taxis with theirtrunks. Crookshanks took quite a while to recoverfrom the fireworks, and by the time they enteredLondon, Harry, Ron, and Hermione were all severelyscratched. They were very relieved to get out at King’sCross, even though the rain was coming down harderthan ever, and they got soaked carrying their trunksacross the busy road and into the station.

Harry was used to getting onto platform nine andthree-quarters by now. It was a simple matter ofwalking straight through the apparently solid barrierdividing platforms nine and ten. The only tricky partwas doing this in an unobtrusive way, so as to avoidattracting Muggle attention. They did it in groupstoday; Harry, Ron, and Hermione (the mostconspicuous, since they were accompanied byPigwidgeon and Crookshanks) went first; they leanedPage | 180 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

casually against the barrier, chatting unconcernedly,and slid sideways through it ... and as they did so,platform nine and three-quarters materialized in frontof them.

The Hogwarts Express, a gleaming scarlet steamengine, was already there, clouds of steam billowingfrom it, through which the many Hogwarts studentsand parents on the platform appeared like darkghosts. Pigwidgeon became noisier than ever inresponse to the hooting of many owls through themist. Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off to find seats,and were soon stowing their luggage in acompartment halfway along the train. They thenhopped back down onto the platform to say good-byeto Mrs. Weasley, Bill, and Charlie.

“I might be seeing you all sooner than you think,”said Charlie, grinning, as he hugged Ginny good-bye.

“Why?” said Fred keenly.

“You’ll see,” said Charlie. “Just don’t tell Percy Imentioned it ... it’s ‘classified information, until suchtime as the Ministry sees fit to release it,’ after all.”

“Yeah, I sort of wish I were back at Hogwarts thisyear,” said Bill, hands in his pockets, looking almostwistfully at the train.

“Why?” said George impatiently.

“You’re going to have an interesting year,” said Bill,his eyes twinkling. “I might even get time off to comeand watch a bit of it. ...”

“A bit of what?” said Ron.

Page | 181

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But at that moment, the whistle blew, and Mrs.Weasley chivvied them toward the train doors.

“Thanks for having us to stay, Mrs. Weasley,” saidHermione as they climbed on board, closed the door,and leaned out of the window to talk to her.

“Yeah, thanks for everything, Mrs. Weasley,” saidHarry.

“Oh it was my pleasure, dears,” said Mrs. Weasley.“Td invite you for Christmas, but ... well, I expectyou’re all going to want to stay at Hogwarts, whatwith ... one thing and another.”

“Mum!” said Ron irritably. “What d’you three knowthat we don’t?”

“You’ll find out this evening, I expect,” said Mrs.Weasley, smiling. “It’s going to be very exciting —mind you, I’m very glad they’ve changed the rules —”

“What rules?” said Harry, Ron, Fred, and Georgetogether.

“I’m sure Professor Dumbledore will tell you. ... Now,behave, won’t you? Won’t you, Fred? And you,George?”

The pistons hissed loudly and the train began tomove.

“Tell us what’s happening at Hogwarts!” Fredbellowed out of the window as Mrs. Weasley, Bill, andCharlie sped away from them. “What rules are theychanging?”

Page | 182

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But Mrs. Weasley only smiled and waved. Before thetrain had rounded the corner, she, Bill, and Charliehad Disapparated.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione went back to theircompartment. The thick rain splattering the windowsmade it very difficult to see out of them. Ron undidhis trunk, pulled out his maroon dress robes, andflung them over Pigwidgeon’s cage to muffle hishooting.

“Bagman wanted to tell us what’s happening atHogwarts,” he said grumpily, sitting down next toHarry. “At the World Cup, remember? But my ownmother won’t say. Wonder what —”

“Shh!” Hermione whispered suddenly, pressing herfinger to her lips and pointing toward thecompartment next to theirs. Harry and Ron listened,and heard a familiar drawling voice drifting inthrough the open door.

"... Father actually considered sending me toDurmstrang rather than Hogwarts, you know. Heknows the headmaster, you see. Well, you know hisopinion of Dumbledore — the man’s such aMudblood-lover — and Durmstrang doesn’t admitthat sort of riffraff. But Mother didn’t like the idea ofme going to school so far away. Father saysDurmstrang takes a far more sensible line thanHogwarts about the Dark Arts. Durmstrang studentsactually learn them, not just the defense rubbish wedo. ...”

Hermione got up, tiptoed to the compartment door,and slid it shut, blocking out Malfoy’s voice.

Page | 183

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“So he thinks Durmstrang would have suited him,does he?” she said angrily. “I wish he had gone, thenwe wouldn’t have to put up with him.”

“Durmstrang’s another wizarding school?” said Harry.

“Yes,” said Hermione sniffily, “and it’s got a horriblereputation. According to An Appraisal of MagicalEducation in Europe, it puts a lot of emphasis on theDark Arts.”

“I think I’ve heard of it,” said Ron vaguely. “Where isit? What country?”

“Well, nobody knows, do they?” said Hermione,raising her eyebrows.

“Er — why not?” said Harry.

“There’s traditionally been a lot of rivalry between allthe magic schools. Durmstrang and Beauxbatons liketo conceal their whereabouts so nobody can stealtheir secrets,” said Hermione matter-of-factly.

“Come off it,” said Ron, starting to laugh.“Durmstrang’s got to be about the same size asHogwarts — how are you going to hide a great bigcastle?”

“But Hogwarts is hidden,” said Hermione, in surprise.“Everyone knows that ... well, everyone who’s readHogwarts, A History, anyway.”

“Just you, then,” said Ron. “So go on — how d’youhide a place like Hogwarts?”

“It’s bewitched,” said Hermione. “If a Muggle looks atit, all they see is a moldering old ruin with a sign over

Page | 184

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the entrance saying DANGER, DO NOT ENTER,UNSAFE.”

“So Durmstrangll just look like a min to an outsidertoo?”

“Maybe,” said Hermione, shrugging, “or it might haveMuggle-repelling charms on it, like the World Cupstadium. And to keep foreign wizards from finding it,they’ll have made it Unplottable —”

“Come again?”

“Well, you can enchant a building so it’s impossible toplot on a map, can’t you?”

“Er ... if you say so,” said Harry.

“But I think Durmstrang must be somewhere in thefar north,” said Hermione thoughtfully. “Somewherevery cold, because they’ve got fur capes as part oftheir uniforms.”

“Ah, think of the possibilities,” said Ron dreamily. “Itwould’ve been so easy to push Malfoy off a glacier andmake it look like an accident. ... Shame his motherlikes him. ...”

The rain became heavier and heavier as the trainmoved farther north. The sky was so dark and thewindows so steamy that the lanterns were lit bymidday. The lunch trolley came rattling along thecorridor, and Harry bought a large stack of CauldronCakes for them to share.

Several of their friends looked in on them as theafternoon progressed, including Seamus Finnigan,Dean Thomas, and Neville Longbottom, a round-faced, extremely forgetful boy who had been brought

Page | 185 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

up by his formidable witch of a grandmother. Seamuswas still wearing his Ireland rosette. Some of itsmagic seemed to be wearing off now; it was stillsqueaking “Troy — Mullet — Moran\” but in a veryfeeble and exhausted sort of way. After half an houror so, Hermione, growing tired of the endlessQuidditch talk, buried herself once more in TheStandard Book of Spells, Grade 4, and started tryingto learn a Summoning Charm.

Neville listened jealously to the others’ conversationas they relived the Cup match.

“Gran didn’t want to go,” he said miserably. “Wouldn’tbuy tickets. It sounded amazing though.”

“It was,” said Ron. “Look at this, Neville. ...”

He rummaged in his trunk up in the luggage rack andpulled out the miniature figure of Viktor Krum.

“Oh wow,” said Neville enviously as Ron tipped Krumonto his pudgy hand.

“We saw him right up close, as well,” said Ron. “Wewere in the Top Box —”

“For the first and last time in your life, Weasley.”

Draco Malfoy had appeared in the doorway. Behindhim stood Crabbe and Goyle, his enormous, thuggishcronies, both of whom appeared to have grown atleast a foot during the summer. Evidently they hadoverheard the conversation through the compartmentdoor, which Dean and Seamus had left ajar.

“Don’t remember asking you to join us, Malfoy,” saidHarry coolly.

Page | 186

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Weasley ... what is that?” said Malfoy, pointing atPigwidgeon’s cage. A sleeve of Ron’s dress robes wasdangling from it, swaying with the motion of the train,the moldy lace cuff very obvious.

Ron made to stuff the robes out of sight, but Malfoywas too quick for him; he seized the sleeve andpulled.

“Look at this!” said Malfoy in ecstasy, holding upRon’s robes and showing Crabbe and Goyle, “Weasley,you weren’t thinking of wearing these, were you? Imean — they were very fashionable in about eighteenninety. ...”

“Eat dung, Malfoy!” said Ron, the same color as thedress robes as he snatched them back out of Malfoy’sgrip. Malfoy howled with derisive laughter; Crabbeand Goyle guffawed stupidly.

“So ... going to enter, Weasley? Going to try and bringa bit of glory to the family name? There’s moneyinvolved as well, you know ... you’d be able to affordsome decent robes if you won. ...”

“What are you talking about?” snapped Ron.

“Are you going to enter?” Malfoy repeated. “I supposeyou will, Potter? You never miss a chance to show off,do you?”

“Either explain what you’re on about or go away,Malfoy,” said Hermione testily, over the top of TheStandard Book of Spells, Grade 4.

A gleeful smile spread across Malfoy’s pale face.

“Don’t tell me you don’t know?” he said delightedly.“You’ve got a father and brother at the Ministry and

Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

you don’t even know? My God, my father told meabout it ages ago ... heard it from Cornelius Fudge.But then, Father’s always associated with the toppeople at the Ministry. ... Maybe your father’s toojunior to know about it, Weasley ... yes ... theyprobably don’t talk about important stuff in front ofhim. ...”

Laughing once more, Malfoy beckoned to Crabbe andGoyle, and the three of them disappeared.

Ron got to his feet and slammed the slidingcompartment door so hard behind them that the glassshattered.

“Ronl” said Hermione reproachfully, and she pulledout her wand, muttered “ReparoV’ and the glassshards flew back into a single pane and back into thedoor.

“Well ... making it look like he knows everything andwe don’t. ...” Ron snarled. “ ‘Father’s alwaysassociated with the top people at the Ministry.’... Dadcould’ve got a promotion any time ... he just likes itwhere he is. ...”

“Of course he does,” said Hermione quietly. “Don’t letMalfoy get to you, Ron —”

“Him! Get to me!? As if!” said Ron, picking up one ofthe remaining Cauldron Cakes and squashing it intoa pulp.

Ron’s bad mood continued for the rest of the journey.He didn’t talk much as they changed into their schoolrobes, and was still glowering when the HogwartsExpress slowed down at last and finally stopped inthe pitch-darkness of Hogsmeade station.

Page | 188

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

As the train doors opened, there was a rumble ofthunder overhead. Hermione bundled upCrookshanks in her cloak and Ron left his dressrobes over Pigwidgeon as they left the train, headsbent and eyes narrowed against the downpour. Therain was now coming down so thick and fast that itwas as though buckets of ice-cold water were beingemptied repeatedly over their heads.

“Hi, Hagrid!” Harry yelled, seeing a gigantic silhouetteat the far end of the platform.

“All righ’, Harry?” Hagrid bellowed back, waving. “Seeyeh at the feast if we don’ drown!”

First years traditionally reached Hogwarts Castle bysailing across the lake with Hagrid.

“Oooh, I wouldn’t fancy crossing the lake in thisweather,” said Hermione fervently, shivering as theyinched slowly along the dark platform with the rest ofthe crowd. A hundred horseless carriages stoodwaiting for them outside the station. Harry, Ron,Hermione, and Neville climbed gratefully into one ofthem, the door shut with a snap, and a few momentslater, with a great lurch, the long procession ofcarriages was rumbling and splashing its way up thetrack toward Hogwarts Castle.

Page | 189

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE TRIWIZARD TOURNAMENT

Through the gates, flanked with statues of wingedboars, and up the sweeping drive the carriagestrundled, swaying dangerously in what was fastbecoming a gale. Leaning against the window, Harrycould see Hogwarts coming nearer, its many lightedwindows blurred and shimmering behind the thickcurtain of rain. Lightning flashed across the sky astheir carriage came to a halt before the great oak frontdoors, which stood at the top of a flight of stone steps.People who had occupied the carriages in front werealready hurrying up the stone steps into the castle.Harry, Ron, Hermione, and Neville jumped down fromtheir carriage and dashed up the steps too, looking uponly when they were safely inside the cavernous,torch-lit entrance hall, with its magnificent marblestaircase.

“Blimey,” said Ron, shaking his head and sendingwater everywhere, “if that keeps up the lake’s going tooverflow. I’m soak — ARRGH!”

Page | 190

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

A large, red, water-filled balloon had dropped fromout of the ceiling onto Ron’s head and exploded.Drenched and sputtering, Ron staggered sidewaysinto Harry, just as a second water bomb dropped —narrowly missing Hermione, it burst at Harry’s feet,sending a wave of cold water over his sneakers intohis socks. People all around them shrieked andstarted pushing one another in their efforts to get outof the line of fire. Harry looked up and saw, floatingtwenty feet above them, Peeves the Poltergeist, a littleman in a bell-covered hat and orange bow tie, hiswide, malicious face contorted with concentration ashe took aim again.

“PEEVES!” yelled an angry voice. “Peeves, come downhere at ONCE!”

Professor McGonagall, Deputy Headmistress andhead of Gryffindor House, had come dashing out ofthe Great Hall; she skidded on the wet floor andgrabbed Hermione around the neck to stop herselffrom falling.

“Ouch — sorry, Miss Granger —”

“That’s all right, Professor!” Hermione gasped,massaging her throat.

“Peeves, get down here NOW!” barked ProfessorMcGonagall, straightening her pointed hat andglaring upward through her square-rimmedspectacles.

“Not doing nothing!” cackled Peeves, lobbing a waterbomb at several fifth-year girls, who screamed anddived into the Great Hall. “Already wet, aren’t they?Little squirts! Wheeeeeeeeee!” And he aimed anotherbomb at a group of second years who had justarrived.

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I shall call the headmaster!” shouted ProfessorMcGonagall. “I’m warning you, Peeves —”

Peeves stuck out his tongue, threw the last of hiswater bombs into the air, and zoomed off up themarble staircase, cackling insanely.

“Well, move along, then!” said Professor McGonagallsharply to the bedraggled crowd. “Into the Great Hall,come on!”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione slipped and slid across theentrance hall and through the double doors on theright, Ron muttering furiously under his breath as hepushed his sopping hair off his face.

The Great Hall looked its usual splendid self,decorated for the start-of-term feast. Golden platesand goblets gleamed by the light of hundreds andhundreds of candles, floating over the tables inmidair. The four long House tables were packed withchattering students; at the top of the Hall, the staffsat along one side of a fifth table, facing their pupils.

It was much warmer in here. Harry, Ron, andHermione walked past the Slytherins, theRavenclaws, and the Hufflepuffs, and sat down withthe rest of the Gryffindors at the far side of the Hall,next to Nearly Headless Nick, the Gryffindor ghost.Pearly white and semitransparent, Nick was dressedtonight in his usual doublet, but with a particularlylarge ruff, which served the dual purpose of lookingextra-festive, and insuring that his head didn’t wobbletoo much on his partially severed neck.

“Good evening,” he said, beaming at them.

“Says who?” said Harry, taking off his sneakers andemptying them of water. “Hope they hurry up with theSorting. I’m starving.”

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The Sorting of the new students into Houses tookplace at the start of every school year, but by anunlucky combination of circumstances, Harry hadn’tbeen present at one since his own. He was quitelooking forward to it. Just then, a highly excited,breathless voice called down the table.

“Hiya, Harry!”

It was Colin Creevey, a third year to whom Harry wassomething of a hero.

“Hi, Colin,” said Harry warily.

“Harry, guess what? Guess what, Harry? My brother’sstarting! My brother Dennis!”

“Er — good,” said Harry.

“He’s really excited!” said Colin, practically bouncingup and down in his seat. “I just hope he’s inGryffindor! Keep your fingers crossed, eh, Harry?”

“Er — yeah, all right,” said Harry. He turned back toHermione, Ron, and Nearly Headless Nick. “Brothersand sisters usually go in the same Houses, don’tthey?” he said. He was judging by the Weasleys, allseven of whom had been put into Gryffindor.

“Oh no, not necessarily,” said Hermione. “ParvatiPatil’s twin’s in Ravenclaw, and they’re identical.You’d think they’d be together, wouldn’t you?”

Harry looked up at the staff table. There seemed to berather more empty seats there than usual. Hagrid, ofcourse, was still fighting his way across the lake withthe first years; Professor McGonagall was presumablysupervising the drying of the entrance hall floor, but

Page | 193

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

there was another empty chair too, and Harrycouldn’t think who else was missing.

“Where’s the new Defense Against the Dark Artsteacher?” said Hermione, who was also looking up atthe teachers.

They had never yet had a Defense Against the DarkArts teacher who had lasted more than three terms.Harry’s favorite by far had been Professor Lupin, whohad resigned last year. He looked up and down thestaff table. There was definitely no new face there.

“Maybe they couldn’t get anyone!” said Hermione,looking anxious.

Harry scanned the table more carefully. Tiny littleProfessor Flitwick, the Charms teacher, was sitting ona large pile of cushions beside Professor Sprout, theHerbology teacher, whose hat was askew over herflyaway gray hair. She was talking to ProfessorSinistra of the Astronomy department. On ProfessorSinistra’s other side was the sallow-faced, hook-nosed, greasy-haired Potions master, Snape —

Harry’s least favorite person at Hogwarts. Harry’sloathing of Snape was matched only by Snape’shatred of him, a hatred which had, if possible,intensified last year, when Harry had helped Siriusescape right under Snape’s overlarge nose — Snapeand Sirius had been enemies since their own schooldays.

On Snape’s other side was an empty seat, whichHarry guessed was Professor McGonagall’s. Next to it,and in the very center of the table, sat ProfessorDumbledore, the headmaster, his sweeping silver hairand beard shining in the candlelight, his magnificentdeep green robes embroidered with many stars andmoons. The tips of Dumbledore’s long, thin fingersPage | 194 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

were together and he was resting his chin upon them,staring up at the ceiling through his half-moonspectacles as though lost in thought. Harry glancedup at the ceiling too. It was enchanted to look like thesky outside, and he had never seen it look thisstormy. Black and purple clouds were swirling acrossit, and as another thunderclap sounded outside, afork of lightning flashed across it.

“Oh hurry up,” Ron moaned, beside Harry, “I couldeat a hippogriff.”

The words were no sooner out of his mouth than thedoors of the Great Hall opened and silence fell.Professor McGonagall was leading a long line of firstyears up to the top of the Hall. If Harry, Ron, andHermione were wet, it was nothing to how these firstyears looked. They appeared to have swum across thelake rather than sailed. All of them were shiveringwith a combination of cold and nerves as they filedalong the staff table and came to a halt in a linefacing the rest of the school — all of them except thesmallest of the lot, a boy with mousy hair, who waswrapped in what Harry recognized as Hagrid’smoleskin overcoat. The coat was so big for him that itlooked as though he were draped in a furry blackcircus tent. His small face protruded from over thecollar, looking almost painfully excited. When he hadlined up with his terrified-looking peers, he caughtColin Creevey’s eye, gave a double thumbs-up, andmouthed, I fell in the lake\ He looked positivelydelighted about it.

Professor McGonagall now placed a three-legged stoolon the ground before the first years and, on top of it,an extremely old, dirty, patched wizard’s hat. The firstyears stared at it. So did everyone else. For amoment, there was silence. Then a long tear near the

Page | 195

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

brim opened wide like a mouth, and the hat brokeinto song:

A thousand years or more ago,

When I was newly sewn,

There lived four wizards of renown,

Whose names are still well known:

Bold Gryffindor, from wild moor,

Fair Ravenclaw, from glen,

Sweet Hufflepuff, from valley broad,

Shrewd Slytherin, from fen.

They shared a wish, a hope, a dream,

They hatched a daring planTo educate young sorcerersThus Hogwarts School began.

Now each of these four foundersFormed their own house, for eachDid value different virtuesIn the ones they had to teach.

By Gryffindor, the bravest werePrized far beyond the rest;

For Ravenclaw, the cleverestWould always be the best;

For Hufflepuff, hard workers wereMost worthy of admission;

And power-hungry SlytherinLoved those of great ambition.

While still alive they did divideTheir favorites from the throng,

Yet how to pick the worthy onesWhen they were dead and gone?

Twas Gryffindor who found the way,

He whipped me off his head

The founders put some brains in me

So I could choose instead!

Now slip me snug about your ears,

I’ve never yet been wrong,

111 have a look inside your mindAnd tell where you belong!

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The Great Hall rang with applause as the Sorting Hatfinished.

“That’s not the song it sang when it Sorted us,” saidHarry, clapping along with everyone else.

“Sings a different one every year,” said Ron. “It’s gotto be a pretty boring life, hasn’t it, being a hat? Isuppose it spends all year making up the next one.”

Professor McGonagall was now unrolling a large scrollof parchment.

“When I call out your name, you will put on the hatand sit on the stool,” she told the first years. “Whenthe hat announces your House, you will go and sit atthe appropriate table.

“Ackerley, Stewart!”

A boy walked forward, visibly trembling from head tofoot, picked up the Sorting Hat, put it on, and satdown on the stool.

“RAVENCLAW!” shouted the hat.

Stewart Ackerley took off the hat and hurried into aseat at the Ravenclaw table, where everyone wasapplauding him. Harry caught a glimpse of Cho, theRavenclaw Seeker, cheering Stewart Ackerley as hesat down. For a fleeting second, Harry had a strangedesire to join the Ravenclaw table too.

“Baddock, Malcolm!”

“SLYTHERIN!”

The table on the other side of the hall erupted withcheers; Harry could see Malfoy clapping as Baddock

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

joined the Slytherins. Harry wondered whetherBaddock knew that Slytherin House had turned outmore Dark witches and wizards than any other. Fredand George hissed Malcolm Baddock as he sat down.

“Branstone, Eleanor!”

“HUFFLEPUFF!”

“Cauldwell, Owen!”

“HUFFLEPUFF!”

“Creevey, Dennis!”

Tiny Dennis Creevey staggered forward, tripping overHagrid’s moleskin, just as Hagrid himself sidled intothe Hall through a door behind the teachers’ table.About twice as tall as a normal man, and at leastthree times as broad, Hagrid, with his long, wild,tangled black hair and beard, looked slightly alarming— a misleading impression, for Harry, Ron, andHermione knew Hagrid to possess a very kind nature.He winked at them as he sat down at the end of thestaff table and watched Dennis Creevey putting onthe Sorting Hat. The rip at the brim opened wide —

“GRYFFINDOR!” the hat shouted.

Hagrid clapped along with the Gryffindors as DennisCreevey, beaming widely, took off the hat, placed itback on the stool, and hurried over to join hisbrother.

“Colin, I fell in!” he said shrilly, throwing himself intoan empty seat. “It was brilliant! And something in thewater grabbed me and pushed me back in the boat!”

Page | 198

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Cool!” said Colin, just as excitedly. “It was probablythe giant squid, Dennis!”

“Wow\” said Dennis, as though nobody in theirwildest dreams could hope for more than beingthrown into a storm-tossed, fathoms-deep lake, andpushed out of it again by a giant sea monster.

“Dennis! Dennis! See that boy down there? The onewith the black hair and glasses? See him? Know whohe is, Dennis?”

Harry looked away, staring very hard at the SortingHat, now Sorting Emma Dobbs.

The Sorting continued; boys and girls with varyingdegrees of fright on their faces moving one by one tothe three-legged stool, the line dwindling slowly asProfessor McGonagall passed the L’s.

“Oh hurry up,” Ron moaned, massaging his stomach.

“Now, Ron, the Sorting’s much more important thanfood,” said Nearly Headless Nick as “Madley, Laura!”became a Hufflepuff.

“ ’Course it is, if you’re dead,” snapped Ron.

“I do hope this year’s batch of Gryffindors are up toscratch,” said Nearly Headless Nick, applauding as“McDonald, Natalie!” joined the Gryffindor table. “Wedon’t want to break our winning streak, do we?”

Gryffindor had won the Inter-House Championshipfor the last three years in a row.

“Pritchard, Graham!”

“SLYTHERIN!”

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Quirke, Orla!”

“RAVENCLAW!”

And finally, with “Whitby, Kevin!” (“HUFFLEPUFF!”),the Sorting ended. Professor McGonagall picked upthe hat and the stool and carried them away.

“About time,” said Ron, seizing his knife and fork andlooking expectantly at his golden plate.

Professor Dumbledore had gotten to his feet. He wassmiling around at the students, his arms opened widein welcome.

“I have only two words to say to you,” he told them,his deep voice echoing around the Hall. “Tuck in.”

“Hear, hear!” said Harry and Ron loudly as the emptydishes filled magically before their eyes.

Nearly Headless Nick watched mournfully as Harry,Ron, and Hermione loaded their own plates.

“Aaah, ’at’s be’er,” said Ron, with his mouth full ofmashed potato.

“You’re lucky there’s a feast at all tonight, you know,”said Nearly Headless Nick. “There was trouble in thekitchens earlier.”

“Why? Wha’ ’appened?” said Harry, through a sizablechunk of steak.

“Peeves, of course,” said Nearly Headless Nick,shaking his head, which wobbled dangerously. Hepulled his ruff a little higher up on his neck. “Theusual argument, you know. He wanted to attend thefeast — well, it’s quite out of the question, you knowPage | 200 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

what he’s like, utterly uncivilized, can’t see a plate offood without throwing it. We held a ghost’s council —the Fat Friar was all for giving him the chance — butmost wisely, in my opinion, the Bloody Baron put hisfoot down.”

The Bloody Baron was the Slytherin ghost, a gauntand silent specter covered in silver bloodstains. Hewas the only person at Hogwarts who could reallycontrol Peeves.

“Yeah, we thought Peeves seemed hacked off aboutsomething,” said Ron darkly. “So what did he do inthe kitchens?”

“Oh the usual,” said Nearly Headless Nick, shrugging.“Wreaked havoc and mayhem. Pots and panseverywhere. Place swimming in soup. Terrified thehouse-elves out of their wits —”

Clang.

Hermione had knocked over her golden goblet.Pumpkin juice spread steadily over the tablecloth,staining several feet of white linen orange, butHermione paid no attention.

“There are house-elves here?” she said, staring,horror-struck, at Nearly Headless Nick. “Here atHogwarts?”

“Certainly,” said Nearly Headless Nick, lookingsurprised at her reaction. “The largest number in anydwelling in Britain, I believe. Over a hundred.”

“I’ve never seen one!” said Hermione.

“Well, they hardly ever leave the kitchen by day, dothey?” said Nearly Headless Nick. “They come out at

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

night to do a bit of cleaning ... see to the fires and soon. ... I mean, you’re not supposed to see them, areyou? That’s the mark of a good house-elf, isn’t it, thatyou don’t know it’s there?”

Hermione stared at him.

“But they get paid?” she said. “They get holidays,don’t they? And — and sick leave, and pensions, andeverything?”

Nearly Headless Nick chortled so much that his ruffslipped and his head flopped off, dangling on the inchor so of ghostly skin and muscle that still attached itto his neck.

“Sick leave and pensions?” he said, pushing his headback onto his shoulders and securing it once morewith his ruff. “House-elves don’t want sick leave andpensions!”

Hermione looked down at her hardly touched plate offood, then put her knife and fork down upon it andpushed it away from her.

“Oh c’mon, ’Er-my-knee,” said Ron, accidentallyspraying Harry with bits of Yorkshire pudding. “Oops— sorry, ’Arry —” He swallowed. “You won’t get themsick leave by starving yourself!”

“Slave labor,” said Hermione, breathing hard throughher nose. “That’s what made this dinner. Slave labor.”

And she refused to eat another bite.

The rain was still drumming heavily against the high,dark glass. Another clap of thunder shook thewindows, and the stormy ceiling flashed, illuminating

Page | 202

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the golden plates as the remains of the first coursevanished and were replaced, instantly, with puddings.

“Treacle tart, Hermione!” said Ron, deliberatelywafting its smell toward her. “Spotted dick, look!Chocolate gateau!”

But Hermione gave him a look so reminiscent ofProfessor McGonagall that he gave up.

When the puddings too had been demolished, and thelast crumbs had faded off the plates, leaving themsparkling clean, Albus Dumbledore got to his feetagain. The buzz of chatter filling the Hall ceasedalmost at once, so that only the howling wind andpounding rain could be heard.

“So!” said Dumbledore, smiling around at them all.“Now that we are all fed and watered,” (“Hmph!” saidHermione) “I must once more ask for your attention,while I give out a few notices.

“Mr. Filch, the caretaker, has asked me to tell youthat the list of objects forbidden inside the castle hasthis year been extended to include Screaming Yo-yos,Fanged Frisbees, and Ever-Bashing Boomerangs. Thefull list comprises some four hundred and thirty-seven items, I believe, and can be viewed in Mr.

Filch’s office, if anybody would like to check it.”

The corners of Dumbledore’s mouth twitched. Hecontinued, “As ever, I would like to remind you allthat the forest on the grounds is out-of-bounds tostudents, as is the village of Hogsmeade to all belowthird year.

“It is also my painful duty to inform you that theInter-House Quidditch Cup will not take place thisyear.”

Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What?” Harry gasped. He looked around at Fred andGeorge, his fellow members of the Quidditch team.They were mouthing soundlessly at Dumbledore,apparently too appalled to speak. Dumbledore wenton, “This is due to an event that will be starting inOctober, and continuing throughout the school year,taking up much of the teachers’ time and energy —but I am sure you will all enjoy it immensely. I havegreat pleasure in announcing that this year atHogwarts —”

But at that moment, there was a deafening rumble ofthunder and the doors of the Great Hall banged open.

A man stood in the doorway, leaning upon a longstaff, shrouded in a black traveling cloak. Every headin the Great Hall swiveled toward the stranger,suddenly brightly illuminated by a fork of lightningthat flashed across the ceiling. He lowered his hood,shook out a long mane of grizzled, dark gray hair,then began to walk up toward the teachers’ table.

A dull clunk echoed through the Hall on his everyother step. He reached the end of the top table,turned right, and limped heavily toward Dumbledore.Another flash of lightning crossed the ceiling.Hermione gasped.

The lightning had thrown the man’s face into sharprelief, and it was a face unlike any Harry had everseen. It looked as though it had been carved out ofweathered wood by someone who had only thevaguest idea of what human faces are supposed tolook like, and was none too skilled with a chisel.Every inch of skin seemed to be scarred. The mouthlooked like a diagonal gash, and a large chunk of thenose was missing. But it was the man’s eyes thatmade him frightening.

Page | 204

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

One of them was small, dark, and beady. The otherwas large, round as a coin, and a vivid, electric blue.The blue eye was moving ceaselessly, withoutblinking, and was rolling up, down, and from side toside, quite independently of the normal eye — andthen it rolled right over, pointing into the back of theman’s head, so that all they could see was whiteness.

The stranger reached Dumbledore. He stretched out ahand that was as badly scarred as his face, andDumbledore shook it, muttering words Harry couldn’thear. He seemed to be making some inquiry of thestranger, who shook his head unsmilingly and repliedin an undertone. Dumbledore nodded and gesturedthe man to the empty seat on his right-hand side.

The stranger sat down, shook his mane of dark grayhair out of his face, pulled a plate of sausages towardhim, raised it to what was left of his nose, and sniffedit. He then took a small knife out of his pocket,speared a sausage on the end of it, and began to eat.His normal eye was fixed upon the sausages, but theblue eye was still darting restlessly around in itssocket, taking in the Hall and the students.

“May I introduce our new Defense Against the DarkArts teacher?” said Dumbledore brightly into thesilence. “Professor Moody.”

It was usual for new staff members to be greeted withapplause, but none of the staff or students clappedexcept Dumbledore and Hagrid, who both put theirhands together and applauded, but the sound echoeddismally into the silence, and they stopped fairlyquickly. Everyone else seemed too transfixed byMoody’s bizarre appearance to do more than stare athim.

Page | 205

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Moody?” Harry muttered to Ron. “MacL-Eye Moody?The one your dad went to help this morning?”

“Must be,” said Ron in a low, awed voice.

“What happened to him?” Hermione whispered. “Whathappened to his face?”

“Dunno,” Ron whispered back, watching Moody withfascination.

Moody seemed totally indifferent to his less-than-warm welcome. Ignoring the jug of pumpkin juice infront of him, he reached again into his traveling cloak,pulled out a hip flask, and took a long draught fromit. As he lifted his arm to drink, his cloak was pulled afew inches from the ground, and Harry saw, below thetable, several inches of carved wooden leg, ending in aclawed foot.

Dumbledore cleared his throat.

“As I was saying,” he said, smiling at the sea ofstudents before him, all of whom were still gazingtransfixed at Mad-Eye Moody, “we are to have thehonor of hosting a very exciting event over the comingmonths, an event that has not been held for over acentury. It is my very great pleasure to inform youthat the Triwizard Tournament will be taking place atHogwarts this year.”

“You’re JOKING!” said Fred Weasley loudly.

The tension that had filled the Hall ever since Moody’sarrival suddenly broke. Nearly everyone laughed, andDumbledore chuckled appreciatively.

“I am not joking, Mr. Weasley,” he said, “though nowthat you mention it, I did hear an excellent one over

Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the summer about a troll, a hag, and a leprechaunwho all go into a bar ...”

Professor McGonagall cleared her throat loudly.

“Er — but maybe this is not the time ... no ...” saidDumbledore, “where was I? Ah yes, the TriwizardTournament ... well, some of you will not know whatthis tournament involves, so I hope those who doknow will forgive me for giving a short explanation,and allow their attention to wander freely.

“The Triwizard Tournament was first establishedsome seven hundred years ago as a friendlycompetition between the three largest Europeanschools of wizardry: Hogwarts, Beauxbatons, andDurmstrang. A champion was selected to representeach school, and the three champions competed inthree magical tasks. The schools took it in turns tohost the tournament once every five years, and it wasgenerally agreed to be a most excellent way ofestablishing ties between young witches and wizardsof different nationalities — until, that is, the death tollmounted so high that the tournament wasdiscontinued.”

“Death toll?” Hermione whispered, looking alarmed.But her anxiety did not seem to be shared by themajority of students in the Hall; many of them werewhispering excitedly to one another, and Harryhimself was far more interested in hearing about thetournament than in worrying about deaths that hadhappened hundreds of years ago.

“There have been several attempts over the centuriesto reinstate the tournament,” Dumbledore continued,“none of which has been very successful. However,our own departments of International MagicalCooperation and Magical Games and Sports havePage | 207 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

decided the time is ripe for another attempt. We haveworked hard over the summer to ensure that thistime, no champion will find himself or herself inmortal danger.

“The heads of Beauxbatons and Durmstrang will bearriving with their short-listed contenders in October,and the selection of the three champions will takeplace at Halloween. An impartial judge will decidewhich students are most worthy to compete for theTriwizard Cup, the glory of their school, and athousand Galleons personal prize money.”

“I’m going for it!” Fred Weasley hissed down the table,his face lit with enthusiasm at the prospect of suchglory and riches. He was not the only person whoseemed to be visualizing himself as the Hogwartschampion. At every House table, Harry could seepeople either gazing raptly at Dumbledore, or elsewhispering fervently to their neighbors. But thenDumbledore spoke again, and the Hall quieted oncemore.

“Eager though I know all of you will be to bring theTriwizard Cup to Hogwarts,” he said, “the heads of theparticipating schools, along with the Ministry ofMagic, have agreed to impose an age restriction oncontenders this year. Only students who are of age —that is to say, seventeen years or older — will beallowed to put forward their names for consideration.This” — Dumbledore raised his voice slightly, forseveral people had made noises of outrage at thesewords, and the Weasley twins were suddenly lookingfurious — “is a measure we feel is necessary, giventhat the tournament tasks will still be difficult anddangerous, whatever precautions we take, and it ishighly unlikely that students below sixth and seventhyear will be able to cope with them. I will personallybe ensuring that no underage student hoodwinks ourPage | 208 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

impartial judge into making them Hogwartschampion.” His light blue eyes twinkled as theyflickered over Fred’s and George’s mutinous faces. “Itherefore beg you not to waste your time submittingyourself if you are under seventeen.

“The delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrangwill be arriving in October and remaining with us forthe greater part of this year. I know that you will allextend every courtesy to our foreign guests while theyare with us, and will give your whole-hearted supportto the Hogwarts champion when he or she is selected.And now, it is late, and I know how important it is toyou all to be alert and rested as you enter yourlessons tomorrow morning. Bedtime! Chop chop!”

Dumbledore sat down again and turned to talk toMad-Eye Moody. There was a great scraping andbanging as all the students got to their feet andswarmed toward the double doors into the entrancehall.

“They can’t do that!” said George Weasley, who hadnot joined the crowd moving toward the door, but wasstanding up and glaring at Dumbledore. “We’reseventeen in April, why can’t we have a shot?”

“They’re not stopping me entering,” said Fredstubbornly, also scowling at the top table. “Thechampions’ll get to do all sorts of stuff you’d never beallowed to do normally. And a thousand Galleonsprize money!”

“Yeah,” said Ron, a faraway look on his face. “Yeah, athousand Galleons ...”

“Come on,” said Hermione, “we’ll be the only ones lefthere if you don’t move.”

Page | 209

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry, Ron, Hermione, Fred, and George set off forthe entrance hall, Fred and George debating the waysin which Dumbledore might stop those who wereunder seventeen from entering the tournament.

“Who’s this impartial judge who’s going to decide whothe champions are?” said Harry.

“Dunno,” said Fred, “but it’s them we’ll have to fool. Ireckon a couple of drops of Aging Potion might do it,George. ...”

“Dumbledore knows you’re not of age, though,” saidRon.

“Yeah, but he’s not the one who decides who thechampion is, is he?” said Fred shrewdly. “Sounds tome like once this judge knows who wants to enter,he’ll choose the best from each school and never mindhow old they are. Dumbledore’s trying to stop usgiving our names.”

“People have died, though!” said Hermione in aworried voice as they walked through a doorconcealed behind a tapestry and started up another,narrower staircase.

“Yeah,” said Fred airily, “but that was years ago,wasn’t it? Anyway, where’s the fun without a bit ofrisk? Hey, Ron, what if we find out how to get ’roundDumbledore? Fancy entering?”

“What d’you reckon?” Ron asked Harry. “Be cool toenter, wouldn’t it? But I s’pose they might wantsomeone older. ... Dunno if we’ve learned enough. ...”

“I definitely haven’t,” came Neville’s gloomy voice frombehind Fred and George.

Page | 210

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I expect my gran’d want me to try, though. She’salways going on about how I should be upholding thefamily honor. I’ll just have to — oops. ...”

Neville’s foot had sunk right through a step halfwayup the staircase. There were many of these trickstairs at Hogwarts; it was second nature to most ofthe older students to jump this particular step, butNeville’s memory was notoriously poor. Harry andRon seized him under the armpits and pulled himout, while a suit of armor at the top of the stairscreaked and clanked, laughing wheezily.

“Shut it, you,” said Ron, banging down its visor asthey passed.

They made their way up to the entrance to GryffindorTower, which was concealed behind a large portrait ofa fat lady in a pink silk dress.

“Password?” she said as they approached.

“Balderdash,” said George, “a prefect downstairs toldme.”

The portrait swung forward to reveal a hole in the wallthrough which they all climbed. A crackling firewarmed the circular common room, which was full ofsquashy armchairs and tables. Hermione cast themerrily dancing flames a dark look, and Harrydistinctly heard her mutter “Slave labor,” beforebidding them good night and disappearing throughthe doorway to the girls’ dormitory.

Harry, Ron, and Neville climbed up the last, spiralstaircase until they reached their own dormitory,which was situated at the top of the tower. Five four-poster beds with deep crimson hangings stood againstthe walls, each with its owner’s trunk at the foot.

Page | 211 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

Dean and Seamus were already getting into bed;Seamus had pinned his Ireland rosette to hisheadboard, and Dean had tacked up a poster ofViktor Krum over his bedside table. His old poster ofthe West Ham football team was pinned right next toit.

“Mental,” Ron sighed, shaking his head at thecompletely stationary soccer players.

Harry, Ron, and Neville got into their pajamas andinto bed. Someone — a house-elf, no doubt — hadplaced warming pans between the sheets. It wasextremely comfortable, lying there in bed andlistening to the storm raging outside.

“I might go in for it, you know,” Ron said sleepilythrough the darkness, “if Fred and George find outhow to ... the tournament ... you never know, doyou?”

“S’pose not. ...”

Harry rolled over in bed, a series of dazzling newpictures forming in his mind’s eye. ... He hadhoodwinked the impartial judge into believing he wasseventeen ... he had become Hogwarts champion ...he was standing on the grounds, his arms raised intriumph in front of the whole school, all of whom wereapplauding and screaming ... he had just won theTriwizard Tournament. ... Cho’s face stood outparticularly clearly in the blurred crowd, her faceglowing with admiration. ...

Harry grinned into his pillow, exceptionally glad thatRon couldn’t see what he could.

Page | 212

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





MAD-EYE MOODY

The storm had blown itself out by the followingmorning, though the ceiling in the Great Hall was stillgloomy; heavy clouds of pewter gray swirled overheadas Harry, Ron, and Hermione examined their newcourse schedules at breakfast. A few seats along,

Fred, George, and Lee Jordan were discussingmagical methods of aging themselves and bluffingtheir way into the Triwizard Tournament.

“Today’s not bad ... outside all morning,” said Ron,who was running his finger down the Monday columnof his schedule. “Herbology with the Hufflepuffs andCare of Magical Creatures ... damn it, we’re still withthe Slytherins. ...”

“Double Divination this afternoon,” Harry groaned,looking down. Divination was his least favoritesubject, apart from Potions. Professor Trelawney keptpredicting Harry’s death, which he found extremelyannoying.

Page | 213

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You should have given it up like me, shouldn’t you?”said Hermione briskly, buttering herself some toast.“Then you’d be doing something sensible likeArithmancy.”

“You’re eating again, I notice,” said Ron, watchingHermione adding liberal amounts of jam to her toasttoo.

“I’ve decided there are better ways of making a standabout elf rights,” said Hermione haughtily.

“Yeah ... and you were hungry,” said Ron, grinning.

There was a sudden rustling noise above them, and ahundred owls came soaring through the openwindows carrying the morning mail. Instinctively,Harry looked up, but there was no sign of whiteamong the mass of brown and gray. The owls circledthe tables, looking for the people to whom their lettersand packages were addressed. A large tawny owlsoared down to Neville Longbottom and deposited aparcel into his lap — Neville almost always forgot topack something. On the other side of the Hall DracoMalfoy’s eagle owl had landed on his shoulder,carrying what looked like his usual supply of sweetsand cakes from home. Trying to ignore the sinkingfeeling of disappointment in his stomach, Harryreturned to his porridge. Was it possible thatsomething had happened to Hedwig, and that Siriushadn’t even got his letter?

His preoccupation lasted all the way across thesodden vegetable patch until they arrived ingreenhouse three, but here he was distracted byProfessor Sprout showing the class the ugliest plantsHarry had ever seen. Indeed, they looked less likeplants than thick, black, giant slugs, protrudingvertically out of the soil. Each was squirming slightlyPage | 214 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

and had a number of large, shiny swellings upon it,which appeared to be full of liquid.

“Bubotubers,” Professor Sprout told them briskly.“They need squeezing. You will collect the pus —”

“The what?” said Seamus Finnigan, soundingrevolted.

“Pus, Finnigan, pus,” said Professor Sprout, “and it’sextremely valuable, so don’t waste it. You will collectthe pus, I say, in these bottles. Wear your dragon-hide gloves; it can do funny things to the skin whenundiluted, bubotuber pus.”

Squeezing the bubotubers was disgusting, but oddlysatisfying. As each swelling was popped, a largeamount of thick yellowish-green liquid burst forth,which smelled strongly of petrol. They caught it in thebottles as Professor Sprout had indicated, and by theend of the lesson had collected several pints.

“This’ll keep Madam Pomfrey happy,” said ProfessorSprout, stoppering the last bottle with a cork. “Anexcellent remedy for the more stubborn forms of acne,bubotuber pus. Should stop students resorting todesperate measures to rid themselves of pimples.”

“Like poor Eloise Midgen,” said Hannah Abbott, aHufflepuff, in a hushed voice. “She tried to curse hersoff.”

“Silly girl,” said Professor Sprout, shaking her head.“But Madam Pomfrey fixed her nose back on in theend.”

A booming bell echoed from the castle across the wetgrounds, signaling the end of the lesson, and theclass separated; the Hufflepuffs climbing the stone

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

steps for Transfiguration, and the Gryffindors headingin the other direction, down the sloping lawn towardHagrid’s small wooden cabin, which stood on the edgeof the Forbidden Forest.

Hagrid was standing outside his hut, one hand on thecollar of his enormous black boarhound, Fang. Therewere several open wooden crates on the ground at hisfeet, and Fang was whimpering and straining at hiscollar, apparently keen to investigate the contentsmore closely. As they drew nearer, an odd rattlingnoise reached their ears, punctuated by whatsounded like minor explosions.

“Mornin’!” Hagrid said, grinning at Harry, Ron, andHermione. “Be’er wait fer the Slytherins, they won’want ter miss this — Blast-Ended Skrewts!”

“Come again?” said Ron.

Hagrid pointed down into the crates.

“Eurgh!” squealed Lavender Brown, jumpingbackward.

“Eurgh” just about summed up the Blast-EndedSkrewts in Harry’s opinion. They looked likedeformed, shell-less lobsters, horribly pale and slimy -looking, with legs sticking out in very odd places andno visible heads. There were about a hundred of themin each crate, each about six inches long, crawlingover one another, bumping blindly into the sides ofthe boxes. They were giving off a very powerful smellof rotting fish. Every now and then, sparks would flyout of the end of a skrewt, and with a small phut, itwould be propelled forward several inches.

Page | 216

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“On’y jus’ hatched,” said Hagrid proudly, “so yeh’ll beable ter raise ’em yerselves! Thought we’d make a bitof a project of it!”

“And why would we want to raise them?” said a coldvoice.

The Slytherins had arrived. The speaker was DracoMalfoy. Crabbe and Goyle were chucklingappreciatively at his words.

Hagrid looked stumped at the question.

“I mean, what do they do?” asked Malfoy. “What is thepoint of them?”

Hagrid opened his mouth, apparently thinking hard;there was a few seconds’ pause, then he said roughly,“Tha’s next lesson, Malfoy. Yer jus’ feedin’ ’em today.Now, yeh’ll wan’ ter try ’em on a few diff’rent things —I’ve never had ’em before, not sure what they’ll go fer

— I got ant eggs an’ frog livers an’ a bit o’ grass snake

— just try ’em out with a bit of each.”

“First pus and now this,” muttered Seamus.

Nothing but deep affection for Hagrid could havemade Harry, Ron, and Hermione pick up squelchyhandfuls of frog liver and lower them into the cratesto tempt the Blast-Ended Skrewts. Harry couldn’tsuppress the suspicion that the whole thing wasentirely pointless, because the skrewts didn’t seem tohave mouths.

“Ouch\” yelled Dean Thomas after about ten minutes.“It got me!”

Hagrid hurried over to him, looking anxious.

Page | 217

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Its end exploded!” said Dean angrily, showing Hagrida burn on his hand.

“Ah, yeah, that can happen when they blast off,” saidHagrid, nodding.

“Eurgh!” said Lavender Brown again. “Eurgh, Hagrid,what’s that pointy thing on it?”

“Ah, some of ’em have got stings,” said Hagridenthusiastically (Lavender quickly withdrew her handfrom the box). “I reckon they’re the males. ... ThefemalesVe got sorta sucker things on their bellies. ... Ithink they might be ter suck blood.”

“Well, I can certainly see why we’re trying to keepthem alive,” said Malfoy sarcastically. “Who wouldn’twant pets that can burn, sting, and bite all at once?”

“Just because they’re not very pretty, it doesn’t meanthey’re not useful,” Hermione snapped. “Dragonblood’s amazingly magical, but you wouldn’t want adragon for a pet, would you?”

Harry and Ron grinned at Hagrid, who gave them afurtive smile from behind his bushy beard. Hagridwould have liked nothing better than a pet dragon, asHarry, Ron, and Hermione knew only too well — hehad owned one for a brief period during their firstyear, a vicious Norwegian Ridgeback by the name ofNorbert. Hagrid simply loved monstrous creatures,the more lethal, the better.

“Well, at least the skrewts are small,” said Ron asthey made their way back up to the castle for lunchan hour later.

Page | 218

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“They are now,” said Hermione in an exasperatedvoice, “but once Hagrid’s found out what they eat, Iexpect they’ll be six feet long.”

“Well, that won’t matter if they turn out to cureseasickness or something, will it?” said Ron, grinningslyly at her.

“You know perfectly well I only said that to shutMalfoy up,” said Hermione. “As a matter of fact Ithink he’s right. The best thing to do would be tostamp on the lot of them before they start attackingus all.”

They sat down at the Gryffindor table and helpedthemselves to lamb chops and potatoes. Hermionebegan to eat so fast that Harry and Ron stared at her.

“Er — is this the new stand on elf rights?” said Ron.“You’re going to make yourself puke instead?”

“No,” said Hermione, with as much dignity as shecould muster with her mouth bulging with sprouts. “Ijust want to get to the library.”

“What?” said Ron in disbelief. “Hermione — it’s thefirst day back! We haven’t even got homework yet!”

Hermione shrugged and continued to shovel down herfood as though she had not eaten for days. Then sheleapt to her feet, said, “See you at dinner!” anddeparted at high speed.

When the bell rang to signal the start of afternoonlessons, Harry and Ron set off for North Tower where,at the top of a tightly spiraling staircase, a silverstepladder led to a circular trapdoor in the ceiling,and the room where Professor Trelawney lived.

Page | 219

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The familiar sweet perfume spreading from the firemet their nostrils as they emerged at the top of thestepladder. As ever, the curtains were all closed; thecircular room was bathed in a dim reddish light castby the many lamps, which were all draped withscarves and shawls. Harry and Ron walked throughthe mass of occupied chintz chairs and poufs thatcluttered the room, and sat down at the same smallcircular table.

“Good day,” said the misty voice of ProfessorTrelawney right behind Harry, making him jump.

A very thin woman with enormous glasses that madeher eyes appear far too large for her face, ProfessorTrelawney was peering down at Harry with the tragicexpression she always wore whenever she saw him.The usual large amount of beads, chains, and banglesglittered upon her person in the firelight.

“You are preoccupied, my dear,” she said mournfullyto Harry. “My inner eye sees past your brave face tothe troubled soul within. And I regret to say that yourworries are not baseless. I see difficult times aheadfor you, alas ... most difficult ... I fear the thing youdread will indeed come to pass ... and perhaps soonerthan you think. ...”

Her voice dropped almost to a whisper. Ron rolled hiseyes at Harry, who looked stonily back. ProfessorTrelawney swept past them and seated herself in alarge winged armchair before the fire, facing the class.Lavender Brown and Parvati Patil, who deeplyadmired Professor Trelawney, were sitting on poufsvery close to her.

“My dears, it is time for us to consider the stars,” shesaid. “The movements of the planets and themysterious portents they reveal only to those who

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

understand the steps of the celestial dance. Humandestiny may be deciphered by the planetary rays,which intermingle ...”

But Harry’s thoughts had drifted. The perfumed firealways made him feel sleepy and dull-witted, andProfessor Trelawney’s rambling talks on fortune-telling never held him exactly spellbound — thoughhe couldn’t help thinking about what she had justsaid to him. “ ‘Ifear the thing you dread will indeedcome to pass ... ’ ”

But Hermione was right, Harry thought irritably,Professor Trelawney really was an old fraud. Hewasn’t dreading anything at the moment at all ... well,unless you counted his fears that Sirius had beencaught ... but what did Professor Trelawney know? Hehad long since come to the conclusion that her brandof fortune-telling was really no more than luckyguesswork and a spooky manner.

Except, of course, for that time at the end of lastterm, when she had made the prediction aboutVoldemort rising again ... and Dumbledore himselfhad said that he thought that trance had beengenuine, when Harry had described it to him. ...

“Harry\” Ron muttered.

“What?”

Harry looked around; the whole class was staring athim. He sat up straight; he had been almost dozingoff, lost in the heat and his thoughts.

“I was saying, my dear, that you were clearly bornunder the baleful influence of Saturn,” said ProfessorTrelawney, a faint note of resentment in her voice at

Page | 221

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the fact that he had obviously not been hanging onher words.

“Born under — what, sorry?” said Harry.

“Saturn, dear, the planet Saturn!” said ProfessorTrelawney, sounding definitely irritated that he wasn’triveted by this news. “I was saying that Saturn wassurely in a position of power in the heavens at themoment of your birth. ... Your dark hair ... your meanstature ... tragic losses so young in life ... I think I amright in saying, my dear, that you were born inmidwinter?”

“No,” said Harry, “I was born in July.”

Ron hastily turned his laugh into a hacking cough.

Half an hour later, each of them had been given acomplicated circular chart, and was attempting to fillin the position of the planets at their moment of birth.It was dull work, requiring much consultation oftimetables and calculation of angles.

“I’ve got two Neptunes here,” said Harry after a while,frowning down at his piece of parchment, “that can’tbe right, can it?”

“Aaaaah,” said Ron, imitating Professor Trelawney’smystical whisper, “when two Neptunes appear in thesky, it is a sure sign that a midget in glasses is beingborn, Harry ...”

Seamus and Dean, who were working nearby,sniggered loudly, though not loudly enough to maskthe excited squeals from Lavender Brown — “OhProfessor, look! I think I’ve got an unaspected planet!Oooh, which one’s that, Professor?”

Page | 222

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“It is Uranus, my dear,” said Professor Trelawney,peering down at the chart.

“Can I have a look at Uranus too, Lavender?” saidRon.

Most unfortunately, Professor Trelawney heard him,and it was this, perhaps, that made her give them somuch homework at the end of the class.

“A detailed analysis of the way the planetarymovements in the coming month will affect you, withreference to your personal chart,” she snapped,sounding much more like Professor McGonagall thanher usual airy-fairy self. “I want it ready to hand innext Monday, and no excuses!”

“Miserable old bat,” said Ron bitterly as they joinedthe crowds descending the staircases back to theGreat Hall and dinner. “Thatll take all weekend, thatwill. ...”

“Lots of homework?” said Hermione brightly, catchingup with them. “Professor Vector didn’t give us any atall!”

“Well, bully for Professor Vector,” said Ron moodily.

They reached the entrance hall, which was packedwith people queuing for dinner. They had just joinedthe end of the line, when a loud voice rang out behindthem.

“Weasley! Hey, Weasley!”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione turned. Malfoy, Crabbe,and Goyle were standing there, each lookingthoroughly pleased about something.

Page | 223

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What?” said Ron shortly.

“Your dad’s in the paper, Weasley!” said Malfoy,brandishing a copy of the Daily Prophet and speakingvery loudly, so that everyone in the packed entrancehall could hear. “Listen to this!

FURTHER MISTAKES AT THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC

It seems as though the Ministry of Magic’s troubles arenot yet at an end, writes Rita Skeeter, SpecialCorrespondent. Recently under fire for its poor crowdcontrol at the Quidditch World Cup, and still unable toaccount for the disappearance of one of its witches, theMinistry was plunged into fresh embarrassmentyesterday by the antics of Arnold Weasley, of theMisuse of Muggle Artifacts Office. ”

Malfoy looked up.

“Imagine them not even getting his name right,Weasley. It’s almost as though he’s a completenonentity, isn’t it?” he crowed.

Everyone in the entrance hall was listening now.Malfoy straightened the paper with a flourish andread on:

Arnold Weasley, who was charged with possession ofa flying car two years ago, was yesterday involved ina tussle with several Muggle law-keepers (“policemen”)over a number of highly aggressive dustbins. Mr.Weasley appears to have rushed to the aid of “Mad-Eye” Moody, the aged ex-Auror who retired from theMinistry when no longer able to tell the differencebetween a handshake and attempted murder.Unsurprisingly, Mr. Weasley found, upon arrival at Mr.Moody’s heavily guarded house, that Mr. Moody hadonce again raised a false alarm. Mr. Weasley wasPage | 224 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

forced to modify several memories before he couldescape from the policemen, but refused to answerDaily Prophet questions about why he had involvedthe Ministry in such an undignified and potentiallyembarrassing scene.

“And there’s a picture, Weasley!” said Malfoy, flippingthe paper over and holding it up. “A picture of yourparents outside their house — if you can call it ahouse! Your mother could do with losing a bit ofweight, couldn’t she?”

Ron was shaking with fury. Everyone was staring athim.

“Get stuffed, Malfoy,” said Harry. “C’mon, Ron. ...”

“Oh yeah, you were staying with them this summer,weren’t you, Potter?” sneered Malfoy. “So tell me, ishis mother really that porky, or is it just the picture?”

“You know your mother, Malfoy?” said Harry — bothhe and Hermione had grabbed the back of Ron’srobes to stop him from launching himself at Malfoy —“that expression she’s got, like she’s got dung underher nose? Has she always looked like that, or was itjust because you were with her?”

Malfoy’s pale face went slightly pink.

“Don’t you dare insult my mother, Potter.”

“Keep your fat mouth shut, then,” said Harry, turningaway.

BANG!

Several people screamed — Harry felt somethingwhite-hot graze the side of his face — he plunged his

Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

hand into his robes for his wand, but before he’d eventouched it, he heard a second loud BANG, and a roarthat echoed through the entrance hall.

“OH NO YOU DONT, LADDIE!”

Harry spun around. Professor Moody was limpingdown the marble staircase. His wand was out and itwas pointing right at a pure white ferret, which wasshivering on the stone-flagged floor, exactly whereMalfoy had been standing.

There was a terrified silence in the entrance hall.Nobody but Moody was moving a muscle. Moodyturned to look at Harry — at least, his normal eye waslooking at Harry; the other one was pointing into theback of his head.

“Did he get you?” Moody growled. His voice was lowand gravelly.

“No,” said Harry, “missed.”

“LEAVE IT!” Moody shouted.

“Leave — what?” Harry said, bewildered.

“Not you — him!” Moody growled, jerking his thumbover his shoulder at Crabbe, who had just frozen,about to pick up the white ferret. It seemed thatMoody’s rolling eye was magical and could see out ofthe back of his head.

Moody started to limp toward Crabbe, Goyle, and theferret, which gave a terrified squeak and took off,streaking toward the dungeons.

“I don’t think so!” roared Moody, pointing his wand atthe ferret again — it flew ten feet into the air, fell with

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

a smack to the floor, and then bounced upward oncemore.

“I don’t like people who attack when their opponent’sback’s turned,” growled Moody as the ferret bouncedhigher and higher, squealing in pain. “Stinking,cowardly, scummy thing to do. ...”

The ferret flew through the air, its legs and tail flailinghelplessly.

“Never — do — that — again —” said Moody, speakingeach word as the ferret hit the stone floor andbounced upward again.

“Professor Moody!” said a shocked voice.

Professor McGonagall was coming down the marblestaircase with her arms full of books.

“Hello, Professor McGonagall,” said Moody calmly,bouncing the ferret still higher.

“What — what are you doing?” said ProfessorMcGonagall, her eyes following the bouncing ferret’sprogress through the air.

“Teaching,” said Moody.

“Teach — Moody, is that a student?” shriekedProfessor McGonagall, the books spilling out of herarms.

“Yep,” said Moody.

“No!” cried Professor McGonagall, running down thestairs and pulling out her wand; a moment later, witha loud snapping noise, Draco Malfoy had reappeared,lying in a heap on the floor with his sleek blond hair

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

all over his now brilliantly pink face. He got to hisfeet, wincing.

“Moody, we never use Transfiguration as apunishment!” said Professor McGonagall weakly.“Surely Professor Dumbledore told you that?”

“He might’ve mentioned it, yeah,” said Moody,scratching his chin unconcernedly, “but I thought agood sharp shock —”

“We give detentions, Moody! Or speak to the offender’sHead of House!”

“I’ll do that, then,” said Moody, staring at Malfoy withgreat dislike.

Malfoy, whose pale eyes were still watering with painand humiliation, looked malevolently up at Moodyand muttered something in which the words “myfather” were distinguishable.

“Oh yeah?” said Moody quietly, limping forward a fewsteps, the dull clunk of his wooden leg echoing aroundthe hall. “Well, I know your father of old, boy. ... Youtell him Moody’s keeping a close eye on his son ... youtell him that from me. ... Now, your Head of House’llbe Snape, will it?”

“Yes,” said Malfoy resentfully.

“Another old friend,” growled Moody. “I’ve beenlooking forward to a chat with old Snape. ... Come on,you. ...”

And he seized Malfoy’s upper arm and marched himoff toward the dungeons.

Page | 228

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Professor McGonagall stared anxiously after them fora few moments, then waved her wand at her fallenbooks, causing them to soar up into the air and backinto her arms.

“Don’t talk to me,” Ron said quietly to Harry andHermione as they sat down at the Gryffindor table afew minutes later, surrounded by excited talk on allsides about what had just happened.

“Why not?” said Hermione in surprise.

“Because I want to fix that in my memory forever,”said Ron, his eyes closed and an uplifted expressionon his face. “Draco Malfoy, the amazing bouncingferret ...”

Harry and Hermione both laughed, and Hermionebegan doling beef casserole onto each of their plates.

“He could have really hurt Malfoy, though,” she said.“It was good, really, that Professor McGonagallstopped it —”

“Hermione!” said Ron furiously, his eyes snappingopen again, “you’re ruining the best moment of mylife!”

Hermione made an impatient noise and began to eatat top speed again.

“Don’t tell me you’re going back to the library thisevening?” said Harry, watching her.

“Got to,” said Hermione thickly. “Loads to do.”

“But you told us Professor Vector —”

Page | 229

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“It’s not schoolwork,” she said. Within five minutes,she had cleared her plate and departed. No soonerhad she gone than her seat was taken by FredWeasley.

“Moody!” he said. “How cool is he?”

“Beyond cool,” said George, sitting down oppositeFred.

“Supercool,” said the twins’ best friend, Lee Jordan,sliding into the seat beside George. “We had him thisafternoon,” he told Harry and Ron.

“What was it like?” said Harry eagerly.

Fred, George, and Lee exchanged looks full ofmeaning.

“Never had a lesson like it,” said Fred.

“He knows, man,” said Lee.

“Knows what?” said Ron, leaning forward.

“Knows what it’s like to be out there doing it,” saidGeorge impressively.

“Doing what?” said Harry.

“Fighting the Dark Arts,” said Fred.

“He’s seen it all,” said George.

“ ’Mazing,” said Lee.

Ron dived into his bag for his schedule.

Page | 230

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“We haven’t got him till Thursday!” he said in adisappointed voice.

Page | 231

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE UNFORGIVABLE CURSES

The next two days passed without great incident,unless you counted Neville melting his sixth cauldronin Potions. Professor Snape, who seemed to haveattained new levels of vindictiveness over thesummer, gave Neville detention, and Neville returnedfrom it in a state of nervous collapse, having beenmade to disembowel a barrel full of horned toads.

“You know why Snape’s in such a foul mood, don’tyou?” said Ron to Harry as they watched Hermioneteaching Neville a Scouring Charm to remove the frogguts from under his fingernails.

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Moody.”

It was common knowledge that Snape really wantedthe Dark Arts job, and he had now failed to get it forthe fourth year running. Snape had disliked all oftheir previous Dark Arts teachers, and shown it —but he seemed strangely wary of displaying overtanimosity to Mad-Eye Moody. Indeed, whenever Harrysaw the two of them together — at mealtimes, or

Page | 232 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

when they passed in the corridors — he had thedistinct impression that Snape was avoiding Moody’seye, whether magical or normal.

“I reckon Snape’s a bit scared of him, you know,”Harry said thoughtfully.

“Imagine if Moody turned Snape into a horned toad,”said Ron, his eyes misting over, “and bounced him allaround his dungeon. ...”

The Gryffindor fourth years were looking forward toMoody’s first lesson so much that they arrived earlyon Thursday lunchtime and queued up outside hisclassroom before the bell had even rung. The onlyperson missing was Hermione, who turned up just intime for the lesson.

“Been in the —”

“Library.” Harry finished her sentence for her.

“C’mon, quick, or we won’t get decent seats.”

They hurried into three chairs right in front of theteacher’s desk, took out their copies of The DarkForces: A Guide to Self-Protection, and waited,unusually quiet. Soon they heard Moody’s distinctiveclunking footsteps coming down the corridor, and heentered the room, looking as strange and frighteningas ever. They could just see his clawed, wooden footprotruding from underneath his robes.

“You can put those away,” he growled, stumping overto his desk and sitting down, “those books. You won’tneed them.”

They returned the books to their bags, Ron lookingexcited.

Page | 233

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Moody took out a register, shook his long mane ofgrizzled gray hair out of his twisted and scarred face,and began to call out names, his normal eye movingsteadily down the list while his magical eye swiveledaround, fixing upon each student as he or sheanswered.

“Right then,” he said, when the last person haddeclared themselves present, “I’ve had a letter fromProfessor Lupin about this class. Seems you’ve had apretty thorough grounding in tackling Dark creatures— you’ve covered boggarts, Red Caps, hinkypunks,grindylows, Kappas, and werewolves, is that right?”

There was a general murmur of assent.

“But you’re behind — very behind — on dealing withcurses,” said Moody. “So I’m here to bring you up toscratch on what wizards can do to each other. I’ve gotone year to teach you how to deal with Dark —”

“What, aren’t you staying?” Ron blurted out.

Moody’s magical eye spun around to stare at Ron;

Ron looked extremely apprehensive, but after amoment Moody smiled — the first time Harry hadseen him do so. The effect was to make his heavilyscarred face look more twisted and contorted thanever, but it was nevertheless good to know that heever did anything as friendly as smile. Ron lookeddeeply relieved.

“You’ll be Arthur Weasley’s son, eh?” Moody said.“Your father got me out of a very tight corner a fewdays ago. ... Yeah, I’m staying just the one year.Special favor to Dumbledore. ... One year, and thenback to my quiet retirement.”

Page | 234

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He gave a harsh laugh, and then clapped his gnarledhands together.

“So — straight into it. Curses. They come in manystrengths and forms. Now, according to the Ministryof Magic, I’m supposed to teach you countercursesand leave it at that. I’m not supposed to show youwhat illegal Dark curses look like until you’re in thesixth year. You’re not supposed to be old enough todeal with it till then. But Professor Dumbledore’s gota higher opinion of your nerves, he reckons you cancope, and I say, the sooner you know what you’re upagainst, the better. How are you supposed to defendyourself against something you’ve never seen? Awizard who’s about to put an illegal curse on you isn’tgoing to tell you what he’s about to do. He’s not goingto do it nice and polite to your face. You need to beprepared. You need to be alert and watchful. Youneed to put that away, Miss Brown, when I’mtalking.”

Lavender jumped and blushed. She had been showingParvati her completed horoscope under the desk.Apparently Moody’s magical eye could see throughsolid wood, as well as out of the back of his head.

“So ... do any of you know which curses are mostheavily punished by wizarding law?”

Several hands rose tentatively into the air, includingRon’s and Hermione’s. Moody pointed at Ron, thoughhis magical eye was still fixed on Lavender.

“Er,” said Ron tentatively, “my dad told me about one.... Is it called the Imperius Curse, or something?”

“Ah, yes,” said Moody appreciatively. “Your fatherwould know that one. Gave the Ministry a lot oftrouble at one time, the Imperius Curse.”

Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Moody got heavily to his mismatched feet, opened hisdesk drawer, and took out a glass jar. Three largeblack spiders were scuttling around inside it. Harryfelt Ron recoil slightly next to him — Ron hatedspiders.

Moody reached into the jar, caught one of the spiders,and held it in the palm of his hand so that they couldall see it. He then pointed his wand at it andmuttered, “Imperio\”

The spider leapt from Moody’s hand on a fine threadof silk and began to swing backward and forward asthough on a trapeze. It stretched out its legs rigidly,then did a back flip, breaking the thread and landingon the desk, where it began to cartwheel in circles.Moody jerked his wand, and the spider rose onto twoof its hind legs and went into what was unmistakablya tap dance.

Everyone was laughing — everyone except Moody.

“Think it’s funny, do you?” he growled. “You’d like it,would you, if I did it to you?”

The laughter died away almost instantly.

“Total control,” said Moody quietly as the spiderballed itself up and began to roll over and over. “Icould make it jump out of the window, drown itself,throw itself down one of your throats ...”

Ron gave an involuntary shudder.

“Years back, there were a lot of witches and wizardsbeing controlled by the Imperius Curse,” said Moody,and Harry knew he was talking about the days inwhich Voldemort had been all-powerful. “Some job for

Page | 236

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the Ministry, trying to sort out who was being forcedto act, and who was acting of their own free will.

“The Imperius Curse can be fought, and I’ll beteaching you how, but it takes real strength ofcharacter, and not everyone’s got it. Better avoidbeing hit with it if you can. CONSTANT VIGILANCE!”he barked, and everyone jumped.

Moody picked up the somersaulting spider and threwit back into the jar.

“Anyone else know one? Another illegal curse?”

Hermione’s hand flew into the air again and so, toHarry’s slight surprise, did Neville’s. The only class inwhich Neville usually volunteered information wasHerbology, which was easily his best subject. Nevillelooked surprised at his own daring.

“Yes?” said Moody, his magical eye rolling right overto fix on Neville.

“There’s one — the Cruciatus Curse,” said Neville in asmall but distinct voice.

Moody was looking very intently at Neville, this timewith both eyes.

“Your name’s Longbottom?” he said, his magical eyeswooping down to check the register again.

Neville nodded nervously, but Moody made no furtherinquiries. Turning back to the class at large, hereached into the jar for the next spider and placed itupon the desktop, where it remained motionless,apparently too scared to move.

Page | 237

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“The Cruciatus Curse,” said Moody. “Needs to be a bitbigger for you to get the idea,” he said, pointing hiswand at the spider. “Engorgio\”

The spider swelled. It was now larger than atarantula. Abandoning all pretense, Ron pushed hischair backward, as far away from Moody’s desk aspossible.

Moody raised his wand again, pointed it at the spider,and muttered, “CrucioV’

At once, the spider’s legs bent in upon its body; itrolled over and began to twitch horribly, rocking fromside to side. No sound came from it, but Harry wassure that if it could have given voice, it would havebeen screaming. Moody did not remove his wand, andthe spider started to shudder and jerk more violently

“Stop it!” Hermione said shrilly.

Harry looked around at her. She was looking, not atthe spider, but at Neville, and Harry, following hergaze, saw that Neville’s hands were clenched upon thedesk in front of him, his knuckles white, his eyeswide and horrified.

Moody raised his wand. The spider’s legs relaxed, butit continued to twitch.

“Reducio,” Moody muttered, and the spider shrankback to its proper size. He put it back into the jar.

“Pain,” said Moody softly. “You don’t needthumbscrews or knives to torture someone if you canperform the Cruciatus Curse. ... That one was verypopular once too.

Page | 238

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Right ... anyone know any others?”

Harry looked around. From the looks on everyone’sfaces, he guessed they were all wondering what wasgoing to happen to the last spider. Hermione’s handshook slightly as, for the third time, she raised it intothe air.

“Yes?” said Moody, looking at her.

“Avada Kedavra,” Hermione whispered.

Several people looked uneasily around at her,including Ron.

“Ah,” said Moody, another slight smile twisting hislopsided mouth. “Yes, the last and worst. AvadaKedavra ... the Killing Curse.”

He put his hand into the glass jar, and almost asthough it knew what was coming, the third spiderscuttled frantically around the bottom of the jar,trying to evade Moody’s fingers, but he trapped it, andplaced it upon the desktop. It started to scuttlefrantically across the wooden surface.

Moody raised his wand, and Harry felt a sudden thrillof foreboding.

“Avada Kedavral” Moody roared.

There was a flash of blinding green light and arushing sound, as though a vast, invisible somethingwas soaring through the air — instantaneously thespider rolled over onto its back, unmarked, butunmistakably dead. Several of the students stifledcries; Ron had thrown himself backward and almosttoppled off his seat as the spider skidded toward him.

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Moody swept the dead spider off the desk onto thefloor.

“Not nice,” he said calmly. “Not pleasant. And there’sno countercurse. There’s no blocking it. Only oneknown person has ever survived it, and he’s sittingright in front of me.”

Harry felt his face redden as Moody’s eyes (both ofthem) looked into his own. He could feel everyone elselooking around at him too. Harry stared at the blankblackboard as though fascinated by it, but not reallyseeing it at all. ...

So that was how his parents had died ... exactly likethat spider. Had they been unblemished andunmarked too? Had they simply seen the flash ofgreen light and heard the rush of speeding death,before life was wiped from their bodies?

Harry had been picturing his parents’ deaths overand over again for three years now, ever since he’dfound out they had been murdered, ever since he’dfound out what had happened that night: Wormtailhad betrayed his parents’ whereabouts to Voldemort,who had come to find them at their cottage. HowVoldemort had killed Harry’s father first. How JamesPotter had tried to hold him off, while he shouted athis wife to take Harry and run ... Voldemort hadadvanced on Lily Potter, told her to move aside sothat he could kill Harry ... how she had begged him tokill her instead, refused to stop shielding her son ...and so Voldemort had murdered her too, beforeturning his wand on Harry. ...

Harry knew these details because he had heard hisparents’ voices when he had fought the dementorslast year — for that was the terrible power of thedementors: to force their victims to relive the worst

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

memories of their lives, and drown, powerless, in theirown despair. ...

Moody was speaking again, from a great distance, itseemed to Harry. With a massive effort, he pulledhimself back to the present and listened to whatMoody was saying.

“Avada Kedavra’s a curse that needs a powerful bit ofmagic behind it — you could all get your wands outnow and point them at me and say the words, and Idoubt I’d get so much as a nosebleed. But thatdoesn’t matter. I’m not here to teach you how to do it.

“Now, if there’s no countercurse, why am I showingyou? Because you’ve got to know. You’ve got toappreciate what the worst is. You don’t want to findyourself in a situation where you’re facing it.CONSTANT VIGILANCE!” he roared, and the wholeclass jumped again.

“Now ... those three curses — Avada Kedavra,Imperius, and Cruciatus — are known as theUnforgivable Curses. The use of any one of them on afellow human being is enough to earn a life sentencein Azkaban. That’s what you’re up against. That’swhat I’ve got to teach you to fight. You needpreparing. You need arming. But most of all, youneed to practice constant, never-ceasing vigilance. Getout your quills ... copy this down. ...”

They spent the rest of the lesson taking notes on eachof the Unforgivable Curses. No one spoke until thebell rang — but when Moody had dismissed them andthey had left the classroom, a torrent of talk burstforth. Most people were discussing the curses in awedvoices — “Did you see it twitch?” “— and when hekilled it — just like that!”

Page | 241

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

They were talking about the lesson, Harry thought, asthough it had been some sort of spectacular show,but he hadn’t found it very entertaining — and nor, itseemed, had Hermione.

“Hurry up,” she said tensely to Harry and Ron.

“Not the ruddy library again?” said Ron.

“No,” said Hermione curtly, pointing up a sidepassage. “Neville.”

Neville was standing alone, halfway up the passage,staring at the stone wall opposite him with the samehorrified, wide-eyed look he had worn when Moodyhad demonstrated the Cruciatus Curse.

“Neville?” Hermione said gently.

Neville looked around.

“Oh hello,” he said, his voice much higher than usual.“Interesting lesson, wasn’t it? I wonder what’s fordinner, I’m — I’m starving, aren’t you?”

“Neville, are you all right?” said Hermione.

“Oh yes, I’m fine,” Neville gabbled in the sameunnaturally high voice. “Very interesting dinner — Imean lesson — what’s for eating?”

Ron gave Harry a startled look.

“Neville, what — ?”

But an odd clunking noise sounded behind them, andthey turned to see Professor Moody limping towardthem. All four of them fell silent, watching him

Page | 242

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

apprehensively, but when he spoke, it was in a muchlower and gentler growl than they had yet heard.

“It’s all right, sonny,” he said to Neville. “Why don’tyou come up to my office? Come on ... we can have acup of tea. ...”

Neville looked even more frightened at the prospect oftea with Moody. He neither moved nor spoke. Moodyturned his magical eye upon Harry.

“You all right, are you, Potter?”

“Yes,” said Harry, almost defiantly.

Moody’s blue eye quivered slightly in its socket as itsurveyed Harry. Then he said, “You’ve got to know. Itseems harsh, maybe, but you’ve got to know. No pointpretending ... well ... come on, Longbottom, I’ve gotsome books that might interest you.”

Neville looked pleadingly at Harry, Ron, andHermione, but they didn’t say anything, so Nevillehad no choice but to allow himself to be steered away,one of Moody’s gnarled hands on his shoulder.

“What was that about?” said Ron, watching Nevilleand Moody turn the corner.

“I don’t know,” said Hermione, looking pensive.

“Some lesson, though, eh?” said Ron to Harry as theyset off for the Great Hall. “Fred and George were right,weren’t they? He really knows his stuff, Moody,doesn’t he? When he did Avada Kedavra, the way thatspider just died, just snuffed it right —”

But Ron fell suddenly silent at the look on Harry’sface and didn’t speak again until they reached the

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Great Hall, when he said he supposed they had bettermake a start on Professor Trelawney’s predictionstonight, since they would take hours.

Hermione did not join in with Harry and Ron’sconversation during dinner, but ate furiously fast,and then left for the library again. Harry and Ronwalked back to Gryffindor Tower, and Harry, who hadbeen thinking of nothing else all through dinner, nowraised the subject of the Unforgivable Curses himself.

“Wouldn’t Moody and Dumbledore be in trouble withthe Ministry if they knew we’d seen the curses?”

Harry asked as they approached the Fat Lady.

“Yeah, probably,” said Ron. “But Dumbledore’s alwaysdone things his way, hasn’t he, and Moody’s beengetting in trouble for years, I reckon. Attacks first andasks questions later — look at his dustbins.Balderdash.”

The Fat Lady swung forward to reveal the entrancehole, and they climbed into the Gryffindor commonroom, which was crowded and noisy.

“Shall we get our Divination stuff, then?” said Harry.

“I s’pose,” Ron groaned.

They went up to the dormitory to fetch their booksand charts, to find Neville there alone, sitting on hisbed, reading. He looked a good deal calmer than atthe end of Moody’s lesson, though still not entirelynormal. His eyes were rather red.

“You all right, Neville?” Harry asked him.

“Oh yes,” said Neville, “I’m fine, thanks. Just readingthis book Professor Moody lent me. ...”

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He held up the book: Magical Water Plants of theMediterranean.

“Apparently, Professor Sprout told Professor MoodyI’m really good at Herbology,” Neville said. There wasa faint note of pride in his voice that Harry had rarelyheard there before. “He thought I’d like this.”

Telling Neville what Professor Sprout had said, Harrythought, had been a very tactful way of cheeringNeville up, for Neville very rarely heard that he wasgood at anything. It was the sort of thing ProfessorLupin would have done.

Harry and Ron took their copies of Unfogging theFuture back down to the common room, found atable, and set to work on their predictions for thecoming month. An hour later, they had made verylittle progress, though their table was littered withbits of parchment bearing sums and symbols, andHarry’s brain was as fogged as though it had beenfilled with the fumes from Professor Trelawney’s fire.

“I haven’t got a clue what this lot’s supposed tomean,” he said, staring down at a long list ofcalculations.

“You know,” said Ron, whose hair was on endbecause of all the times he had run his fingersthrough it in frustration, “I think it’s back to the oldDivination standby.”

“What — make it up?”

“Yeah,” said Ron, sweeping the jumble of scrawlednotes off the table, dipping his pen into some ink, andstarting to write.

Page | 245

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Next Monday,” he said as he scribbled, “I am likely todevelop a cough, owing to the unlucky conjunction ofMars and Jupiter.” He looked up at Harry. “You knowher —just put in loads of misery, shell lap it up.”

“Right,” said Harry, crumpling up his first attemptand lobbing it over the heads of a group of chatteringfirst years into the fire. “Okay ... on Monday, / will bein danger of — er — burns.”

“Yeah, you will be,” said Ron darkly, “we’re seeing theskrewts again on Monday. Okay, Tuesday, I’ll... erm

“Lose a treasured possession,” said Harry, who wasflicking through Unfogging the Future for ideas.

“Good one,” said Ron, copying it down. “Because of... erm ... Mercury. Why don’t you get stabbed in theback by someone you thought was a friend?”

“Yeah ... cool ...” said Harry, scribbling it down,“because ... Venus is in the twelfth house.”

“And on Wednesday, I think I’ll come off worst in afight.”

“Aaah, I was going to have a fight. Okay, I’ll lose abet.”

“Yeah, you’ll be betting I’ll win my fight. ...”

They continued to make up predictions (which grewsteadily more tragic) for another hour, while thecommon room around them slowly emptied as peoplewent up to bed. Crookshanks wandered over to them,leapt lightly into an empty chair, and staredinscrutably at Harry, rather as Hermione might look ifshe knew they weren’t doing their homework properly.Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Staring around the room, trying to think of a kind ofmisfortune he hadn’t yet used, Harry saw Fred andGeorge sitting together against the opposite wall,heads together, quills out, poring over a single pieceof parchment. It was most unusual to see Fred andGeorge hidden away in a corner and working silently;they usually liked to be in the thick of things and thenoisy center of attention. There was somethingsecretive about the way they were working on thepiece of parchment, and Harry was reminded of howthey had sat together writing something back at theBurrow. He had thought then that it was anotherorder form for Weasleys’ Wizard Wheezes, but it didn’tlook like that this time; if it had been, they wouldsurely have let Lee Jordan in on the joke. Hewondered whether it had anything to do with enteringthe Triwizard Tournament.

As Harry watched, George shook his head at Fred,scratched out something with his quill, and said, in avery quiet voice that nevertheless carried across thealmost deserted room, “No — that sounds like we’reaccusing him. Got to be careful ...”

Then George looked over and saw Harry watchinghim. Harry grinned and quickly returned to hispredictions — he didn’t want George to think he waseavesdropping. Shortly after that, the twins rolled uptheir parchment, said good night, and went off to bed.

Fred and George had been gone ten minutes or sowhen the portrait hole opened and Hermione climbedinto the common room carrying a sheaf of parchmentin one hand and a box whose contents rattled as shewalked in the other. Crookshanks arched his back,purring.

“Hello,” she said, “I’ve just finished!”

Page | 247

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“So have I!” said Ron triumphantly, throwing downhis quill.

Hermione sat down, laid the things she was carryingin an empty armchair, and pulled Ron’s predictionstoward her.

“Not going to have a very good month, are you?” shesaid sardonically as Crookshanks curled up in herlap.

“Ah well, at least I’m forewarned,” Ron yawned.

“You seem to be drowning twice,” said Hermione.

“Oh am I?” said Ron, peering down at his predictions.“I’d better change one of them to getting trampled bya rampaging hippogriff.”

“Don’t you think it’s a bit obvious you’ve made theseup?” said Hermione.

“How dare you!” said Ron, in mock outrage. “We’vebeen working like house-elves here!”

Hermione raised her eyebrows.

“It’s just an expression,” said Ron hastily.

Harry laid down his quill too, having just finishedpredicting his own death by decapitation.

“What’s in the box?” he asked, pointing at it.

“Funny you should ask,” said Hermione, with a nastylook at Ron. She took off the lid and showed them thecontents.

Page | 248

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Inside were about fifty badges, all of different colors,but all bearing the same letters: S.P.E.W.

“ ‘Spew?” said Harry, picking up a badge and lookingat it. “What’s this about?”

“Not spew,” said Hermione impatiently. “It’s S-P-E-W.Stands for the Society for the Promotion of ElfishWelfare.”

“Never heard of it,” said Ron.

“Well, of course you haven’t,” said Hermione briskly,“I’ve only just started it.”

“Yeah?” said Ron in mild surprise. “How manymembers have you got?”

“Well — if you two join — three,” said Hermione.

“And you think we want to walk around wearingbadges saying ‘spew,’ do you?” said Ron.

“S-P-E-W!” said Hermione hotly. “I was going to putStop the Outrageous Abuse of Our Fellow MagicalCreatures and Campaign for a Change in Their LegalStatus — but it wouldn’t fit. So that’s the heading ofour manifesto.”

She brandished the sheaf of parchment at them.

“I’ve been researching it thoroughly in the library. Elfenslavement goes back centuries. I can’t believe noone’s done anything about it before now.”

“Hermione — open your ears,” said Ron loudly. “They.Like. It. They like being enslaved!”

Page | 249

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Our short-term aims,” said Hermione, speaking evenmore loudly than Ron, and acting as though shehadn’t heard a word, “are to secure house-elves fairwages and working conditions. Our long-term aimsinclude changing the law about non-wand use, andtrying to get an elf into the Department for theRegulation and Control of Magical Creatures, becausethey’re shockingly underrepresented.”

“And how do we do all this?” Harry asked.

“We start by recruiting members,” said Hermionehappily. “I thought two Sickles to join — that buys abadge — and the proceeds can fund our leafletcampaign. You’re treasurer, Ron — I’ve got you acollecting tin upstairs — and Harry, you’re secretary,so you might want to write down everything I’msaying now, as a record of our first meeting.”

There was a pause in which Hermione beamed at thepair of them, and Harry sat, torn betweenexasperation at Hermione and amusement at the lookon Ron’s face. The silence was broken, not by Ron,who in any case looked as though he was temporarilydumbstruck, but by a soft tap, tap on the window.Harry looked across the now empty common roomand saw, illuminated by the moonlight, a snowy owlperched on the windowsill.

“Hedwig!” he shouted, and he launched himself out ofhis chair and across the room to pull open thewindow.

Hedwig flew inside, soared across the room, andlanded on the table on top of Harry’s predictions.

“About time!” said Harry, hurrying after her.

Page | 250

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“She’s got an answer!” said Ron excitedly, pointing atthe grubby piece of parchment tied to Hedwig’s leg.

Harry hastily untied it and sat down to read,whereupon Hedwig fluttered onto his knee, hootingsoftly.

“What does it say?” Hermione asked breathlessly.

The letter was very short, and looked as though it hadbeen scrawled in a great hurry. Harry read it aloud:

Harry —

I’m flying north immediately. This news about yourscar is the latest in a series of strange rumors thathave reached me here. If it hurts again, go straight toDumbledore — they’re saying he’s got Mad-Eye out ofretirement, which means he’s reading the signs, even ifno one else is.

I’ll be in touch soon. My best to Ron and Hermione.

Keep your eyes open, Harry.

Sirius

Harry looked up at Ron and Hermione, who staredback at him.

“He’s flying north?” Hermione whispered. “He’scoming back?”

“Dumbledore’s reading what signs?” said Ron, lookingperplexed. “Harry — what’s up?”

For Harry had just hit himself in the forehead withhis fist, jolting Hedwig out of his lap.

“I shouldn’t’ve told him!” Harry said furiously.

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What are you on about?” said Ron in surprise.

“It’s made him think he’s got to come back!” saidHarry, now slamming his fist on the table so thatHedwig landed on the back of Ron’s chair, hootingindignantly. “Coming back, because he thinks I’m introuble! And there’s nothing wrong with me! And Ihaven’t got anything for you,” Harry snapped atHedwig, who was clicking her beak expectantly,

“you’ll have to go up to the Owlery if you want food.”

Hedwig gave him an extremely offended look and tookoff for the open window, cuffing him around the headwith her outstretched wing as she went.

“Harry,” Hermione began, in a pacifying sort of voice.

“I’m going to bed,” said Harry shortly. “See you in themorning.”

Upstairs in the dormitory he pulled on his pajamasand got into his four-poster, but he didn’t feelremotely tired.

If Sirius came back and got caught, it would be his,Harry’s, fault. Why hadn’t he kept his mouth shut? Afew seconds’ pain and he’d had to blab. ... If he’d justhad the sense to keep it to himself. ...

He heard Ron come up into the dormitory a shortwhile later, but did not speak to him. For a long time,Harry lay staring up at the dark canopy of his bed.The dormitory was completely silent, and, had hebeen less preoccupied, Harry would have realized thatthe absence of Neville’s usual snores meant that hewas not the only one lying awake.

Page | 252

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





BEAUXBATONS AND DRUMSTRANG

Early next morning, Harry woke with a plan fullyformed in his mind, as though his sleeping brain hadbeen working on it all night. He got up, dressed in thepale dawn light, left the dormitory without wakingRon, and went back down to the deserted commonroom. Here he took a piece of parchment from thetable upon which his Divination homework still layand wrote the following letter:

Dear Sirius,

I reckon I just imagined my scar hurting, I was halfasleep when I wrote to you last time. There’s no pointcoming back, everything’s fine here. Don’t worry aboutme, my head feels completely normal.

Harry

He then climbed out of the portrait hole, up throughthe silent castle (held up only briefly by Peeves, whotried to overturn a large vase on him halfway along

Page | 253

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the fourth-floor corridor), finally arriving at theOwlery, which was situated at the top of West Tower.

The Owlery was a circular stone room, rather coldand drafty, because none of the windows had glass inthem. The floor was entirely covered in straw, owldroppings, and the regurgitated skeletons of mice andvoles. Hundreds upon hundreds of owls of everybreed imaginable were nestled here on perches thatrose right up to the top of the tower, nearly all ofthem asleep, though here and there a round ambereye glared at Harry. He spotted Hedwig nestledbetween a barn owl and a tawny, and hurried over toher, sliding a little on the dropping-strewn floor.

It took him a while to persuade her to wake up andthen to look at him, as she kept shuffling around onher perch, showing him her tail. She was evidentlystill furious about his lack of gratitude the previousnight. In the end, it was Harry suggesting she mightbe too tired, and that perhaps he would ask Ron toborrow Pigwidgeon, that made her stick out her legand allow him to tie the letter to it.

“Just find him, all right?” Harry said, stroking herback as he carried her on his arm to one of the holesin the wall. “Before the dementors do.”

She nipped his finger, perhaps rather harder than shewould ordinarily have done, but hooted softly in areassuring sort of way all the same. Then she spreadher wings and took off into the sunrise. Harrywatched her fly out of sight with the familiar feeling ofunease back in his stomach. He had been so surethat Sirius’s reply would alleviate his worries ratherthan increasing them.

“That was a lie, Harry,” said Hermione sharply overbreakfast, when he told her and Ron what he had

Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

done. “You didn’t imagine your scar hurting and youknow it.”

“So what?” said Harry. “He’s not going back toAzkaban because of me.”

“Drop it,” said Ron sharply to Hermione as sheopened her mouth to argue some more, and for once,Hermione heeded him, and fell silent.

Harry did his best not to worry about Sirius over thenext couple of weeks. True, he could not stop himselffrom looking anxiously around every morning whenthe post owls arrived, nor, late at night before he wentto sleep, prevent himself from seeing horrible visionsof Sirius, cornered by dementors down some darkLondon street, but betweentimes he tried to keep hismind off his godfather. He wished he still hadQuidditch to distract him; nothing worked so well ona troubled mind as a good, hard training session. Onthe other hand, their lessons were becoming moredifficult and demanding than ever before, particularlyMoody’s Defense Against the Dark Arts.

To their surprise, Professor Moody had announcedthat he would be putting the Imperius Curse on eachof them in turn, to demonstrate its power and to seewhether they could resist its effects.

“But — but you said it’s illegal, Professor,” saidHermione uncertainly as Moody cleared away thedesks with a sweep of his wand, leaving a large clearspace in the middle of the room. “You said — to use itagainst another human was —”

“Dumbledore wants you taught what it feels like,”said Moody, his magical eye swiveling onto Hermioneand fixing her with an eerie, unblinking stare. “Ifyou’d rather learn the hard way — when someone’s

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

putting it on you so they can control you completely— fine by me. You’re excused. Off you go.”

He pointed one gnarled finger toward the door.Hermione went very pink and muttered somethingabout not meaning that she wanted to leave. Harryand Ron grinned at each other. They knew Hermionewould rather eat bubotuber pus than miss such animportant lesson.

Moody began to beckon students forward in turn andput the Imperius Curse upon them. Harry watchedas, one by one, his classmates did the mostextraordinary things under its influence. DeanThomas hopped three times around the room, singingthe national anthem. Lavender Brown imitated asquirrel. Neville performed a series of quiteastonishing gymnastics he would certainly not havebeen capable of in his normal state. Not one of themseemed to be able to fight off the curse, and each ofthem recovered only when Moody had removed it.

“Potter,” Moody growled, “you next.”

Harry moved forward into the middle of theclassroom, into the space that Moody had cleared ofdesks. Moody raised his wand, pointed it at Harry,and said, “Imperio\”

It was the most wonderful feeling. Harry felt a floatingsensation as every thought and worry in his head waswiped gently away, leaving nothing but a vague,untraceable happiness. He stood there feelingimmensely relaxed, only dimly aware of everyonewatching him.

And then he heard Mad-Eye Moody’s voice, echoing insome distant chamber of his empty brain: Jump ontothe desk ... jump onto the desk. ...

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry bent his knees obediently, preparing to spring.Jump onto the desk. ...

Why, though? Another voice had awoken in the backof his brain.

Stupid thing to do, really, said the voice.

Jump onto the desk. ...

No, I don’t think I will, thanks, said the other voice, alittle more firmly ... no, I don’t really want to. ...

Jump\ NOW

The next thing Harry felt was considerable pain. Hehad both jumped and tried to prevent himself fromjumping — the result was that he’d smashedheadlong into the desk, knocking it over, and, by thefeeling in his legs, fractured both his kneecaps.

“Now, that’s more like it!” growled Moody’s voice, andsuddenly, Harry felt the empty, echoing feeling in hishead disappear. He remembered exactly what washappening, and the pain in his knees seemed todouble.

“Look at that, you lot ... Potter fought! He fought it,and he damn near beat it! We’ll try that again, Potter,and the rest of you, pay attention — watch his eyes,that’s where you see it — very good, Potter, very goodindeed! They’ll have trouble controlling you!”

“The way he talks,” Harry muttered as he hobbled outof the Defense Against the Dark Arts class an hourlater (Moody had insisted on putting Harry through

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

his paces four times in a row, until Harry could throwoff the curse entirely), “you’d think we were all goingto be attacked any second.”

“Yeah, I know,” said Ron, who was skipping on everyalternate step. He had had much more difficulty withthe curse than Harry, though Moody assured him theeffects would wear off by lunch-time. “Talk aboutparanoid ...” Ron glanced nervously over his shoulderto check that Moody was definitely out of earshot andwent on. “No wonder they were glad to get shot of himat the Ministry. Did you hear him telling Seamuswhat he did to that witch who shouted ‘Boo’ behindhim on April Fools’ Day? And when are we supposedto read up on resisting the Imperius Curse witheverything else we’ve got to do?”

All the fourth years had noticed a definite increase inthe amount of work they were required to do thisterm. Professor McGonagall explained why, when theclass gave a particularly loud groan at the amount ofTransfiguration homework she had assigned.

“You are now entering a most important phase of yourmagical education!” she told them, her eyes glintingdangerously behind her square spectacles. “YourOrdinary Wizarding Levels are drawing closer —”

“We don’t take O.W.L.s till fifth year!” said DeanThomas indignantly.

“Maybe not, Thomas, but believe me, you need all thepreparation you can get! Miss Granger remains theonly person in this class who has managed to turn ahedgehog into a satisfactory pincushion. I mightremind you that your pincushion, Thomas, still curlsup in fright if anyone approaches it with a pin!”

Page | 258

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hermione, who had turned rather pink again, seemedto be trying not to look too pleased with herself.

Harry and Ron were deeply amused when ProfessorTrelawney told them that they had received top marksfor their homework in their next Divination class. Sheread out large portions of their predictions,commending them for their unflinching acceptance ofthe horrors in store for them — but they were lessamused when she asked them to do the same thingfor the month after next; both of them were runningout of ideas for catastrophes.

Meanwhile Professor Binns, the ghost who taughtHistory of Magic, had them writing weekly essays onthe goblin rebellions of the eighteenth century.Professor Snape was forcing them to researchantidotes. They took this one seriously, as he hadhinted that he might be poisoning one of them beforeChristmas to see if their antidote worked. ProfessorFlitwick had asked them to read three extra books inpreparation for their lesson on Summoning Charms.

Even Hagrid was adding to their workload. The Blast-Ended Skrewts were growing at a remarkable pacegiven that nobody had yet discovered what they ate.Hagrid was delighted, and as part of their “project,”suggested that they come down to his hut onalternate evenings to observe the skrewts and makenotes on their extraordinary behavior.

“I will not,” said Draco Malfoy flatly when Hagrid hadproposed this with the air of Father Christmas pullingan extra-large toy out of his sack. “I see enough ofthese foul things during lessons, thanks.”

Hagrid’s smile faded off his face.

Page | 259

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yeh’ll do wha’yer told,” he growled, “or I’ll be takin’ aleaf outta Professor Moody’s book. ... I hear yeh madea good ferret, Malfoy.”

The Gryffindors roared with laughter. Malfoy flushedwith anger, but apparently the memory of Moody’spunishment was still sufficiently painful to stop himfrom retorting. Harry, Ron, and Hermione returned tothe castle at the end of the lesson in high spirits;seeing Hagrid put down Malfoy was particularlysatisfying, especially because Malfoy had done hisvery best to get Hagrid sacked the previous year.

When they arrived in the entrance hall, they foundthemselves unable to proceed owing to the largecrowd of students congregated there, all millingaround a large sign that had been erected at the footof the marble staircase. Ron, the tallest of the three,stood on tiptoe to see over the heads in front of themand read the sign aloud to the other two:

TRIWIZARD TOURNAMENT

The delegations from Beauxbatons and Durmstrangwill be arriving at 6 o’clock on Friday the 30th ofOctober. Lessons will end half an hour early —

“Brilliant!” said Harry. “It’s Potions last thing onFriday! Snape won’t have time to poison us all!”

Students will return their bags and books to theirdormitories and assemble in front of the castle togreet our guests before the Welcoming Feast.

“Only a week away!” said Ernie Macmillan ofHufflepuff, emerging from the crowd, his eyes

Page | 260

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

gleaming. “I wonder if Cedric knows? Think 111 go andtell him. ...”

“Cedric?” said Ron blankly as Ernie hurried off.

“Diggory,” said Harry. “He must be entering thetournament.”

“That idiot, Hogwarts champion?” said Ron as theypushed their way through the chattering crowdtoward the staircase.

“He’s not an idiot. You just don’t like him because hebeat Gryffindor at Quidditch,” said Hermione. “I’veheard he’s a really good student — and he’s aprefect.”

She spoke as though this settled the matter.

“You only like him because he’s handsome,” said Ronscathingly.

“Excuse me, I don’t like people just because they’rehandsome!” said Hermione indignantly.

Ron gave a loud false cough, which sounded oddlylike “Lockhart\”

The appearance of the sign in the entrance hall had amarked effect upon the inhabitants of the castle.During the following week, there seemed to be onlyone topic of conversation, no matter where Harrywent: the Triwizard Tournament. Rumors were flyingfrom student to student like highly contagious germs:who was going to try for Hogwarts champion, whatthe tournament would involve, how the students fromBeauxbatons and Durmstrang differed fromthemselves.

Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry noticed too that the castle seemed to beundergoing an extra-thorough cleaning. Several grimyportraits had been scrubbed, much to the displeasureof their subjects, who sat huddled in their framesmuttering darkly and wincing as they felt their rawpink faces. The suits of armor were suddenlygleaming and moving without squeaking, and ArgusFilch, the caretaker, was behaving so ferociously toany students who forgot to wipe their shoes that heterrified a pair of first-year girls into hysterics.

Other members of the staff seemed oddly tense too.

“Longbottom, kindly do not reveal that you can’t evenperform a simple Switching Spell in front of anyonefrom Durmstrang!” Professor McGonagall barked atthe end of one particularly difficult lesson, duringwhich Neville had accidentally transplanted his ownears onto a cactus.

When they went down to breakfast on the morning ofthe thirtieth of October, they found that the GreatHall had been decorated overnight. Enormous silkbanners hung from the walls, each of themrepresenting a Hogwarts House: red with a gold lionfor Gryffindor, blue with a bronze eagle forRavenclaw, yellow with a black badger for Hufflepuff,and green with a silver serpent for Slytherin. Behindthe teachers’ table, the largest banner of all bore theHogwarts coat of arms: lion, eagle, badger, and snakeunited around a large letter H.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat down beside Fred andGeorge at the Gryffindor table. Once again, and mostunusually, they were sitting apart from everyone elseand conversing in low voices. Ron led the way over tothem.

Page | 262

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“It’s a bummer, all right,” George was saying gloomilyto Fred. “But if he won’t talk to us in person, we’llhave to send him the letter after all. Or we’ll stuff itinto his hand. He can’t avoid us forever.”

“Who’s avoiding you?” said Ron, sitting down next tothem.

“Wish you would,” said Fred, looking irritated at theinterruption.

“What’s a bummer?” Ron asked George.

“Having a nosy git like you for a brother,” said George.

“You two got any ideas on the Triwizard Tournamentyet?” Harry asked. “Thought any more about trying toenter?”

“I asked McGonagall how the champions are chosenbut she wasn’t telling,” said George bitterly. “She justtold me to shut up and get on with transfiguring myraccoon.”

“Wonder what the tasks are going to be?” said Ronthoughtfully. “You know, I bet we could do them,Harry. We’ve done dangerous stuff before. ...”

“Not in front of a panel of judges, you haven’t,” saidFred. “McGonagall says the champions get awardedpoints according to how well they’ve done the tasks.”

“Who are the judges?” Harry asked.

“Well, the Heads of the participating schools arealways on the panel,” said Hermione, and everyonelooked around at her, rather surprised, “because allthree of them were injured during the Tournament of

Page | 263

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

1792, when a cockatrice the champions weresupposed to be catching went on the rampage.”

She noticed them all looking at her and said, with herusual air of impatience that nobody else had read allthe books she had, “It’s all in Hogwarts, A History.Though, of course, that book’s not entirely reliable. ARevised History of Hogwarts would be a moreaccurate title. Or A Highly Biased and SelectiveHistory of Hogwarts, Which Glosses Over the NastierAspects of the School.”

“What are you on about?” said Ron, though Harrythought he knew what was coming.

“House-elves\” said Hermione, her eyes flashing. “Notonce, in over a thousand pages, does Hogwarts, AHistory mention that we are all colluding in theoppression of a hundred slaves!”

Harry shook his head and applied himself to hisscrambled eggs. His and Ron’s lack of enthusiasmhad done nothing whatsoever to curb Hermione’sdetermination to pursue justice for house-elves. True,both of them had paid two Sickles for a S.P.E.W.badge, but they had only done it to keep her quiet.Their Sickles had been wasted, however; if anything,they seemed to have made Hermione more vociferous.She had been badgering Harry and Ron ever since,first to wear the badges, then to persuade others to dothe same, and she had also taken to rattling aroundthe Gryffindor common room every evening, corneringpeople and shaking the collecting tin under theirnoses.

“You do realize that your sheets are changed, yourfires lit, your classrooms cleaned, and your foodcooked by a group of magical creatures who areunpaid and enslaved?” she kept saying fiercely.

Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Some people, like Neville, had paid up just to stopHermione from glowering at them. A few seemedmildly interested in what she had to say, but werereluctant to take a more active role in campaigning.Many regarded the whole thing as a joke.

Ron now rolled his eyes at the ceiling, which wasflooding them all in autumn sunlight, and Fredbecame extremely interested in his bacon (both twinshad refused to buy a S.P.E.W. badge). George,however, leaned in toward Hermione.

“Listen, have you ever been down in the kitchens,Hermione?”

“No, of course not,” said Hermione curtly, “I hardlythink students are supposed to —”

“Well, we have,” said George, indicating Fred, “loadsof times, to nick food. And we’ve met them, andthey’re happy. They think they’ve got the best job inthe world —”

“That’s because they’re uneducated andbrainwashed!” Hermione began hotly, but her nextfew words were drowned out by the suddenwhooshing noise from overhead, which announcedthe arrival of the post owls. Harry looked up at once,and saw Hedwig soaring toward him. Hermionestopped talking abruptly; she and Ron watchedHedwig anxiously as she fluttered down onto Harry’sshoulder, folded her wings, and held out her legwearily.

Harry pulled off Sirius’s reply and offered Hedwig hisbacon rinds, which she ate gratefully. Then, checkingthat Fred and George were safely immersed in furtherdiscussions about the Tri-wizard Tournament, Harry

Page | 265

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

read out Sirius’s letter in a whisper to Ron andHermione.

Nice try, Harry.

I’m back in the country and well hidden. I want you tokeep me posted on everything that’s going on atHog warts. Don’t use Hedwig, keep changing owls, anddon’t worry about me, just watch out for yourself. Don’tforget what I said about your scar.

Sirius

“Why d’you have to keep changing owls?” Ron askedin a low voice.

“Hedwig’ll attract too much attention,” said Hermioneat once. “She stands out. A snowy owl that keepsreturning to wherever he’s hiding ... I mean, they’renot native birds, are they?”

Harry rolled up the letter and slipped it inside hisrobes, wondering whether he felt more or less worriedthan before. He supposed that Sirius managing to getback without being caught was something. Hecouldn’t deny either that the idea that Sirius wasmuch nearer was reassuring; at least he wouldn’thave to wait so long for a response every time hewrote.

“Thanks, Hedwig,” he said, stroking her. She hootedsleepily, dipped her beak briefly into his goblet oforange juice, then took off again, clearly desperate fora good long sleep in the Owlery.

There was a pleasant feeling of anticipation in the airthat day. Nobody was very attentive in lessons, beingmuch more interested in the arrival that evening ofthe people from Beauxbatons and Durmstrang; even

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Potions was more bearable than usual, as it was halfan hour shorter. When the bell rang early, Harry,

Ron, and Hermione hurried up to Gryffindor Tower,deposited their bags and books as they had beeninstructed, pulled on their cloaks, and rushed backdownstairs into the entrance hall.

The Heads of Houses were ordering their studentsinto lines.

“Weasley, straighten your hat,” Professor McGonagallsnapped at Ron. “Miss Patil, take that ridiculousthing out of your hair.”

Parvati scowled and removed a large ornamentalbutterfly from the end of her plait.

“Follow me, please,” said Professor McGonagall. “Firstyears in front ... no pushing. ...”

They filed down the steps and lined up in front of thecastle. It was a cold, clear evening; dusk was fallingand a pale, transparent-looking moon was alreadyshining over the Forbidden Forest. Harry, standingbetween Ron and Hermione in the fourth row fromthe front, saw Dennis Creevey positively shiveringwith anticipation among the other first years.

“Nearly six,” said Ron, checking his watch and thenstaring down the drive that led to the front gates.“How d’you reckon they’re coming? The train?”

“I doubt it,” said Hermione.

“How, then? Broomsticks?” Harry suggested, lookingup at the starry sky.

“I don’t think so ... not from that far away. ...”

Page | 267

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“A Portkey?” Ron suggested. “Or they could Apparate— maybe you’re allowed to do it under seventeenwherever they come from?”

“You can’t Apparate inside the Hogwarts grounds,how often do I have to tell you?” said Hermioneimpatiently.

They scanned the darkening grounds excitedly, butnothing was moving; everything was still, silent, andquite as usual. Harry was starting to feel cold. Hewished they’d hurry up. ... Maybe the foreignstudents were preparing a dramatic entrance. ... Heremembered what Mr. Weasley had said back at thecampsite before the Quidditch World Cup: “always thesame — we can’t resist showing off when we gettogether. ...”

And then Dumbledore called out from the back rowwhere he stood with the other teachers —

“Aha! Unless I am very much mistaken, the delegationfrom Beauxbatons approaches!”

“Where?” said many students eagerly, all looking indifferent directions.

“There!” yelled a sixth year, pointing over the forest.

Something large, much larger than a broomstick —or, indeed, a hundred broomsticks — was hurtlingacross the deep blue sky toward the castle, growinglarger all the time.

“It’s a dragon!” shrieked one of the first years, losingher head completely.

“Don’t be stupid ... it’s a flying house!” said DennisCreevey.

Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dennis’s guess was closer. ... As the gigantic blackshape skimmed over the treetops of the ForbiddenForest and the lights shining from the castle windowshit it, they saw a gigantic, powder-blue, horse-drawncarriage, the size of a large house, soaring towardthem, pulled through the air by a dozen wingedhorses, all palominos, and each the size of anelephant.

The front three rows of students drew backward asthe carriage hurtled ever lower, coming in to land at atremendous speed — then, with an almighty crashthat made Neville jump backward onto a Slytherinfifth year’s foot, the horses’ hooves, larger than dinnerplates, hit the ground. A second later, the carriagelanded too, bouncing upon its vast wheels, while thegolden horses tossed their enormous heads and rolledlarge, fiery red eyes.

Harry just had time to see that the door of thecarriage bore a coat of arms (two crossed, goldenwands, each emitting three stars) before it opened.

A boy in pale blue robes jumped down from thecarriage, bent forward, fumbled for a moment withsomething on the carriage floor, and unfolded a set ofgolden steps. He sprang back respectfully. ThenHarry saw a shining, high-heeled black shoe emergingfrom the inside of the carriage — a shoe the size of achild’s sled — followed, almost immediately, by thelargest woman he had ever seen in his life. The size ofthe carriage, and of the horses, was immediatelyexplained. A few people gasped.

Harry had only ever seen one person as large as thiswoman in his life, and that was Hagrid; he doubtedwhether there was an inch difference in their heights.Yet somehow — maybe simply because he was usedto Hagrid — this woman (now at the foot of the steps,Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

and looking around at the waiting, wide-eyed crowd)seemed even more unnaturally large. As she steppedinto the light flooding from the entrance hall, she wasrevealed to have a handsome, olive-skinned face;large, black, liquid-looking eyes; and a rather beakynose. Her hair was drawn back in a shining knob atthe base of her neck. She was dressed from head tofoot in black satin, and many magnificent opalsgleamed at her throat and on her thick fingers.

Dumbledore started to clap; the students, followinghis lead, broke into applause too, many of themstanding on tiptoe, the better to look at this woman.

Her face relaxed into a gracious smile and she walkedforward toward Dumbledore, extending a glitteringhand. Dumbledore, though tall himself, had barely tobend to kiss it.

“My dear Madame Maxime,” he said. “Welcome toHogwarts.”

“Dumbly-dorr,” said Madame Maxime in a deep voice.“I ’ope I find you well?”

“In excellent form, I thank you,” said Dumbledore.

“My pupils,” said Madame Maxime, waving one of herenormous hands carelessly behind her.

Harry, whose attention had been focused completelyupon Madame Maxime, now noticed that about adozen boys and girls, all, by the look of them, in theirlate teens, had emerged from the carriage and werenow standing behind Madame Maxime. They wereshivering, which was unsurprising, given that theirrobes seemed to be made of fine silk, and none ofthem were wearing cloaks. A few had wrapped scarvesand shawls around their heads. From what HarryPage | 270 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

could see of them (they were standing in MadameMaxime’s enormous shadow), they were staring up atHogwarts with apprehensive looks on their faces.

“ ’As Karkaroff arrived yet?” Madame Maxime asked.

“He should be here any moment,” said Dumbledore.“Would you like to wait here and greet him or wouldyou prefer to step inside and warm up a trifle?”

“Warm up, I think,” said Madame Maxime. “But ze’orses —”

“Our Care of Magical Creatures teacher will bedelighted to take care of them,” said Dumbledore, “themoment he has returned from dealing with a slightsituation that has arisen with some of his other — er— charges.”

“Skrewts,” Ron muttered to Harry, grinning.

“My steeds require — er — forceful ’andling,” saidMadame Maxime, looking as though she doubtedwhether any Care of Magical Creatures teacher atHogwarts could be up to the job. “Zey are very strong.

“I assure you that Hagrid will be well up to the job,”said Dumbledore, smiling.

“Very well,” said Madame Maxime, bowing slightly.“Will you please inform zis ’Agrid zat ze ’orses drinkonly single-malt whiskey?”

“It will be attended to,” said Dumbledore, also bowing.

“Come,” said Madame Maxime imperiously to herstudents, and the Hogwarts crowd parted to allow herand her students to pass up the stone steps.

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“How big d’you reckon Durmstrang’s horses are goingto be?” Seamus Finnigan said, leaning aroundLavender and Parvati to address Harry and Ron.

“Well, if they’re any bigger than this lot, even Hagridwon’t be able to handle them,” said Harry. “That’s ifhe hasn’t been attacked by his skrewts. Wonderwhat’s up with them?”

“Maybe they’ve escaped,” said Ron hopefully.

“Oh don’t say that,” said Hermione with a shudder.“Imagine that lot loose on the grounds. ...”

They stood, shivering slightly now, waiting for theDurmstrang party to arrive. Most people were gazinghopefully up at the sky. For a few minutes, thesilence was broken only by Madame Maxime’s hugehorses snorting and stamping. But then —

“Can you hear something?” said Ron suddenly.

Harry listened; a loud and oddly eerie noise wasdrifting toward them from out of the darkness: amuffled rumbling and sucking sound, as though animmense vacuum cleaner were moving along ariverbed. ...

“The lake!” yelled Lee Jordan, pointing down at it.“Look at the lake!”

From their position at the top of the lawnsoverlooking the grounds, they had a clear view of thesmooth black surface of the water — except that thesurface was suddenly not smooth at all. Somedisturbance was taking place deep in the center; greatbubbles were forming on the surface, waves were nowwashing over the muddy banks — and then, out inthe very middle of the lake, a whirlpool appeared, as ifPage | 272 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

a giant plug had just been pulled out of the lake’sfloor. ...

What seemed to be a long, black pole began to riseslowly out of the heart of the whirlpool ... and thenHarry saw the rigging. ...

“It’s a mast!” he said to Ron and Hermione.

Slowly, magnificently, the ship rose out of the water,gleaming in the moonlight. It had a strangely skeletallook about it, as though it were a resurrected wreck,and the dim, misty lights shimmering at its portholeslooked like ghostly eyes. Finally, with a great sloshingnoise, the ship emerged entirely, bobbing on theturbulent water, and began to glide toward the bank.A few moments later, they heard the splash of ananchor being thrown down in the shallows, and thethud of a plank being lowered onto the bank.

People were disembarking; they could see theirsilhouettes passing the lights in the ship’s portholes.All of them, Harry noticed, seemed to be built alongthe lines of Crabbe and Goyle ... but then, as theydrew nearer, walking up the lawns into the lightstreaming from the entrance hall, he saw that theirbulk was really due to the fact that they were wearingcloaks of some kind of shaggy, matted fur. But theman who was leading them up to the castle waswearing furs of a different sort: sleek and silver, likehis hair.

“Dumbledore!” he called heartily as he walked up theslope. “How are you, my dear fellow, how are you?”

“Blooming, thank you, Professor Karkaroff,”Dumbledore replied.

Page | 273

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Karkaroff had a fruity, unctuous voice; when hestepped into the light pouring from the front doors ofthe castle they saw that he was tall and thin likeDumbledore, but his white hair was short, and hisgoatee (finishing in a small curl) did not entirely hidehis rather weak chin. When he reached Dumbledore,he shook hands with both of his own.

“Dear old Hogwarts,” he said, looking up at the castleand smiling; his teeth were rather yellow, and Harrynoticed that his smile did not extend to his eyes,which remained cold and shrewd. “How good it is tobe here, how good. ... Viktor, come along, into thewarmth ... you don’t mind, Dumbledore? Viktor has aslight head cold. ...”

Karkaroff beckoned forward one of his students. Asthe boy passed, Harry caught a glimpse of aprominent curved nose and thick black eyebrows. Hedidn’t need the punch on the arm Ron gave him, orthe hiss in his ear, to recognize that profile.

“Harry — it’s Krum\”

Page | 274

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

t'fyfflapier- l6



THE GOBLET OF FIRE

“I don’t believe it!” Ron said, in a stunned voice, asthe Hogwarts students filed back up the steps behindthe party from Durmstrang. “Krum, Harry! ViktorKruml”

“For heaven’s sake, Ron, he’s only a Quidditchplayer,” said Hermione.

“Only a Quidditch player?” Ron said, looking at her asthough he couldn’t believe his ears. “Hermione — he’sone of the best Seekers in the world! I had no idea hewas still at school!”

As they recrossed the entrance hall with the rest ofthe Hogwarts students heading for the Great Hall,Harry saw Lee Jordan jumping up and down on thesoles of his feet to get a better look at the back ofKrum’s head. Several sixth-year girls were franticallysearching their pockets as they walked —

“Oh I don’t believe it, I haven’t got a single quill on me

??

Page | 275

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“D’you think he’d sign my hat in lipstick?”

“Really,” Hermione said loftily as they passed thegirls, now squabbling over the lipstick.

“I’m getting his autograph if I can,” said Ron. “Youhaven’t got a quill, have you, Harry?”

“Nope, they’re upstairs in my bag,” said Harry.

They walked over to the Gryffindor table and satdown. Ron took care to sit on the side facing thedoorway, because Krum and his fellow Durmstrangstudents were still gathered around it, apparentlyunsure about where they should sit. The studentsfrom Beauxbatons had chosen seats at the Ravenclawtable. They were looking around the Great Hall withglum expressions on their faces. Three of them werestill clutching scarves and shawls around their heads.

“It’s not that cold,” said Hermione defensively. “Whydidn’t they bring cloaks?”

“Over here! Come and sit over here!” Ron hissed.

“Over here! Hermione, budge up, make a space —”

“What?”

“Too late,” said Ron bitterly.

Viktor Krum and his fellow Durmstrang students hadsettled themselves at the Slytherin table. Harry couldsee Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle looking very smugabout this. As he watched, Malfoy bent forward tospeak to Krum.

“Yeah, that’s right, smarm up to him, Malfoy,” saidRon scathingly. “I bet Krum can see right throughhim, though ... bet he gets people fawning over him

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

all the time. ... Where d’you reckon they’re going tosleep? We could offer him a space in our dormitory,Harry ... I wouldn’t mind giving him my bed, I couldkip on a camp bed.”

Hermione snorted.

“They look a lot happier than the Beauxbatons lot,”said Harry.

The Durmstrang students were pulling off their heavyfurs and looking up at the starry black ceiling withexpressions of interest; a couple of them were pickingup the golden plates and goblets and examiningthem, apparently impressed.

Up at the staff table, Filch, the caretaker, was addingchairs. He was wearing his moldy old tailcoat inhonor of the occasion. Harry was surprised to seethat he added four chairs, two on either side ofDumbledore’s.

“But there are only two extra people,” Harry said.“Why’s Filch putting out four chairs, who else iscoming?”

“Eh?” said Ron vaguely. He was still staring avidly atKrum.

When all the students had entered the Hall andsettled down at their House tables, the staff entered,filing up to the top table and taking their seats. Lastin line were Professor Dumbledore, ProfessorKarkaroff, and Madame Maxime. When theirheadmistress appeared, the pupils from Beauxbatonsleapt to their feet. A few of the Hogwarts studentslaughed. The Beauxbatons party appeared quiteunembarrassed, however, and did not resume theirseats until Madame Maxime had sat down onPage | 277 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore’s left-hand side. Dumbledore remainedstanding, and a silence fell over the Great Hall.

“Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, ghosts and —most particularly — guests,” said Dumbledore,beaming around at the foreign students. “I have greatpleasure in welcoming you all to Hogwarts. I hope andtrust that your stay here will be both comfortable andenjoyable.”

One of the Beauxbatons girls still clutching a muffleraround her head gave what was unmistakably aderisive laugh.

“No one’s making you stay!” Hermione whispered,bristling at her.

“The tournament will be officially opened at the end ofthe feast,” said Dumbledore. “I now invite you all toeat, drink, and make yourselves at home!”

He sat down, and Harry saw Karkaroff lean forward atonce and engage him in conversation.

The plates in front of them filled with food as usual.The house-elves in the kitchen seemed to have pulledout all the stops; there was a greater variety of dishesin front of them than Harry had ever seen, includingseveral that were definitely foreign.

“What’s that?” said Ron, pointing at a large dish ofsome sort of shellfish stew that stood beside a largesteak-and-kidney pudding.

“Bouillabaisse,” said Hermione.

“Bless you,” said Ron.

Page | 278

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“It’s French,” said Hermione, “I had it on holidaysummer before last. It’s very nice.”

“I’ll take your word for it,” said Ron, helping himselfto black pudding.

The Great Hall seemed somehow much more crowdedthan usual, even though there were barely twentyadditional students there; perhaps it was becausetheir differently colored uniforms stood out so clearlyagainst the black of the Hogwarts’ robes. Now thatthey had removed their furs, the Durmstrangstudents were revealed to be wearing robes of a deepbloodred.

Hagrid sidled into the Hall through a door behind thestaff table twenty minutes after the start of the feast.He slid into his seat at the end and waved at Harry,Ron, and Hermione with a very heavily bandagedhand.

“Skrewts doing all right, Hagrid?” Harry called.

“Thrivin’,” Hagrid called back happily.

“Yeah, I’ll just bet they are,” said Ron quietly. “Lookslike they’ve finally found a food they like, doesn’t it?Hagrid’s fingers.”

At that moment, a voice said, “Excuse me, are youwanting ze bouillabaisse?”

It was the girl from Beauxbatons who had laughedduring Dumbledore’s speech. She had finally removedher muffler. A long sheet of silvery-blonde hair fellalmost to her waist. She had large, deep blue eyes,and very white, even teeth.

Page | 279

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Ron went purple. He stared up at her, opened hismouth to reply, but nothing came out except a faintgurgling noise.

“Yeah, have it,” said Harry, pushing the dish towardthe girl.

“You ’ave finished wiz it?”

“Yeah,” Ron said breathlessly. “Yeah, it wasexcellent.”

The girl picked up the dish and carried it carefully offto the Ravenclaw table. Ron was still goggling at thegirl as though he had never seen one before. Harrystarted to laugh. The sound seemed to jog Ron backto his senses.

“She’s a veelcd” he said hoarsely to Harry.

“Of course she isn’t!” said Hermione tartly. “I don’t seeanyone else gaping at her like an idiot!”

But she wasn’t entirely right about that. As the girlcrossed the Hall, many boys’ heads turned, and someof them seemed to have become temporarilyspeechless, just like Ron.

“I’m telling you, that’s not a normal girl!” said Ron,leaning sideways so he could keep a clear view of her.“They don’t make them like that at Hogwarts!”

“They make them okay at Hogwarts,” said Harrywithout thinking. Cho happened to be sitting only afew places away from the girl with the silvery hair.

“When you’ve both put your eyes back in,” saidHermione briskly, “you’ll be able to see who’s justarrived.”

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

She was pointing up at the staff table. The tworemaining empty seats had just been filled. LudoBagman was now sitting on Professor Karkaroff’sother side, while Mr. Crouch, Percy’s boss, was nextto Madame Maxime.

“What are they doing here?” said Harry in surprise.

“They organized the Triwizard Tournament, didn’tthey?” said Hermione. “I suppose they wanted to behere to see it start.”

When the second course arrived they noticed anumber of unfamiliar desserts too. Ron examined anodd sort of pale blancmange closely, then moved itcarefully a few inches to his right, so that it would beclearly visible from the Ravenclaw table. The girl wholooked like a veela appeared to have eaten enough,however, and did not come over to get it.

Once the golden plates had been wiped clean,Dumbledore stood up again. A pleasant sort oftension seemed to fill the Hall now. Harry felt a slightthrill of excitement, wondering what was coming.Several seats down from them, Fred and George wereleaning forward, staring at Dumbledore with greatconcentration.

“The moment has come,” said Dumbledore, smilingaround at the sea of upturned faces. “The TriwizardTournament is about to start. I would like to say a fewwords of explanation before we bring in the casket —”

“The what?” Harry muttered.

Ron shrugged.

“—just to clarify the procedure that we will befollowing this year. But first, let me introduce, for

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

those who do not know them, Mr. Bartemius Crouch,Head of the Department of International MagicalCooperation” — there was a smattering of politeapplause — “and Mr. Ludo Bagman, Head of theDepartment of Magical Games and Sports.”

There was a much louder round of applause forBagman than for Crouch, perhaps because of hisfame as a Beater, or simply because he looked somuch more likable. He acknowledged it with a jovialwave of his hand. Bartemius Crouch did not smile orwave when his name was announced. Rememberinghim in his neat suit at the Quidditch World Cup,Harry thought he looked strange in wizard’s robes.

His toothbrush mustache and severe parting lookedvery odd next to Dumbledore’s long white hair andbeard.

“Mr. Bagman and Mr. Crouch have worked tirelesslyover the last few months on the arrangements for theTriwizard Tournament,” Dumbledore continued, “andthey will be joining myself, Professor Karkaroff, andMadame Maxime on the panel that will judge thechampions’ efforts.”

At the mention of the word “champions,” theattentiveness of the listening students seemed tosharpen. Perhaps Dumbledore had noticed theirsudden stillness, for he smiled as he said, “Thecasket, then, if you please, Mr. Filch.”

Filch, who had been lurking unnoticed in a far cornerof the Hall, now approached Dumbledore carrying agreat wooden chest encrusted with jewels. It lookedextremely old. A murmur of excited interest rose fromthe watching students; Dennis Creevey actually stoodon his chair to see it properly, but, being so tiny, hishead hardly rose above anyone else’s.

Page | 282

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“The instructions for the tasks the champions willface this year have already been examined by Mr.Crouch and Mr. Bagman,” said Dumbledore as Filchplaced the chest carefully on the table before him,

“and they have made the necessary arrangements foreach challenge. There will be three tasks, spacedthroughout the school year, and they will test thechampions in many different ways ... their magicalprowess — their daring — their powers of deduction— and, of course, their ability to cope with danger.”

At this last word, the Hall was filled with a silence soabsolute that nobody seemed to be breathing.

“As you know, three champions compete in thetournament,” Dumbledore went on calmly, “one fromeach of the participating schools. They will be markedon how well they perform each of the Tournamenttasks and the champion with the highest total aftertask three will win the Triwizard Cup. The championswill be chosen by an impartial selector: the Goblet ofFire.”

Dumbledore now took out his wand and tapped threetimes upon the top of the casket. The lid creakedslowly open. Dumbledore reached inside it and pulledout a large, roughly hewn wooden cup. It would havebeen entirely unremarkable had it not been full to thebrim with dancing blue-white flames.

Dumbledore closed the casket and placed the gobletcarefully on top of it, where it would be clearly visibleto everyone in the Hall.

“Anybody wishing to submit themselves as championmust write their name and school clearly upon a slipof parchment and drop it into the goblet,” saidDumbledore. “Aspiring champions have twenty-fourhours in which to put their names forward. TomorrowPage | 283 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

night, Halloween, the goblet will return the names ofthe three it has judged most worthy to represent theirschools. The goblet will be placed in the entrance halltonight, where it will be freely accessible to all thosewishing to compete.

“To ensure that no underage student yields totemptation,” said Dumbledore, “I will be drawing anAge Line around the Goblet of Fire once it has beenplaced in the entrance hall. Nobody under the age ofseventeen will be able to cross this line.

“Finally, I wish to impress upon any of you wishing tocompete that this tournament is not to be enteredinto lightly. Once a champion has been selected bythe Goblet of Fire, he or she is obliged to see thetournament through to the end. The placing of yourname in the goblet constitutes a binding, magicalcontract. There can be no change of heart once youhave become a champion. Please be very sure,therefore, that you are wholeheartedly prepared toplay before you drop your name into the goblet. Now,

I think it is time for bed. Good night to you all.”

“An Age Line!” Fred Weasley said, his eyes glinting, asthey all made their way across the Hall to the doorsinto the entrance hall. “Well, that should be fooled byan Aging Potion, shouldn’t it? And once your name’sin that goblet, you’re laughing — it can’t tell whetheryou’re seventeen or not!”

“But I don’t think anyone under seventeen will standa chance,” said Hermione, “we just haven’t learnedenough ...”

“Speak for yourself,” said George shortly. “You’ll tryand get in, won’t you, Harry?”

Page | 284

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry thought briefly of Dumbledore’s insistence thatnobody under seventeen should submit their name,but then the wonderful picture of himself winning theTriwizard Tournament filled his mind again. ... Hewondered how angry Dumbledore would be ifsomeone younger than seventeen did find a way to getover the Age Line. ...

“Where is he?” said Ron, who wasn’t listening to aword of this conversation, but looking through thecrowd to see what had become of Krum. “Dumbledoredidn’t say where the Durmstrang people are sleeping,did he?”

But this query was answered almost instantly; theywere level with the Slytherin table now, and Karkaroffhad just bustled up to his students.

“Back to the ship, then,” he was saying. “Viktor, howare you feeling? Did you eat enough? Should I sendfor some mulled wine from the kitchens?”

Harry saw Krum shake his head as he pulled his fursback on.

“Professor, I vood like some vine,” said one of theother Durmstrang boys hopefully.

“I wasn’t offering it to you, Poliakoff,” snappedKarkaroff, his warmly paternal air vanishing in aninstant. “I notice you have dribbled food all down thefront of your robes again, disgusting boy —”

Karkaroff turned and led his students toward thedoors, reaching them at exactly the same moment asHarry, Ron, and Hermione. Harry stopped to let himwalk through first.

Page | 285

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Thank you,” said Karkaroff carelessly, glancing athim.

And then Karkaroff froze. He turned his head back toHarry and stared at him as though he couldn’t believehis eyes. Behind their headmaster, the students fromDurmstrang came to a halt too. Karkaroffs eyesmoved slowly up Harry’s face and fixed upon his scar.The Durmstrang students were staring curiously atHarry too. Out of the corner of his eye, Harry sawcomprehension dawn on a few of their faces. The boywith food all down his front nudged the girl next tohim and pointed openly at Harry’s forehead.

“Yeah, that’s Harry Potter,” said a growling voice frombehind them.

Professor Karkaroff spun around. Mad-Eye Moodywas standing there, leaning heavily on his staff, hismagical eye glaring unblinkingly at the Durmstrangheadmaster.

The color drained from Karkaroff’s face as Harrywatched. A terrible look of mingled fury and fear cameover him.

“You!” he said, staring at Moody as though unsure hewas really seeing him.

“Me,” said Moody grimly. “And unless you’ve gotanything to say to Potter, Karkaroff, you might wantto move. You’re blocking the doorway.”

It was true; half the students in the Hall were nowwaiting behind them, looking over one another’sshoulders to see what was causing the holdup.

Without another word, Professor Karkaroff swept hisstudents away with him. Moody watched him until he

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

was out of sight, his magical eye fixed upon his back,a look of intense dislike upon his mutilated face.

As the next day was Saturday, most students wouldnormally have breakfasted late. Harry, Ron, andHermione, however, were not alone in rising muchearlier than they usually did on weekends. When theywent down into the entrance hall, they saw abouttwenty people milling around it, some of them eatingtoast, all examining the Goblet of Fire. It had beenplaced in the center of the hall on the stool thatnormally bore the Sorting Hat. A thin golden line hadbeen traced on the floor, forming a circle ten feetaround it in every direction.

“Anyone put their name in yet?” Ron asked a third-year girl eagerly.

“All the Durmstrang lot,” she replied. “But I haven’tseen anyone from Hogwarts yet.”

“Bet some of them put it in last night after we’d allgone to bed,” said Harry. “I would’ve if it had been me... wouldn’t have wanted everyone watching. What ifthe goblet just gobbed you right back out again?”

Someone laughed behind Harry. Turning, he sawFred, George, and Lee Jordan hurrying down thestaircase, all three of them looking extremely excited.

“Done it,” Fred said in a triumphant whisper to Harry,Ron, and Hermione. “Just taken it.”

“What?” said Ron.

“The Aging Potion, dung brains,” said Fred.

Page | 287

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“One drop each,” said George, rubbing his handstogether with glee. “We only need to be a few monthsolder.”

“We’re going to split the thousand Galleons betweenthe three of us if one of us wins,” said Lee, grinningbroadly.

“I’m not sure this is going to work, you know,” saidHermione warningly “I’m sure Dumbledore will havethought of this.”

Fred, George, and Lee ignored her.

“Ready?” Fred said to the other two, quivering withexcitement. “C’mon, then — I’ll go first —”

Harry watched, fascinated, as Fred pulled a slip ofparchment out of his pocket bearing the words FredWeasley — Hog warts. Fred walked right up to theedge of the line and stood there, rocking on his toeslike a diver preparing for a fifty-foot drop. Then, withthe eyes of every person in the entrance hall uponhim, he took a great breath and stepped over the line.

For a split second Harry thought it had worked —George certainly thought so, for he let out a yell oftriumph and leapt after Fred — but next moment,there was a loud sizzling sound, and both twins werehurled out of the golden circle as though they hadbeen thrown by an invisible shot-putter. They landedpainfully, ten feet away on the cold stone floor, and toadd insult to injury, there was a loud popping noise,and both of them sprouted identical long whitebeards.

The entrance hall rang with laughter. Even Fred andGeorge joined in, once they had gotten to their feetand taken a good look at each other’s beards.

Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I did warn you,” said a deep, amused voice, andeveryone turned to see Professor Dumbledore comingout of the Great Hall. He surveyed Fred and George,his eyes twinkling. “I suggest you both go up toMadam Pomfrey. She is already tending to MissFawcett, of Ravenclaw, and Mr. Summers, ofHufflepuff, both of whom decided to age themselvesup a little too. Though I must say, neither of theirbeards is anything like as fine as yours.”

Fred and George set off for the hospital wing,accompanied by Lee, who was howling with laughter,and Harry, Ron, and Hermione, also chortling, wentin to breakfast.

The decorations in the Great Hall had changed thismorning. As it was Halloween, a cloud of live bats wasfluttering around the enchanted ceiling, whilehundreds of carved pumpkins leered from everycorner. Harry led the way over to Dean and Seamus,who were discussing those Hogwarts students ofseventeen or over who might be entering.

“There’s a rumor going around that Warrington got upearly and put his name in,” Dean told Harry. “Thatbig bloke from Slytherin who looks like a sloth.”

Harry, who had played Quidditch against Warrington,shook his head in disgust.

“We can’t have a Slytherin champion!”

“And all the Hufflepuffs are talking about Diggory,”said Seamus contemptuously. “But I wouldn’t havethought he’d have wanted to risk his good looks.”

“Listen!” said Hermione suddenly.

Page | 289

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

People were cheering out in the entrance hall. They allswiveled around in their seats and saw AngelinaJohnson coming into the Hall, grinning in anembarrassed sort of way. A tall black girl who playedChaser on the Gryffindor Quidditch team, Angelinacame over to them, sat down, and said, “Well, I’vedone it! Just put my name in!”

“You’re kidding!” said Ron, looking impressed.

“Are you seventeen, then?” asked Harry.

“ ’Course she is, can’t see a beard, can you?” saidRon.

“I had my birthday last week,” said Angelina.

“Well, I’m glad someone from Gryffindor’s entering,”said Hermione. “I really hope you get it, Angelina!”

“Thanks, Hermione,” said Angelina, smiling at her.

“Yeah, better you than Pretty-Boy Diggory,” saidSeamus, causing several Hufflepuffs passing theirtable to scowl heavily at him.

“What’re we going to do today, then?” Ron askedHarry and Hermione when they had finishedbreakfast and were leaving the Great Hall.

“We haven’t been down to visit Hagrid yet,” saidHarry.

“Okay,” said Ron, “just as long as he doesn’t ask us todonate a few fingers to the skrewts.”

A look of great excitement suddenly dawned onHermione’s face.

Page | 290

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I’ve just realized — I haven’t asked Hagrid to joinS.P.E.W. yet!” she said brightly. “Wait for me, willyou, while I nip upstairs and get the badges?”

“What is it with her?” said Ron, exasperated, asHermione ran away up the marble staircase.

“Hey, Ron,” said Harry suddenly. “It’s your friend ...”

The students from Beauxbatons were coming throughthe front doors from the grounds, among them, theveela-girl. Those gathered around the Goblet of Firestood back to let them pass, watching eagerly.

Madame Maxime entered the hall behind her studentsand organized them into a line. One by one, theBeauxbatons students stepped across the Age Lineand dropped their slips of parchment into the blue-white flames. As each name entered the fire, it turnedbriefly red and emitted sparks.

“What d’you reckon’ll happen to the ones who aren’tchosen?” Ron muttered to Harry as the veela-girldropped her parchment into the Goblet of Fire.“Reckon they’ll go back to school, or hang around towatch the tournament?”

“Dunno,” said Harry. “Hang around, I suppose. ...Madame Maxime’s staying to judge, isn’t she?”

When all the Beauxbatons students had submittedtheir names, Madame Maxime led them back out ofthe hall and out onto the grounds again.

“Where are they sleeping, then?” said Ron, movingtoward the front doors and staring after them.

Page | 291

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

A loud rattling noise behind them announcedHermione’s reappearance with the box of S.P.E.W.badges.

“Oh good, hurry up,” said Ron, and he jumped downthe stone steps, keeping his eyes on the back of theveela-girl, who was now halfway across the lawn withMadame Maxime.

As they neared Hagrid’s cabin on the edge of theForbidden Forest, the mystery of the Beauxbatons’sleeping quarters was solved. The gigantic powder-blue carriage in which they had arrived had beenparked two hundred yards from Hagrid’s front door,and the students were climbing back inside it. Theelephantine flying horses that had pulled the carriagewere now grazing in a makeshift paddock alongside it.

Harry knocked on Hagrid’s door, and Fang’s boomingbarks answered instantly

“ ’Bout time!” said Hagrid, when he’d flung open thedoor. “Thought you lot’d forgotten where I live!”

“We’ve been really busy, Hag —” Hermione started tosay, but then she stopped dead, looking up at Hagrid,apparently lost for words.

Hagrid was wearing his best (and very horrible) hairybrown suit, plus a checked yellow-and-orange tie.

This wasn’t the worst of it, though; he had evidentlytried to tame his hair, using large quantities of whatappeared to be axle grease. It was now slicked downinto two bunches — perhaps he had tried a ponytaillike Bill’s, but found he had too much hair. The lookdidn’t really suit Hagrid at all. For a moment,Hermione goggled at him, then, obviously decidingnot to comment, she said, “Erm — where are theskrewts?”

Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Out by the pumpkin patch,” said Hagrid happily.“They’re gettin’ massive, mus’ be nearly three footlong now. On’y trouble is, they’ve started killin’ eachother.”

“Oh no, really?” said Hermione, shooting a repressivelook at Ron, who, staring at Hagrid’s odd hairstyle,had just opened his mouth to say something about it.

“Yeah,” said Hagrid sadly. “ ’S’ okay, though, I’ve got’em in separate boxes now. Still got abou’ twenty.”

“Well, that’s lucky,” said Ron. Hagrid missed thesarcasm.

Hagrid’s cabin comprised a single room, in one cornerof which was a gigantic bed covered in a patchworkquilt. A similarly enormous wooden table and chairsstood in front of the fire beneath the quantity of curedhams and dead birds hanging from the ceiling. Theysat down at the table while Hagrid started to maketea, and were soon immersed in yet more discussionof the Triwizard Tournament. Hagrid seemed quite asexcited about it as they were.

“You wait,” he said, grinning. “You jus’ wait. Yer goingter see some stuff yeh’ve never seen before. Firs’ task... ah, but I’m not supposed ter say.”

“Go on, Hagrid!” Harry, Ron, and Hermione urgedhim, but he just shook his head, grinning.

“I don’ want ter spoil it fer yeh,” said Hagrid. “But it’sgonna be spectacular, I’ll tell yeh that. Themchampions’re going ter have their work cut out. Neverthought I’d live ter see the Triwizard Tournamentplayed again!”

Page | 293

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

They ended up having lunch with Hagrid, though theydidn’t eat much — Hagrid had made what he said wasa beef casserole, but after Hermione unearthed alarge talon in hers, she, Harry, and Ron rather losttheir appetites. However, they enjoyed themselvestrying to make Hagrid tell them what the tasks in thetournament were going to be, speculating which ofthe entrants were likely to be selected as champions,and wondering whether Fred and George werebeardless yet.

A light rain had started to fall by midafternoon; it wasvery cozy sitting by the fire, listening to the gentlepatter of the drops on the window, watching Hagriddarning his socks and arguing with Hermione abouthouse-elves — for he flatly refused to join S.P.E.W.when she showed him her badges.

“It’d be doin’ ’em an unkindness, Hermione,” he saidgravely, threading a massive bone needle with thickyellow yarn. “It’s in their nature ter look afterhumans, that’s what they like, see? Yeh’d be makin’’em unhappy ter take away their work, an’ insultin’’em if yeh tried ter pay ’em.”

“But Harry set Dobby free, and he was over the moonabout it!” said Hermione. “And we heard he’s askingfor wages now!”

“Yeah, well, yeh get weirdos in every breed. I’m notsayin’ there isn’t the odd elf who’d take freedom, butyeh’ll never persuade most of ’em ter do it — no,nothin’ doin’, Hermione.”

Hermione looked very cross indeed and stuffed herbox of badges back into her cloak pocket.

By half past five it was growing dark, and Ron, Harry,and Hermione decided it was time to get back up to

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the castle for the Halloween feast — and, moreimportant, the announcement of the schoolchampions.

“I’ll come with yeh,” said Hagrid, putting away hisdarning. “Jus’ give us a sec.”

Hagrid got up, went across to the chest of drawersbeside his bed, and began searching for somethinginside it. They didn’t pay too much attention until atruly horrible smell reached their nostrils. Coughing,Ron said, “Hagrid, what’s that?”

“Eh?” said Hagrid, turning around with a large bottlein his hand. “Don’ yeh like it?”

“Is that aftershave?” said Hermione in a slightlychoked voice.

“Er — eau de cologne,” Hagrid muttered. He wasblushing. “Maybe it’s a bit much,” he said gruffly. “I’llgo take it off, hang on ...

He stumped out of the cabin, and they saw himwashing himself vigorously in the water barrel outsidethe window.

“Eau de cologne?” said Hermione in amazement.“Hagrid?”

“And what’s with the hair and the suit?” said Harry inan undertone.

“Look!” said Ron suddenly, pointing out of thewindow.

Hagrid had just straightened up and turned ’round. Ifhe had been blushing before, it was nothing to whathe was doing now. Getting to their feet very

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

cautiously, so that Hagrid wouldn’t spot them, Harry,Ron, and Hermione peered through the window andsaw that Madame Maxime and the Beauxbatonsstudents had just emerged from their carriage, clearlyabout to set off for the feast too. They couldn’t hearwhat Hagrid was saying, but he was talking toMadame Maxime with a rapt, misty-eyed expressionHarry had only ever seen him wear once before —when he had been looking at the baby dragon,

Norbert.

“He’s going up to the castle with her!” said Hermioneindignantly. “I thought he was waiting for us!”

Without so much as a backward glance at his cabin,Hagrid was trudging off up the grounds with MadameMaxime, the Beauxbatons students following in theirwake, jogging to keep up with their enormous strides.

“He fancies her!” said Ron incredulously. “Well, if theyend up having children, they’ll be setting a worldrecord — bet any baby of theirs would weigh about aton.”

They let themselves out of the cabin and shut thedoor behind them. It was surprisingly dark outside.Drawing their cloaks more closely around themselves,they set off up the sloping lawns.

“Ooh it’s them, look!” Hermione whispered.

The Durmstrang party was walking up toward thecastle from the lake. Viktor Krum was walking side byside with Karkaroff, and the other Durmstrangstudents were straggling along behind them. Ronwatched Krum excitedly, but Krum did not lookaround as he reached the front doors a little ahead ofHermione, Ron, and Harry and proceeded throughthem.

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

When they entered the candlelit Great Hall it wasalmost full. The Goblet of Fire had been moved; it wasnow standing in front of Dumbledore’s empty chair atthe teachers’ table. Fred and George — clean-shavenagain — seemed to have taken their disappointmentfairly well.

“Hope it’s Angelina,” said Fred as Harry, Ron, andHermione sat down.

“So do I!” said Hermione breathlessly. “Well, we’llsoon know!”

The Halloween feast seemed to take much longer thanusual. Perhaps because it was their second feast intwo days, Harry didn’t seem to fancy theextravagantly prepared food as much as he wouldhave normally. Like everyone else in the Hall, judgingby the constantly craning necks, the impatientexpressions on every face, the fidgeting, and thestanding up to see whether Dumbledore had finishedeating yet, Harry simply wanted the plates to clear,and to hear who had been selected as champions.

At long last, the golden plates returned to theiroriginal spotless state; there was a sharp upswing inthe level of noise within the Hall, which died awayalmost instantly as Dumbledore got to his feet. Oneither side of him, Professor Karkaroff and MadameMaxime looked as tense and expectant as anyone.Ludo Bagman was beaming and winking at variousstudents. Mr. Crouch, however, looked quiteuninterested, almost bored.

“Well, the goblet is almost ready to make its decision,”said Dumbledore. “I estimate that it requires onemore minute. Now, when the champions’ names arecalled, I would ask them please to come up to the topof the Hall, walk along the staff table, and go throughPage | 297 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

into the next chamber” — he indicated the doorbehind the staff table — “where they will be receivingtheir first instructions.”

He took out his wand and gave a great sweeping wavewith it; at once, all the candles except those inside thecarved pumpkins were extinguished, plunging theminto a state of semidarkness. The Goblet of Fire nowshone more brightly than anything in the whole Hall,the sparkling bright, bluey-whiteness of the flamesalmost painful on the eyes. Everyone watched,waiting. ... A few people kept checking their watches.

“Any second,” Lee Jordan whispered, two seats awayfrom Harry.

The flames inside the goblet turned suddenly redagain. Sparks began to fly from it. Next moment, atongue of flame shot into the air, a charred piece ofparchment fluttered out of it — the whole roomgasped.

Dumbledore caught the piece of parchment and heldit at arm’s length, so that he could read it by the lightof the flames, which had turned back to blue-white.

“The champion for Durmstrang,” he read, in a strong,clear voice, “will be Viktor Krum.”

“No surprises there!” yelled Ron as a storm ofapplause and cheering swept the Hall. Harry sawViktor Krum rise from the Slytherin table and slouchup toward Dumbledore; he turned right, walked alongthe staff table, and disappeared through the door intothe next chamber.

Page | 298

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Bravo, Viktor!” boomed Karkaroff, so loudly thateveryone could hear him, even over all the applause.“Knew you had it in you!”

The clapping and chatting died down. Now everyone’sattention was focused again on the goblet, which,seconds later, turned red once more. A second pieceof parchment shot out of it, propelled by the flames.

“The champion for Beauxbatons,” said Dumbledore,

“is Fleur Delacour!”

“It’s her, Ron!” Harry shouted as the girl who soresembled a veela got gracefully to her feet, shookback her sheet of silvery blonde hair, and swept upbetween the Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables.

“Oh look, they’re all disappointed,” Hermione saidover the noise, nodding toward the remainder of theBeauxbatons party. “Disappointed” was a bit of anunderstatement, Harry thought. Two of the girls whohad not been selected had dissolved into tears andwere sobbing with their heads on their arms.

When Fleur Delacour too had vanished into the sidechamber, silence fell again, but this time it was asilence so stiff with excitement you could almost tasteit. The Hogwarts champion next ...

And the Goblet of Fire turned red once more; sparksshowered out of it; the tongue of flame shot high intothe air, and from its tip Dumbledore pulled the thirdpiece of parchment.

“The Hogwarts champion,” he called, “is CedricDiggory!”

“No!” said Ron loudly, but nobody heard him exceptHarry; the uproar from the next table was too great.

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Every single Hufflepuff had jumped to his or her feet,screaming and stamping, as Cedric made his waypast them, grinning broadly, and headed off towardthe chamber behind the teachers’ table. Indeed, theapplause for Cedric went on so long that it was sometime before Dumbledore could make himself heardagain.

“Excellent!” Dumbledore called happily as at last thetumult died down. “Well, we now have our threechampions. I am sure I can count upon all of you,including the remaining students from Beauxbatonsand Durmstrang, to give your champions every ounceof support you can muster. By cheering yourchampion on, you will contribute in a very real —”

But Dumbledore suddenly stopped speaking, and itwas apparent to everybody what had distracted him.

The fire in the goblet had just turned red again.Sparks were flying out of it. A long flame shotsuddenly into the air, and borne upon it was anotherpiece of parchment.

Automatically, it seemed, Dumbledore reached out along hand and seized the parchment. He held it outand stared at the name written upon it. There was along pause, during which Dumbledore stared at theslip in his hands, and everyone in the room stared atDumbledore. And then Dumbledore cleared his throatand read out —

“Harry Potter.”

Page | 300

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



THE FOUR CHAMPIONS

Harry sat there, aware that every head in the GreatHall had turned to look at him. He was stunned. Hefelt numb. He was surely dreaming. He had not heardcorrectly.

There was no applause. A buzzing, as though of angrybees, was starting to fill the Hall; some students werestanding up to get a better look at Harry as he sat,frozen, in his seat.

Up at the top table, Professor McGonagall had got toher feet and swept past Ludo Bagman and ProfessorKarkaroff to whisper urgently to ProfessorDumbledore, who bent his ear toward her, frowningslightly.

Harry turned to Ron and Hermione; beyond them, hesaw the long Gryffindor table all watching him,openmouthed.

“I didn’t put my name in,” Harry said blankly. “Youknow I didn’t.”

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Both of them stared just as blankly back.

At the top table, Professor Dumbledore hadstraightened up, nodding to Professor McGonagall.

“Harry Potter!” he called again. “Harry! Up here, if youplease!”

“Go on,” Hermione whispered, giving Harry a slightpush.

Harry got to his feet, trod on the hem of his robes,and stumbled slightly. He set off up the gap betweenthe Gryffindor and Hufflepuff tables. It felt like animmensely long walk; the top table didn’t seem to begetting any nearer at all, and he could feel hundredsand hundreds of eyes upon him, as though each werea searchlight. The buzzing grew louder and louder.After what seemed like an hour, he was right in frontof Dumbledore, feeling the stares of all the teachersupon him.

“Well ... through the door, Harry,” said Dumbledore.He wasn’t smiling.

Harry moved off along the teachers’ table. Hagrid wasseated right at the end. He did not wink at Harry, orwave, or give any of his usual signs of greeting. Helooked completely astonished and stared at Harry ashe passed like everyone else. Harry went through thedoor out of the Great Hall and found himself in asmaller room, lined with paintings of witches andwizards. A handsome fire was roaring in the fireplaceopposite him.

The faces in the portraits turned to look at him as heentered. He saw a wizened witch flit out of the frameof her picture and into the one next to it, which

Page | 302

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

contained a wizard with a walrus mustache. Thewizened witch started whispering in his ear.

Viktor Krum, Cedric Diggory, and Fleur Delacourwere grouped around the fire. They looked strangelyimpressive, silhouetted against the flames. Krum,hunched-up and brooding, was leaning against themantelpiece, slightly apart from the other two. Cedricwas standing with his hands behind his back, staringinto the fire. Fleur Delacour looked around whenHarry walked in and threw back her sheet of long,silvery hair.

“What is it?” she said. “Do zey want us back in zeHall?”

She thought he had come to deliver a message. Harrydidn’t know how to explain what had just happened.He just stood there, looking at the three champions. Itstruck him how very tall all of them were.

There was a sound of scurrying feet behind him, andLudo Bagman entered the room. He took Harry by thearm and led him forward.

“Extraordinary!” he muttered, squeezing Harry’s arm.“Absolutely extraordinary! Gentlemen ... lady,” headded, approaching the fireside and addressing theother three. “May I introduce — incredible though itmay seem — the fourth Triwizard champion?”

Viktor Krum straightened up. His surly face darkenedas he surveyed Harry. Cedric looked nonplussed. Helooked from Bagman to Harry and back again asthough sure he must have misheard what Bagmanhad said. Fleur Delacour, however, tossed her hair,smiling, and said, “Oh, vairy funny joke, MeesterBagman.”

Page | 303

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Joke?” Bagman repeated, bewildered. “No, no, not atall! Harry’s name just came out of the Goblet of Fire!”

Krum’s thick eyebrows contracted slightly. Cedric wasstill looking politely bewildered. Fleur frowned.

“But evidently zair ’as been a mistake,” she saidcontemptuously to Bagman. “ ’E cannot compete. ’E istoo young.”

“Well ... it is amazing,” said Bagman, rubbing hissmooth chin and smiling down at Harry. “But, as youknow, the age restriction was only imposed this yearas an extra safety measure. And as his name’s comeout of the goblet ... I mean, I don’t think there can beany ducking out at this stage. ... It’s down in therules, you’re obliged ... Harry will just have to do thebest he —”

The door behind them opened again, and a largegroup of people came in: Professor Dumbledore,followed closely by Mr. Crouch, Professor Karkaroff,Madame Maxime, Professor McGonagall, andProfessor Snape. Harry heard the buzzing of thehundreds of students on the other side of the wall,before Professor McGonagall closed the door.

“Madame Maxime!” said Fleur at once, striding over toher headmistress. “Zey are saying zat zis little boy isto compete also!”

Somewhere under Harry’s numb disbelief he felt aripple of anger. Little boy?

Madame Maxime had drawn herself up to her full,and considerable, height. The top of her handsomehead brushed the candle-filled chandelier, and hergigantic black-satin bosom swelled.

Page | 304

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What is ze meaning of zis, Dumbly-dorr?” she saidimperiously.

“I’d rather like to know that myself, Dumbledore,”said Professor Karkaroff. He was wearing a steelysmile, and his blue eyes were like chips of ice. “TwoHogwarts champions? I don’t remember anyonetelling me the host school is allowed two champions— or have I not read the rules carefully enough?”

He gave a short and nasty laugh.

“C’est impossible,” said Madame Maxime, whoseenormous hand with its many superb opals wasresting upon Fleur’s shoulder. “ ’Ogwarts cannot ’avetwo champions. It is most injust.”

“We were under the impression that your Age Linewould keep out younger contestants, Dumbledore,”said Karkaroff, his steely smile still in place, thoughhis eyes were colder than ever. “Otherwise, we would,of course, have brought along a wider selection ofcandidates from our own schools.”

“It’s no one’s fault but Potter’s, Karkaroff,” said Snapesoftly. His black eyes were alight with malice. “Don’tgo blaming Dumbledore for Potter’s determination tobreak rules. He has been crossing lines ever since hearrived here —”

“Thank you, Severus,” said Dumbledore firmly, andSnape went quiet, though his eyes still glintedmalevolently through his curtain of greasy black hair.

Professor Dumbledore was now looking down atHarry, who looked right back at him, trying to discernthe expression of the eyes behind the half-moonspectacles.

Page | 305

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Did you put your name into the Goblet of Fire,Harry?” he asked calmly.

“No,” said Harry. He was very aware of everybodywatching him closely. Snape made a soft noise ofimpatient disbelief in the shadows.

“Did you ask an older student to put it into the Gobletof Fire for you?” said Professor Dumbledore, ignoringSnape.

“No,” said Harry vehemently.

“Ah, but of course ’e is lying!” cried Madame Maxime.Snape was now shaking his head, his lip curling.

“He could not have crossed the Age Line,” saidProfessor McGonagall sharply. “I am sure we are allagreed on that —”

“Dumbly-dorr must ’ave made a mistake wiz ze line,”said Madame Maxime, shrugging.

“It is possible, of course,” said Dumbledore politely

“Dumbledore, you know perfectly well you did notmake a mistake!” said Professor McGonagall angrily.“Really, what nonsense! Harry could not have crossedthe line himself, and as Professor Dumbledorebelieves that he did not persuade an older student todo it for him, I’m sure that should be good enough foreverybody else!”

She shot a very angry look at Professor Snape.

“Mr. Crouch ... Mr. Bagman,” said Karkaroff, his voiceunctuous once more, “you are our — er — objectivejudges. Surely you will agree that this is mostirregular?”

Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Bagman wiped his round, boyish face with hishandkerchief and looked at Mr. Crouch, who wasstanding outside the circle of the firelight, his facehalf hidden in shadow. He looked slightly eerie, thehalf darkness making him look much older, givinghim an almost skull-like appearance. When he spoke,however, it was in his usual curt voice.

“We must follow the rules, and the rules state clearlythat those people whose names come out of theGoblet of Fire are bound to compete in thetournament.”

“Well, Barty knows the rule book back to front,” saidBagman, beaming and turning back to Karkaroff andMadame Maxime, as though the matter was nowclosed.

“I insist upon resubmitting the names of the rest ofmy students,” said Karkaroff. He had dropped hisunctuous tone and his smile now. His face wore avery ugly look indeed. “You will set up the Goblet ofFire once more, and we will continue adding namesuntil each school has two champions. It’s only fair,Dumbledore.”

“But Karkaroff, it doesn’t work like that,” saidBagman. “The Goblet of Fire’s just gone out — it won’treignite until the start of the next tournament —”

“— in which Durmstrang will most certainly not becompeting!” exploded Karkaroff. “After all ourmeetings and negotiations and compromises, I littleexpected something of this nature to occur! I havehalf a mind to leave now!”

“Empty threat, Karkaroff,” growled a voice from nearthe door. “You can’t leave your champion now. He’sgot to compete. They’ve all got to compete. Binding

Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

magical contract, like Dumbledore said. Convenient,eh?”

Moody had just entered the room. He limped towardthe fire, and with every right step he took, there was aloud clunk.

“Convenient?” said Karkaroff. “I’m afraid I don’tunderstand you, Moody.”

Harry could tell he was trying to sound disdainful, asthough what Moody was saying was barely worth hisnotice, but his hands gave him away; they had balledthemselves into fists.

“Don’t you?” said Moody quietly. “It’s very simple,Karkaroff. Someone put Potter’s name in that gobletknowing he’d have to compete if it came out.”

“Evidently, someone ’oo wished to give ’Ogwarts twobites at ze apple!” said Madame Maxime.

“I quite agree, Madame Maxime,” said Karkaroff,bowing to her. “I shall be lodging complaints with theMinistry of Magic and the International Confederationof Wizards —”

“If anyone’s got reason to complain, it’s Potter,”growled Moody, “but ... funny thing ... I don’t hearhim saying a word. ...”

“Why should ’e complain?” burst out Fleur Delacour,stamping her foot. “ ’E ’as ze chance to compete, ’asn’t’e? We ’ave all been ’oping to be chosen for weeks andweeks! Ze honor for our schools! A thousand Galleonsin prize money — zis is a chance many would die for!”

“Maybe someone’s hoping Potter is going to die for it,”said Moody, with the merest trace of a growl.

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

An extremely tense silence followed these words. LudoBagman, who was looking very anxious indeed,bounced nervously up and down on his feet and said,“Moody, old man ... what a thing to say!”

“We all know Professor Moody considers the morningwasted if he hasn’t discovered six plots to murder himbefore lunchtime,” said Karkaroff loudly. “Apparentlyhe is now teaching his students to fear assassinationtoo. An odd quality in a Defense Against the DarkArts teacher, Dumbledore, but no doubt you had yourreasons.”

“Imagining things, am I?” growled Moody. “Seeingthings, eh? It was a skilled witch or wizard who putthe boy’s name in that goblet. ...”

“Ah, what evidence is zere of zat?” said MadameMaxime, throwing up her huge hands.

“Because they hoodwinked a very powerful magicalobject!” said Moody. “It would have needed anexceptionally strong Confundus Charm to bamboozlethat goblet into forgetting that only three schoolscompete in the tournament. ... I’m guessing theysubmitted Potter’s name under a fourth school, tomake sure he was the only one in his category. ...”

“You seem to have given this a great deal of thought,Moody,” said Karkaroff coldly, “and a very ingenioustheory it is — though of course, I heard you recentlygot it into your head that one of your birthdaypresents contained a cunningly disguised basiliskegg, and smashed it to pieces before realizing it was acarriage clock. So you’ll understand if we don’t takeyou entirely seriously. ...”

“There are those who’ll turn innocent occasions totheir advantage,” Moody retorted in a menacing voice.

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“It’s my job to think the way Dark wizards do,Karkaroff— as you ought to remember. ...”

“Alastor!” said Dumbledore warningly. Harrywondered for a moment whom he was speaking to,but then realized “Mad-Eye” could hardly be Moody’sreal first name. Moody fell silent, though stillsurveying Karkaroff with satisfaction — Karkaroff’sface was burning.

“How this situation arose, we do not know,” saidDumbledore, speaking to everyone gathered in theroom. “It seems to me, however, that we have nochoice but to accept it. Both Cedric and Harry havebeen chosen to compete in the Tournament. This,therefore, they will do. ...”

“Ah, but Dumbly-dorr —”

“My dear Madame Maxime, if you have an alternative,

I would be delighted to hear it.”

Dumbledore waited, but Madame Maxime did notspeak, she merely glared. She wasn’t the only oneeither. Snape looked furious; Karkaroff livid; Bagman,however, looked rather excited.

“Well, shall we crack on, then?” he said, rubbing hishands together and smiling around the room. “Got togive our champions their instructions, haven’t we?Barty, want to do the honors?”

Mr. Crouch seemed to come out of a deep reverie.

“Yes,” he said, “instructions. Yes ... the first task ...”

He moved forward into the firelight. Close up, Harrythought he looked ill. There were dark shadowsbeneath his eyes and a thin, papery look about his

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

wrinkled skin that had not been there at theQuidditch World Cup.

“The first task is designed to test your daring,” he toldHarry, Cedric, Fleur, and Viktor, “so we are not goingto be telling you what it is. Courage in the face of theunknown is an important quality in a wizard ... veryimportant. ...

“The first task will take place on November thetwenty-fourth, in front of the other students and thepanel of judges.

“The champions are not permitted to ask for or accepthelp of any kind from their teachers to complete thetasks in the tournament. The champions will face thefirst challenge armed only with their wands. They willreceive information about the second task when thefirst is over. Owing to the demanding and time-consuming nature of the tournament, the championsare exempted from end-of-year tests.”

Mr. Crouch turned to look at Dumbledore.

“I think that’s all, is it, Albus?”

“I think so,” said Dumbledore, who was looking at Mr.Crouch with mild concern. “Are you sure youwouldn’t like to stay at Hogwarts tonight, Barty?”

“No, Dumbledore, I must get back to the Ministry,”said Mr. Crouch. “It is a very busy, very difficult timeat the moment. ... I’ve left young Weatherby incharge. ... Very enthusiastic ... a littleoverenthusiastic, if truth be told. ...”

“You’ll come and have a drink before you go, atleast?” said Dumbledore.

Page | 311

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Come on, Barty, I’m staying!” said Bagman brightly.“It’s all happening at Hogwarts now, you know, muchmore exciting here than at the office!”

“I think not, Ludo,” said Crouch with a touch of hisold impatience.

“Professor Karkaroff — Madame Maxime — anightcap?” said Dumbledore.

But Madame Maxime had already put her armaround Fleur’s shoulders and was leading her swiftlyout of the room. Harry could hear them both talkingvery fast in French as they went off into the GreatHall. Karkaroff beckoned to Krum, and they, too,exited, though in silence.

“Harry, Cedric, I suggest you go up to bed,” saidDumbledore, smiling at both of them. “I am sureGryffindor and Hufflepuff are waiting to celebrate withyou, and it would be a shame to deprive them of thisexcellent excuse to make a great deal of mess andnoise.”

Harry glanced at Cedric, who nodded, and they lefttogether.

The Great Hall was deserted now; the candles hadburned low, giving the jagged smiles of the pumpkinsan eerie, flickering quality.

“So,” said Cedric, with a slight smile. “We’re playingagainst each other again!”

“I s’pose,” said Harry. He really couldn’t think ofanything to say. The inside of his head seemed to bein complete disarray, as though his brain had beenransacked.

Page | 312

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“So ... tell me ...” said Cedric as they reached theentrance hall, which was now lit only by torches inthe absence of the Goblet of Fire. “How did you getyour name in?”

“I didn’t,” said Harry, staring up at him. “I didn’t putit in. I was telling the truth.”

“Ah ... okay,” said Cedric. Harry could tell Cedricdidn’t believe him. “Well ... see you, then.”

Instead of going up the marble staircase, Cedricheaded for a door to its right. Harry stood listening tohim going down the stone steps beyond it, then,slowly, he started to climb the marble ones.

Was anyone except Ron and Hermione going tobelieve him, or would they all think he’d put himselfin for the tournament? Yet how could anyone thinkthat, when he was facing competitors who’d had threeyears’ more magical education than he had — whenhe was now facing tasks that not only sounded verydangerous, but which were to be performed in front ofhundreds of people? Yes, he’d thought about it ... he’dfantasized about it ... but it had been a joke, really,an idle sort of dream ... he’d never really, seriouslyconsidered entering. ...

But someone else had considered it ... someone elsehad wanted him in the tournament, and had madesure he was entered. Why? To give him a treat? Hedidn’t think so, somehow. ...

To see him make a fool of himself? Well, they werelikely to get their wish. ...

But to get him killed?

Page | 313

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Was Moody just being his usual paranoid self?Couldn’t someone have put Harry’s name in thegoblet as a trick, a practical joke? Did anyone reallywant him dead?

Harry was able to answer that at once. Yes, someonewanted him dead, someone had wanted him deadever since he had been a year old ... Lord Voldemort.But how could Voldemort have ensured that Harry’sname got into the Goblet of Fire? Voldemort wassupposed to be far away, in some distant country, inhiding, alone ... feeble and powerless. ...

Yet in that dream he had had, just before he hadawoken with his scar hurting, Voldemort had notbeen alone ... he had been talking to Wormtail ...plotting Harry’s murder. ...

Harry got a shock to find himself facing the Fat Ladyalready. He had barely noticed where his feet werecarrying him. It was also a surprise to see that shewas not alone in her frame. The wizened witch whohad flitted into her neighbor’s painting when he hadjoined the champions downstairs was now sittingsmugly beside the Fat Lady. She must have dashedthrough every picture lining seven staircases to reachhere before him. Both she and the Fat Lady werelooking down at him with the keenest interest.

“Well, well, well,” said the Fat Lady, “Violet’s just toldme everything. Who’s just been chosen as schoolchampion, then?”

“Balderdash,” said Harry dully.

“It most certainly isn’t!” said the pale witchindignantly.

Page | 314

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No, no, Vi, it’s the password,” said the Fat Ladysoothingly, and she swung forward on her hinges tolet Harry into the common room.

The blast of noise that met Harry’s ears when theportrait opened almost knocked him backward. Nextthing he knew, he was being wrenched inside thecommon room by about a dozen pairs of hands, andwas facing the whole of Gryffindor House, all of whomwere screaming, applauding, and whistling.

“You should’ve told us you’d entered!” bellowed Fred;he looked half annoyed, half deeply impressed.

“How did you do it without getting a beard? Brilliant!”roared George.

“I didn’t,” Harry said. “I don’t know how —”

But Angelina had now swooped down upon him; “Ohif it couldn’t be me, at least it’s a Gryffindor —”

“You’ll be able to pay back Diggory for that lastQuidditch match, Harry!” shrieked Katie Bell, anotherof the Gryffindor Chasers.

“We’ve got food, Harry, come and have some —”

“I’m not hungry, I had enough at the feast —”

But nobody wanted to hear that he wasn’t hungry;nobody wanted to hear that he hadn’t put his name inthe goblet; not one single person seemed to havenoticed that he wasn’t at all in the mood to celebrate.... Lee Jordan had unearthed a Gryffindor bannerfrom somewhere, and he insisted on draping itaround Harry like a cloak. Harry couldn’t get away;whenever he tried to sidle over to the staircase up tothe dormitories, the crowd around him closed ranks,Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

forcing another butterbeer on him, stuffing crisps andpeanuts into his hands. ... Everyone wanted to knowhow he had done it, how he had tricked Dumbledore’sAge Line and managed to get his name into thegoblet. ...

“I didn’t,” he said, over and over again, “I don’t knowhow it happened.”

But for all the notice anyone took, he might just aswell not have answered at all.

“I’m tired!” he bellowed finally, after nearly half anhour. “No, seriously, George — I’m going to bed —”

He wanted more than anything to find Ron andHermione, to find a bit of sanity, but neither of themseemed to be in the common room. Insisting that heneeded to sleep, and almost flattening the littleCreevey brothers as they attempted to waylay him atthe foot of the stairs, Harry managed to shakeeveryone off and climb up to the dormitory as fast ashe could.

To his great relief, he found Ron was lying on his bedin the otherwise empty dormitory, still fully dressed.He looked up when Harry slammed the door behindhim.

“Where’ve you been?” Harry said.

“Oh hello,” said Ron.

He was grinning, but it was a very odd, strained sortof grin. Harry suddenly became aware that he wasstill wearing the scarlet Gryffindor banner that Leehad tied around him. He hastened to take it off, but itwas knotted very tightly. Ron lay on the bed withoutmoving, watching Harry struggle to remove it.

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

“So,” he said, when Harry had finally removed thebanner and thrown it into a corner.

“Congratulations. ”

“What d’you mean, congratulations?” said Harry,staring at Ron. There was definitely something wrongwith the way Ron was smiling: It was more like agrimace.

“Well ... no one else got across the Age Line,” saidRon. “Not even Fred and George. What did you use —the Invisibility Cloak?”

“The Invisibility Cloak wouldn’t have got me over thatline,” said Harry slowly.

“Oh right,” said Ron. “I thought you might’ve told meif it was the cloak ... because it would’ve covered bothof us, wouldn’t it? But you found another way, didyou?”

“Listen,” said Harry, “I didn’t put my name in thatgoblet. Someone else must’ve done it.”

Ron raised his eyebrows.

“What would they do that for?”

“I dunno,” said Harry. He felt it would sound verymelodramatic to say, “To kill me.”

Ron’s eyebrows rose so high that they were in dangerof disappearing into his hair.

“It’s okay, you know, you can tell me the truth,” hesaid. “If you don’t want everyone else to know, fine,but I don’t know why you’re bothering to lie, youdidn’t get into trouble for it, did you? That friend ofthe Fat Lady’s, that Violet, she’s already told us allPage | 317 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore’s letting you enter. A thousand Galleonsprize money, eh? And you don’t have to do end-of-year tests either. ...”

“I didn’t put my name in that goblet!” said Harry,starting to feel angry.

“Yeah, okay,” said Ron, in exactly the same scepticaltone as Cedric. “Only you said this morning you’dhave done it last night, and no one would’ve seen you.... I’m not stupid, you know.”

“You’re doing a really good impression of it,” Harrysnapped.

“Yeah?” said Ron, and there was no trace of a grin,forced or otherwise, on his face now. “You want to getto bed, Harry. I expect you’ll need to be up earlytomorrow for a photo-call or something.”

He wrenched the hangings shut around his four-poster, leaving Harry standing there by the door,staring at the dark red velvet curtains, now hidingone of the few people he had been sure would believehim.

Page | 318

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE WEIGHING OF THE WANDS

When Harry woke up on Sunday morning, it took hima moment to remember why he felt so miserable andworried. Then the memory of the previous night rolledover him. He sat up and ripped back the curtains ofhis own four-poster, intending to talk to Ron, to forceRon to believe him — only to find that Ron’s bed wasempty; he had obviously gone down to breakfast.

Harry dressed and went down the spiral staircase intothe common room. The moment he appeared, thepeople who had already finished breakfast broke intoapplause again. The prospect of going down into theGreat Hall and facing the rest of the Gryffindors, alltreating him like some sort of hero, was not inviting;it was that, however, or stay here and allow himself tobe cornered by the Creevey brothers, who were bothbeckoning frantically to him to join them. He walkedresolutely over to the portrait hole, pushed it open,climbed out of it, and found himself face-to-face withHermione.

Page | 319

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Hello,” she said, holding up a stack of toast, whichshe was carrying in a napkin. “I brought you this. ...Want to go for a walk?”

“Good idea,” said Harry gratefully.

They went downstairs, crossed the entrance hallquickly without looking in at the Great Hall, and weresoon striding across the lawn toward the lake, wherethe Durmstrang ship was moored, reflected blackly inthe water. It was a chilly morning, and they keptmoving, munching their toast, as Harry toldHermione exactly what had happened after he had leftthe Gryffindor table the night before. To his immenserelief, Hermione accepted his story without question.

“Well, of course I knew you hadn’t entered yourself,”she said when he’d finished telling her about thescene in the chamber off the Hall. “The look on yourface when Dumbledore read out your name! But thequestion is, who did put it in? Because Moody’s right,Harry ... I don’t think any student could have done it... they’d never be able to fool the Goblet, or get overDumbledore’s —”

“Have you seen Ron?” Harry interrupted.

Hermione hesitated.

“Erm ... yes ... he was at breakfast,” she said.

“Does he still think I entered myself?”

“Well ... no, I don’t think so ... not really,” saidHermione awkwardly.

“What’s that supposed to mean, ‘not really’?”

Page | 320

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh Harry, isn’t it obvious?” Hermione saiddespairingly. “He’s jealous!”

“Jealous?” Harry said incredulously. “Jealous ofwhat? He wants to make a prat of himself in front ofthe whole school, does he?”

“Look,” said Hermione patiently, “it’s always you whogets all the attention, you know it is. I know it’s notyour fault,” she added quickly, seeing Harry open hismouth furiously. “I know you don’t ask for it ... but —well — you know, Ron’s got all those brothers tocompete against at home, and you’re his best friend,and you’re really famous — he’s always shunted toone side whenever people see you, and he puts upwith it, and he never mentions it, but I suppose thisis just one time too many. ...”

“Great,” said Harry bitterly. “Really great. Tell himfrom me I’ll swap any time he wants. Tell him fromme he’s welcome to it. ... People gawping at myforehead everywhere I go. ...”

“I’m not telling him anything,” Hermione said shortly.“Tell him yourself. It’s the only way to sort this out.”

“I’m not running around after him trying to make himgrow up!” Harry said, so loudly that several owls in anearby tree took flight in alarm. “Maybe he’ll believeI’m not enjoying myself once I’ve got my neck brokenor —”

“That’s not funny,” said Hermione quietly. “That’s notfunny at all.” She looked extremely anxious. “Harry,I’ve been thinking — you know what we’ve got to do,don’t you? Straight away, the moment we get back tothe castle?”

“Yeah, give Ron a good kick up the —”

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Write to Sirius. You’ve got to tell him what’shappened. He asked you to keep him posted oneverything that’s going on at Hogwarts. ... It’s almostas if he expected something like this to happen. Ibrought some parchment and a quill out with me —”

“Come off it,” said Harry, looking around to checkthat they couldn’t be overheard, but the grounds werequite deserted. “He came back to the country justbecause my scar twinged. He’ll probably comebursting right into the castle if I tell him someone’sentered me in the Triwizard Tournament —”

“He’d want you to tell him,” said Hermione sternly.“He’s going to find out anyway —”

“How?”

“Harry, this isn’t going to be kept quiet,” saidHermione, very seriously. “This tournament’s famous,and you’re famous. Ill be really surprised if there isn’tanything in the Daily Prophet about you competing. ...You’re already in half the books about You-Know-Who, you know ... and Sirius would rather hear itfrom you, I know he would.”

“Okay, okay, I’ll write to him,” said Harry, throwinghis last piece of toast into the lake. They both stoodand watched it floating there for a moment, before alarge tentacle rose out of the water and scooped itbeneath the surface. Then they returned to the castle.

“Whose owl am I going to use?” Harry said as theyclimbed the stairs. “He told me not to use Hedwigagain.”

“Ask Ron if you can borrow —”

“I’m not asking Ron for anything,” Harry said flatly.

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Well, borrow one of the school owls, then, anyonecan use them,” said Hermione.

They went up to the Owlery Hermione gave Harry apiece of parchment, a quill, and a bottle of ink, thenstrolled around the long lines of perches, looking atall the different owls, while Harry sat down against awall and wrote his letter.

Dear Sirius,

You told me to keep you posted on what’s happeningat Hogwarts, so here goes — I don’t know if you’veheard, but the Tri-wizard Tournament’s happening thisyear and on Saturday night I got picked as a fourthchampion. I don’t know who put my name in the Gobletof Fire, because I didn’t The other Hogwarts championis Cedric Diggory, from Hufflepuff

He paused at this point, thinking. He had an urge tosay something about the large weight of anxiety thatseemed to have settled inside his chest since lastnight, but he couldn’t think how to translate this intowords, so he simply dipped his quill back into the inkbottle and wrote,

Hope you’re okay, and Buckbeak — Harry

“Finished,” he told Hermione, getting to his feet andbrushing straw off his robes. At this, Hedwig camefluttering down onto his shoulder and held out herleg.

“I can’t use you,” Harry told her, looking around forthe school owls. “I’ve got to use one of these. ...”

Page | 323

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hedwig gave a very loud hoot and took off so suddenlythat her talons cut into his shoulder. She kept herback to Harry all the time he was tying his letter tothe leg of a large barn owl. When the barn owl hadflown off, Harry reached out to stroke Hedwig, but sheclicked her beak furiously and soared up into therafters out of reach.

“First Ron, then you,” said Harry angrily. “This isn’tmy fault.”

If Harry had thought that matters would improveonce everyone got used to the idea of him beingchampion, the following day showed him howmistaken he was. He could no longer avoid the rest ofthe school once he was back at lessons — and it wasclear that the rest of the school, just like theGryffindors, thought Harry had entered himself forthe tournament. Unlike the Gryffindors, however,they did not seem impressed.

The Hufflepuffs, who were usually on excellent termswith the Gryffindors, had turned remarkably coldtoward the whole lot of them. One Herbology lessonwas enough to demonstrate this. It was plain that theHufflepuffs felt that Harry had stolen theirchampion’s glory; a feeling exacerbated, perhaps, bythe fact that Hufflepuff House very rarely got anyglory, and that Cedric was one of the few who hadever given them any, having beaten Gryffindor once atQuidditch. Ernie Macmillan and Justin Finch-Fletchley, with whom Harry normally got on very well,did not talk to him even though they were repottingBouncing Bulbs at the same tray — though they didlaugh rather unpleasantly when one of the BouncingBulbs wriggled free from Harry’s grip and smackedhim hard in the face. Ron wasn’t talking to Harryeither. Hermione sat between them, making veryforced conversation, but though both answered herPage | 324 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

normally, they avoided making eye contact with eachother. Harry thought even Professor Sprout seemeddistant with him — but then, she was Head ofHufflepuff House.

He would have been looking forward to seeing Hagridunder normal circumstances, but Care of MagicalCreatures meant seeing the Slytherins too — the firsttime he would come face-to-face with them sincebecoming champion.

Predictably, Malfoy arrived at Hagrid’s cabin with hisfamiliar sneer firmly in place.

“Ah, look, boys, it’s the champion,” he said to Crabbeand Goyle the moment he got within earshot of Harry.“Got your autograph books? Better get a signaturenow, because I doubt he’s going to be around muchlonger. ... Half the Triwizard champions have died ...how long d’you reckon you’re going to last, Potter?

Ten minutes into the first task’s my bet.”

Crabbe and Goyle guffawed sycophantically, butMalfoy had to stop there, because Hagrid emergedfrom the back of his cabin balancing a teetering towerof crates, each containing a very large Blast-EndedSkrewt. To the class’s horror, Hagrid proceeded toexplain that the reason the skrewts had been killingone another was an excess of pent-up energy, andthat the solution would be for each student to fix aleash on a skrewt and take it for a short walk. Theonly good thing about this plan was that it distractedMalfoy completely.

“Take this thing for a walk?” he repeated in disgust,staring into one of the boxes. “And where exactly arewe supposed to fix the leash? Around the sting, theblasting end, or the sucker?”

Page | 325

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Roun’ the middle,” said Hagrid, demonstrating. “Er— yeh might want ter put on yer dragon-hide gloves,jus’ as an extra precaution, like. Harry — you comehere an’ help me with this big one. ...”

Hagrid’s real intention, however, was to talk to Harryaway from the rest of the class. He waited untileveryone else had set off with their skrewts, thenturned to Harry and said, very seriously, “So — yercompetin’, Harry. In the tournament. Schoolchampion.”

“One of the champions,” Harry corrected him.

Hagrid’s beetle-black eyes looked very anxious underhis wild eyebrows.

“No idea who put yeh in fer it, Harry?”

“You believe I didn’t do it, then?” said Harry,concealing with difficulty the rush of gratitude he feltat Hagrid’s words.

“ ’Course I do,” Hagrid grunted. “Yeh say it wasn’ you,an’ I believe yeh — an’ Dumbledore believes yer, an’all.”

“Wish I knew who did do it,” said Harry bitterly.

The pair of them looked out over the lawn; the classwas widely scattered now, and all in great difficulty.The skrewts were now over three feet long, andextremely powerful. No longer shell-less and colorless,they had developed a kind of thick, grayish, shinyarmor. They looked like a cross between giantscorpions and elongated crabs — but still withoutrecognizable heads or eyes. They had becomeimmensely strong and very hard to control.

Page | 326

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Look like they’re havin’ fun, don’ they?” Hagrid saidhappily. Harry assumed he was talking about theskrewts, because his classmates certainly weren’t;every now and then, with an alarming bang, one ofthe skrewts’ ends would explode, causing it to shootforward several yards, and more than one person wasbeing dragged along on their stomach, tryingdesperately to get back on their feet.

“Ah, I don’ know, Harry,” Hagrid sighed suddenly,looking back down at him with a worried expressionon his face. “School champion ... everythin’ seems terhappen ter you, doesn’ it?”

Harry didn’t answer. Yes, everything did seem tohappen to him ... that was more or less whatHermione had said as they had walked around thelake, and that was the reason, according to her, thatRon was no longer talking to him.

The next few days were some of Harry’s worst atHogwarts. The closest he had ever come to feeling likethis had been during those months, in his secondyear, when a large part of the school had suspectedhim of attacking his fellow students. But Ron hadbeen on his side then. He thought he could havecoped with the rest of the school’s behavior if he couldjust have had Ron back as a friend, but he wasn’tgoing to try and persuade Ron to talk to him if Rondidn’t want to. Nevertheless, it was lonely with dislikepouring in on him from all sides.

He could understand the Hufflepuffs’ attitude, even ifhe didn’t like it; they had their own champion tosupport. He expected nothing less than viciousinsults from the Slytherins — he was highlyunpopular there and always had been, because hehad helped Gryffindor beat them so often, both atQuidditch and in the Inter-House Championship. ButPage | 327 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

he had hoped the Ravenclaws might have found it intheir hearts to support him as much as Cedric. Hewas wrong, however. Most Ravenclaws seemed tothink that he had been desperate to earn himself a bitmore fame by tricking the goblet into accepting hisname.

Then there was the fact that Cedric looked the part ofa champion so much more than he did. Exceptionallyhandsome, with his straight nose, dark hair, and grayeyes, it was hard to say who was receiving moreadmiration these days, Cedric or Viktor Krum. Harryactually saw the same sixth-year girls who had beenso keen to get Krum’s autograph begging Cedric tosign their school bags one lunchtime.

Meanwhile there was no reply from Sirius, Hedwigwas refusing to come anywhere near him, ProfessorTrelawney was predicting his death with even morecertainty than usual, and he did so badly atSummoning Charms in Professor Flitwick’s class thathe was given extra homework — the only person toget any, apart from Neville.

“It’s really not that difficult, Harry,” Hermione tried toreassure him as they left Flitwick’s class — she hadbeen making objects zoom across the room to her alllesson, as though she were some sort of weird magnetfor board dusters, wastepaper baskets, andlunascopes. “You just weren’t concentrating properly

“Wonder why that was,” said Harry darkly as CedricDiggory walked past, surrounded by a large group ofsimpering girls, all of whom looked at Harry asthough he were a particularly large Blast-EndedSkrewt. “Still — never mind, eh? Double Potions tolook forward to this afternoon. ...”

Page | 328

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Double Potions was always a horrible experience, butthese days it was nothing short of torture. Being shutin a dungeon for an hour and a half with Snape andthe Slytherins, all of whom seemed determined topunish Harry as much as possible for daring tobecome school champion, was about the mostunpleasant thing Harry could imagine. He hadalready struggled through one Friday’s worth, withHermione sitting next to him intoning “ignore them,ignore them, ignore them” under her breath, and hecouldn’t see why today should be any better.

When he and Hermione arrived at Snape’s dungeonafter lunch, they found the Slytherins waiting outside,each and every one of them wearing a large badge onthe front of his or her robes. For one wild momentHarry thought they were S.P.E.W. badges — then hesaw that they all bore the same message, in luminousred letters that burnt brightly in the dimly litunderground passage:

Support CEDRIC DIGGORY —

The REAL Hogwarts Champion

“Like them, Potter?” said Malfoy loudly as Harryapproached. “And this isn’t all they do — look!”

He pressed his badge into his chest, and the messageupon it vanished, to be replaced by another one,which glowed green:

POTTER STINKS

The Slytherins howled with laughter. Each of thempressed their badges too, until the message POTTERSTINKS was shining brightly all around Harry. He feltthe heat rise in his face and neck.

Page | 329

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh very funny,” Hermione said sarcastically to PansyParkinson and her gang of Slytherin girls, who werelaughing harder than anyone, “really witty.”

Ron was standing against the wall with Dean andSeamus. He wasn’t laughing, but he wasn’t stickingup for Harry either.

“Want one, Granger?” said Malfoy, holding out abadge to Hermione. “I’ve got loads. But don’t touchmy hand, now. I’ve just washed it, you see; don’t wanta Mudblood sliming it up.”

Some of the anger Harry had been feeling for daysand days seemed to burst through a dam in his chest.He had reached for his wand before he’d thoughtwhat he was doing. People all around them scrambledout of the way, backing down the corridor.

“Harry!” Hermione said warningly.

“Go on, then, Potter,” Malfoy said quietly, drawing outhis own wand. “Moody’s not here to look after younow — do it, if you’ve got the guts —”

For a split second, they looked into each other’s eyes,then, at exactly the same time, both acted.

“ FurnunculusV’ Harry yelled.

“DensaugeoV’ screamed Malfoy.

Jets of light shot from both wands, hit each other inmidair, and ricocheted off at angles — Harry’s hitGoyle in the face, and Malfoy’s hit Hermione. Goylebellowed and put his hands to his nose, where greatugly boils were springing up — Hermione, whimperingin panic, was clutching her mouth.

Page | 330

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Hermione!”

Ron had hurried forward to see what was wrong withher; Harry turned and saw Ron dragging Hermione’shand away from her face. It wasn’t a pretty sight.Hermione’s front teeth — already larger than average— were now growing at an alarming rate; she waslooking more and more like a beaver as her teethelongated, past her bottom lip, toward her chin —panic-stricken, she felt them and let out a terrifiedcry.

“And what is all this noise about?” said a soft, deadlyvoice.

Snape had arrived. The Slytherins clamored to givetheir explanations; Snape pointed a long yellow fingerat Malfoy and said, “Explain.”

“Potter attacked me, sir —”

“We attacked each other at the same time!” Harryshouted.

“— and he hit Goyle — look —”

Snape examined Goyle, whose face now resembledsomething that would have been at home in a bookon poisonous fungi.

“Hospital wing, Goyle,” Snape said calmly.

“Malfoy got Hermione!” Ron said. “Loo/d”

He forced Hermione to show Snape her teeth — shewas doing her best to hide them with her hands,though this was difficult as they had now grown downpast her collar. Pansy Parkinson and the other

Page | 331

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Slytherin girls were doubled up with silent giggles,pointing at Hermione from behind Snape’s back.

Snape looked coldly at Hermione, then said, “I see nodifference.”

Hermione let out a whimper; her eyes filled with tears,she turned on her heel and ran, ran all the way upthe corridor and out of sight.

It was lucky, perhaps, that both Harry and Ronstarted shouting at Snape at the same time; luckytheir voices echoed so much in the stone corridor, forin the confused din, it was impossible for him to hearexactly what they were calling him. He got the gist,however.

“Let’s see,” he said, in his silkiest voice. “Fifty pointsfrom Gryffindor and a detention each for Potter andWeasley. Now get inside, or it’ll be a week’s worth ofdetentions.”

Harry’s ears were ringing. The injustice of it madehim want to curse Snape into a thousand slimypieces. He passed Snape, walked with Ron to theback of the dungeon, and slammed his bag down ontothe table. Ron was shaking with anger too — for amoment, it felt as though everything was back tonormal between them, but then Ron turned and satdown with Dean and Seamus instead, leaving Harryalone at his table. On the other side of the dungeon,Malfoy turned his back on Snape and pressed hisbadge, smirking. POTTER STINKS flashed once moreacross the room.

Harry sat there staring at Snape as the lesson began,picturing horrific things happening to him. ... If onlyhe knew how to do the Cruciatus Curse ... he’d have

Page | 332

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Snape flat on his back like that spider, jerking andtwitching. ...

“Antidotes!” said Snape, looking around at them all,his cold black eyes glittering unpleasantly. “Youshould all have prepared your recipes now. I want youto brew them carefully, and then, we will be selectingsomeone on whom to test one. ...”

Snape’s eyes met Harry’s, and Harry knew what wascoming. Snape was going to poison him. Harryimagined picking up his cauldron, and sprinting tothe front of the class, and bringing it down on Snape’sgreasy head —

And then a knock on the dungeon door burst in onHarry’s thoughts.

It was Colin Creevey; he edged into the room,beaming at Harry, and walked up to Snape’s desk atthe front of the room.

“Yes?” said Snape curtly.

“Please, sir, I’m supposed to take Harry Potterupstairs.”

Snape stared down his hooked nose at Colin, whosesmile faded from his eager face.

“Potter has another hour of Potions to complete,” saidSnape coldly. “He will come upstairs when this classis finished.”

Colin went pink.

“Sir — sir, Mr. Bagman wants him,” he saidnervously. “All the champions have got to go, I thinkthey want to take photographs. ...”

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry would have given anything he owned to havestopped Colin saying those last few words. Hechanced half a glance at Ron, but Ron was staringdeterminedly at the ceiling.

“Very well, very well,” Snape snapped. “Potter, leaveyour things here, I want you back down here later totest your antidote.”

“Please, sir — he’s got to take his things with him,”squeaked Colin. “All the champions —”

“Very well\” said Snape. “Potter — take your bag andget out of my sight!”

Harry swung his bag over his shoulder, got up, andheaded for the door. As he walked through theSlytherin desks, POTTER STINKS flashed at him fromevery direction.

“It’s amazing, isn’t it, Harry?” said Colin, starting tospeak the moment Harry had closed the dungeondoor behind him. “Isn’t it, though? You beingchampion?”

“Yeah, really amazing,” said Harry heavily as they setoff toward the steps into the entrance hall. “What dothey want photos for, Colin?”

“The Daily Prophet, I think!”

“Great,” said Harry dully. “Exactly what I need. Morepublicity.”

“Good luck!” said Colin when they had reached theright room. Harry knocked on the door and entered.

He was in a fairly small classroom; most of the deskshad been pushed away to the back of the room,

Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

leaving a large space in the middle; three of them,however, had been placed end-to-end in front of theblackboard and covered with a long length of velvet.Five chairs had been set behind the velvet-covereddesks, and Ludo Bagman was sitting in one of them,talking to a witch Harry had never seen before, whowas wearing magenta robes.

Viktor Krum was standing moodily in a corner asusual and not talking to anybody. Cedric and Fleurwere in conversation. Fleur looked a good dealhappier than Harry had seen her so far; she keptthrowing back her head so that her long silvery haircaught the light. A paunchy man, holding a largeblack camera that was smoking slightly, waswatching Fleur out of the corner of his eye.

Bagman suddenly spotted Harry, got up quickly, andbounded forward.

“Ah, here he is! Champion number four! In you come,Harry, in you come ... nothing to worry about, it’s justthe wand weighing ceremony, the rest of the judgeswill be here in a moment —”

“Wand weighing?” Harry repeated nervously.

“We have to check that your wands are fullyfunctional, no problems, you know, as they’re yourmost important tools in the tasks ahead,” saidBagman. “The expert’s upstairs now withDumbledore. And then there’s going to be a littlephoto shoot. This is Rita Skeeter,” he added,gesturing toward the witch in magenta robes. “She’sdoing a small piece on the tournament for the DailyProphet ...”

“Maybe not that small, Ludo,” said Rita Skeeter, hereyes on Harry.

Page | 335 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Her hair was set in elaborate and curiously rigid curlsthat contrasted oddly with her heavy-jawed face. Shewore jeweled spectacles. The thick fingers clutchingher crocodile-skin handbag ended in two-inch nails,painted crimson.

“I wonder if I could have a little word with Harrybefore we start?” she said to Bagman, but still gazingfixedly at Harry. “The youngest champion, you know... to add a bit of color?”

“Certainly!” cried Bagman. “That is — if Harry has noobjection?”

“Er —” said Harry.

“Lovely,” said Rita Skeeter, and in a second, herscarlet-taloned fingers had Harry’s upper arm in asurprisingly strong grip, and she was steering himout of the room again and opening a nearby door.

“We don’t want to be in there with all that noise,” shesaid. “Let’s see ... ah, yes, this is nice and cozy.”

It was a broom cupboard. Harry stared at her.

“Come along, dear — that’s right — lovely,” said RitaSkeeter again, perching herself precariously upon anupturned bucket, pushing Harry down onto acardboard box, and closing the door, throwing theminto darkness. “Let’s see now ...”

She unsnapped her crocodile-skin handbag andpulled out a handful of candles, which she lit with awave of her wand and magicked into midair, so thatthey could see what they were doing.

“You won’t mind, Harry, if I use a Quick-QuotesQuill? It leaves me free to talk to you normally. ...”

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“A what?” said Harry.

Rita Skeeter’s smile widened. Harry counted threegold teeth. She reached again into her crocodile bagand drew out a long acid-green quill and a roll ofparchment, which she stretched out between them ona crate of Mrs. Skower’s All-Purpose Magical MessRemover. She put the tip of the green quill into hermouth, sucked it for a moment with apparent relish,then placed it upright on the parchment, where itstood balanced on its point, quivering slightly.

“Testing ... my name is Rita Skeeter, Daily Prophetreporter.”

Harry looked down quickly at the quill. The momentRita Skeeter had spoken, the green quill had startedto scribble, skidding across the parchment:

Attractive blonde Rita Skeeter, forty-three, whosesavage quill has punctured many inflated reputations

“Lovely,” said Rita Skeeter, yet again, and she rippedthe top piece of parchment off, crumpled it up, andstuffed it into her handbag. Now she leaned towardHarry and said, “So, Harry ... what made you decideto enter the Triwizard Tournament?”

“Er —” said Harry again, but he was distracted by thequill. Even though he wasn’t speaking, it was dashingacross the parchment, and in its wake he could makeout a fresh sentence:

An ugly scar, souvenir of a tragic past, disfigures theotherwise charming face of Harry Potter, whose eyes

Page | 337

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Ignore the quill, Harry,” said Rita Skeeter firmly.Reluctantly, Harry looked up at her instead. “Now —why did you decide to enter the tournament, Harry?”

“I didn’t,” said Harry. “I don’t know how my name gotinto the Goblet of Fire. I didn’t put it in there.”

Rita Skeeter raised one heavily penciled eyebrow.

“Come now, Harry, there’s no need to be scared ofgetting into trouble. We all know you shouldn’t reallyhave entered at all. But don’t worry about that. Ourreaders love a rebel.”

“But I didn’t enter,” Harry repeated. “I don’t knowwho —”

“How do you feel about the tasks ahead?” said RitaSkeeter. “Excited? Nervous?”

“I haven’t really thought ... yeah, nervous, I suppose,”said Harry. His insides squirmed uncomfortably as hespoke.

“Champions have died in the past, haven’t they?” saidRita Skeeter briskly. “Have you thought about that atall?”

“Well ... they say it’s going to be a lot safer this year,”said Harry.

The quill whizzed across the parchment betweenthem, back and forward as though it were skating.

“Of course, you’ve looked death in the face before,haven’t you?” said Rita Skeeter, watching him closely.“How would you say that’s affected you?”

“Er,” said Harry, yet again.

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Do you think that the trauma in your past mighthave made you keen to prove yourself? To live up toyour name? Do you think that perhaps you weretempted to enter the Triwizard Tournament because

“I didn’t enter,” said Harry, starting to feel irritated.

“Can you remember your parents at all?” said RitaSkeeter, talking over him.

“No,” said Harry.

“How do you think they’d feel if they knew you werecompeting in the Triwizard Tournament? Proud?Worried? Angry?”

Harry was feeling really annoyed now. How on earthwas he to know how his parents would feel if theywere alive? He could feel Rita Skeeter watching himvery intently. Frowning, he avoided her gaze andlooked down at words the quill had just written:

Tears fill those startling green eyes as ourconversation turns to the parents he can barelyremember.

“I have NOT got tears in my eyes!” said Harry loudly.

Before Rita Skeeter could say a word, the door of thebroom cupboard was pulled open. Harry lookedaround, blinking in the bright light. AlbusDumbledore stood there, looking down at both ofthem, squashed into the cupboard.

“Dumbledorel” cried Rita Skeeter, with everyappearance of delight — but Harry noticed that herquill and the parchment had suddenly vanished fromthe box of Magical Mess Remover, and Rita’s clawed

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

fingers were hastily snapping shut the clasp of hercrocodile-skin bag. “How are you?” she said, standingup and holding out one of her large, mannish handsto Dumbledore. “I hope you saw my piece over thesummer about the International Confederation ofWizards’ Conference?”

“Enchantingly nasty,” said Dumbledore, his eyestwinkling. “I particularly enjoyed your description ofme as an obsolete dingbat.”

Rita Skeeter didn’t look remotely abashed.

“I was just making the point that some of your ideasare a little old-fashioned, Dumbledore, and that manywizards in the street —”

“I will be delighted to hear the reasoning behind therudeness, Rita,” said Dumbledore, with a courteousbow and a smile, “but I’m afraid we will have todiscuss the matter later. The Weighing of the Wandsis about to start, and it cannot take place if one of ourchampions is hidden in a broom cupboard.”

Very glad to get away from Rita Skeeter, Harryhurried back into the room. The other championswere now sitting in chairs near the door, and he satdown quickly next to Cedric, looking up at the velvet-covered table, where four of the five judges were nowsitting — Professor Karkaroff, Madame Maxime, Mr.Crouch, and Ludo Bagman. Rita Skeeter settledherself down in a corner; Harry saw her slip theparchment out of her bag again, spread it on herknee, suck the end of the Quick-Quotes Quill, andplace it once more on the parchment.

“May I introduce Mr. Ollivander?” said Dumbledore,taking his place at the judges’ table and talking to thechampions. “He will be checking your wands to

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

ensure that they are in good condition before thetournament.”

Harry looked around, and with a jolt of surprise sawan old wizard with large, pale eyes standing quietly bythe window. Harry had met Mr. Ollivander before —he was the wand-maker from whom Harry hadbought his own wand over three years ago in DiagonAlley.

“Mademoiselle Delacour, could we have you first,please?” said Mr. Ollivander, stepping into the emptyspace in the middle of the room.

Fleur Delacour swept over to Mr. Ollivander andhanded him her wand.

“Hmmm ...” he said.

He twirled the wand between his long fingers like abaton and it emitted a number of pink and goldsparks. Then he held it close to his eyes andexamined it carefully.

“Yes,” he said quietly, “nine and a half inches ...inflexible ... rosewood ... and containing ... dear me

“An ’air from ze ’ead of a veela,” said Fleur. “One ofmy grandmuzzer’s.”

So Fleur was part veela, thought Harry, making amental note to tell Ron ... then he remembered thatRon wasn’t speaking to him.

“Yes,” said Mr. Ollivander, “yes, I’ve never used veelahair myself, of course. I find it makes for rathertemperamental wands ... however, to each his own,and if this suits you ...”

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mr. Ollivander ran his fingers along the wand,apparently checking for scratches or bumps; then hemuttered, “OrchideousV’ and a bunch of flowers burstfrom the wand tip.

“Very well, very well, it’s in fine working order,” saidMr. Ollivander, scooping up the flowers and handingthem to Fleur with her wand. “Mr. Diggory, you next.”

Fleur glided back to her seat, smiling at Cedric as hepassed her.

“Ah, now, this is one of mine, isn’t it?” said Mr.Ollivander, with much more enthusiasm, as Cedrichanded over his wand. “Yes, I remember it well.Containing a single hair from the tail of a particularlyfine male unicorn ... must have been seventeenhands; nearly gored me with his horn after I pluckedhis tail. Twelve and a quarter inches ... ash ...pleasantly springy. It’s in fine condition. ... You treatit regularly?”

“Polished it last night,” said Cedric, grinning.

Harry looked down at his own wand. He could seefinger marks all over it. He gathered a fistful of robefrom his knee and tried to rub it clean surreptitiously.Several gold sparks shot out of the end of it. FleurDelacour gave him a very patronizing look, and hedesisted.

Mr. Ollivander sent a stream of silver smoke ringsacross the room from the tip of Cedric’s wand,pronounced himself satisfied, and then said, “Mr.Krum, if you please.”

Viktor Krum got up and slouched, round-shoulderedand duck-footed, toward Mr. Ollivander. He thrust

Page | 342

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

out his wand and stood scowling, with his hands inthe pockets of his robes.

“Hmm,” said Mr. Ollivander, “this is a Gregorovitchcreation, unless I’m much mistaken? A fine wand-maker, though the styling is never quite what I ...however ...”

He lifted the wand and examined it minutely, turningit over and over before his eyes.

“Yes ... hornbeam and dragon heartstring?” he shot atKrum, who nodded. “Rather thicker than one usuallysees ... quite rigid ... ten and a quarter inches ...

Avis'.”

The hornbeam wand let off a blast like a gun, and anumber of small, twittering birds flew out of the endand through the open window into the waterysunlight.

“Good,” said Mr. Ollivander, handing Krum back hiswand. “Which leaves ... Mr. Potter.”

Harry got to his feet and walked past Krum to Mr.Ollivander. He handed over his wand.

“Aaaah, yes,” said Mr. Ollivander, his pale eyessuddenly gleaming. “Yes, yes, yes. How well Iremember.”

Harry could remember too. He could remember it asthough it had happened yesterday...

Four summers ago, on his eleventh birthday, he hadentered Mr. Ollivander’s shop with Hagrid to buy awand. Mr. Ollivander had taken his measurementsand then started handing him wands to try. Harryhad waved what felt like every wand in the shop, untilPage | 343 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

at last he had found the one that suited him — thisone, which was made of holly, eleven inches long, andcontained a single feather from the tail of a phoenix.Mr. Ollivander had been very surprised that Harryhad been so compatible with this wand. “Curious,” hehad said, “curious,” and not until Harry asked whatwas curious had Mr. Ollivander explained that thephoenix feather in Harry’s wand had come from thesame bird that had supplied the core of LordVoldemort’s.

Harry had never shared this piece of information withanybody. He was very fond of his wand, and as far ashe was concerned its relation to Voldemort’s wandwas something it couldn’t help — rather as hecouldn’t help being related to Aunt Petunia. However,he really hoped that Mr. Ollivander wasn’t about totell the room about it. He had a funny feeling RitaSkeeter’s Quick-Quotes Quill might just explode withexcitement if he did.

Mr. Ollivander spent much longer examining Harry’swand than anyone else’s. Eventually, however, hemade a fountain of wine shoot out of it, and handed itback to Harry, announcing that it was still in perfectcondition.

“Thank you all,” said Dumbledore, standing up at thejudges’ table. “You may go back to your lessons now— or perhaps it would be quicker just to go down todinner, as they are about to end —”

Feeling that at last something had gone right today,Harry got up to leave, but the man with the blackcamera jumped up and cleared his throat.

“Photos, Dumbledore, photos!” cried Bagmanexcitedly. “All the judges and champions, what do youthink, Rita?”

Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Er — yes, let’s do those first,” said Rita Skeeter,whose eyes were upon Harry again. “And thenperhaps some individual shots.”

The photographs took a long time. Madame Maximecast everyone else into shadow wherever she stood,and the photographer couldn’t stand far enough backto get her into the frame; eventually she had to sitwhile everyone else stood around her. Karkaroff kepttwirling his goatee around his finger to give it an extracurl; Krum, whom Harry would have thought wouldhave been used to this sort of thing, skulked, half-hidden, at the back of the group. The photographerseemed keenest to get Fleur at the front, but RitaSkeeter kept hurrying forward and dragging Harryinto greater prominence. Then she insisted onseparate shots of all the champions. At last, they werefree to go.

Harry went down to dinner. Hermione wasn’t there —he supposed she was still in the hospital wing havingher teeth fixed. He ate alone at the end of the table,then returned to Gryffindor Tower, thinking of all theextra work on Summoning Charms that he had to do.Up in the dormitory, he came across Ron.

“You’ve had an owl,” said Ron brusquely the momenthe walked in. He was pointing at Harry’s pillow. Theschool barn owl was waiting for him there.

“Oh — right,” said Harry.

“And we’ve got to do our detentions tomorrow night,Snape’s dungeon,” said Ron.

He then walked straight out of the room, not lookingat Harry. For a moment, Harry considered going afterhim — he wasn’t sure whether he wanted to talk tohim or hit him, both seemed quite appealing — but

Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the lure of Sirius’s answer was too strong. Harrystrode over to the barn owl, took the letter off its leg,and unrolled it.

Harry —

I can’t say everything I would like to in a letter, it’s toorisky in case the owl is intercepted — we need to talkface-to-face. Can you ensure that you are alone by thefire in Gryffindor Tower at one o’clock in the morningon the 22nd of November?

I know better than anyone that you can look afteryourself and while you’re around Dumbledore andMoody I don’t think anyone will be able to hurt you.However, someone seems to be having a good try.Entering you in that tournament would have been veryrisky, especially right under Dumbledore’s nose.

Be on the watch, Harry. I still want to hear aboutanything unusual. Let me know about the 22nd ofNovember as quickly as you can.

Sirius

Page | 346

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



THE HUNGARIAN HORNTAIL

The prospect of talking face-to-face with Sirius was allthat sustained Harry over the next fortnight, the onlybright spot on a horizon that had never lookeddarker. The shock of finding himself school championhad worn off slightly now, and the fear of what wasfacing him had started to sink in. The first task wasdrawing steadily nearer; he felt as though it werecrouching ahead of him like some horrific monster,barring his path. He had never suffered nerves likethese; they were way beyond anything he hadexperienced before a Quidditch match, not even hislast one against Slytherin, which had decided whowould win the Quidditch Cup. Harry was finding ithard to think about the future at all; he felt as thoughhis whole life had been leading up to, and wouldfinish with, the first task. ...

Admittedly, he didn’t see how Sirius was going tomake him feel any better about having to perform anunknown piece of difficult and dangerous magic infront of hundreds of people, but the mere sight of afriendly face would be something at the moment.

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry wrote back to Sirius saying that he would bebeside the common room fire at the time Sirius hadsuggested, and he and Hermione spent a long timegoing over plans for forcing any stragglers out of thecommon room on the night in question. If the worstcame to the worst, they were going to drop a bag ofDungbombs, but they hoped they wouldn’t have toresort to that — Filch would skin them alive.

In the meantime, life became even worse for Harrywithin the confines of the castle, for Rita Skeeter hadpublished her piece about the Triwizard Tournament,and it had turned out to be not so much a report onthe tournament as a highly colored life story of Harry.Much of the front page had been given over to apicture of Harry; the article (continuing on pages two,six, and seven) had been all about Harry, the namesof the Beauxbatons and Durmstrang champions(misspelled) had been squashed into the last line ofthe article, and Cedric hadn’t been mentioned at all.

The article had appeared ten days ago, and Harry stillgot a sick, burning feeling of shame in his stomachevery time he thought about it. Rita Skeeter hadreported him saying an awful lot of things that hecouldn’t remember ever saying in his life, let alone inthat broom cupboard.

I suppose I get my strength from my parents. I knowthey’d be very proud of me if they could see me now.

... Yes, sometimes at night I still cry about them, I’mnot ashamed to admit it. ... I know nothing will hurtme during the tournament, because they’re watchingover me. ...

But Rita Skeeter had gone even further thantransforming his “er’s” into long, sickly sentences:

She had interviewed other people about him too.

Page | 348

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry has at last found love at Hogwarts. His closefriend, Colin Creevey, says that Harry is rarely seenout of the company of one Hermione Granger, astunningly pretty Muggle-born girl who, like Harry, isone of the top students in the school.

From the moment the article had appeared, Harryhad had to endure people — Slytherins, mainly —quoting it at him as he passed and making sneeringcomments.

“Want a hanky, Potter, in case you start crying inTransfiguration?”

“Since when have you been one of the top students inthe school, Potter? Or is this a school you andLongbottom have set up together?”

“Hey — Harry!”

“Yeah, that’s right!” Harry found himself shouting ashe wheeled around in the corridor, having had justabout enough. “I’ve just been crying my eyes out overmy dead mum, and I’m just off to do a bit more. ...”

“No — it was just — you dropped your quill.”

It was Cho. Harry felt the color rising in his face.

“Oh — right — sorry,” he muttered, taking the quillback.

“Er ... good luck on Tuesday,” she said. “I really hopeyou do well.”

Which left Harry feeling extremely stupid.

Hermione had come in for her fair share ofunpleasantness too, but she hadn’t yet started yelling

Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

at innocent bystanders; in fact, Harry was full ofadmiration for the way she was handling thesituation.

“Stunningly pretty? Her?” Pansy Parkinson hadshrieked the first time she had come face-to-face withHermione after Rita’s article had appeared. “What wasshe judging against — a chipmunk?”

“Ignore it,” Hermione said in a dignified voice, holdingher head in the air and stalking past the sniggeringSlytherin girls as though she couldn’t hear them.

“Just ignore it, Harry.”

But Harry couldn’t ignore it. Ron hadn’t spoken tohim at all since he had told him about Snape’sdetentions. Harry had half hoped they would makethings up during the two hours they were forced topickle rats’ brains in Snape’s dungeon, but that hadbeen the day Rita’s article had appeared, whichseemed to have confirmed Ron’s belief that Harry wasreally enjoying all the attention.

Hermione was furious with the pair of them; she wentfrom one to the other, trying to force them to talk toeach other, but Harry was adamant: He would talk toRon again only if Ron admitted that Harry hadn’t puthis name in the Goblet of Fire and apologized forcalling him a liar.

“I didn’t start this,” Harry said stubbornly. “It’s hisproblem.”

“You miss him!” Hermione said impatiently. “And Iknow he misses you —”

“Miss him?” said Harry. “I don’t miss him. ...”

Page | 350

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But this was a downright lie. Harry liked Hermionevery much, but she just wasn’t the same as Ron.

There was much less laughter and a lot more hangingaround in the library when Hermione was your bestfriend. Harry still hadn’t mastered SummoningCharms, he seemed to have developed something of ablock about them, and Hermione insisted thatlearning the theory would help. They consequentlyspent a lot of time poring over books during theirlunchtimes.

Viktor Krum was in the library an awful lot too, andHarry wondered what he was up to. Was he studying,or was he looking for things to help him through thefirst task? Hermione often complained about Krumbeing there — not that he ever bothered them — butbecause groups of giggling girls often turned up to spyon him from behind bookshelves, and Hermionefound the noise distracting.

“He’s not even good-looking!” she muttered angrily,glaring at Krum’s sharp profile. “They only like himbecause he’s famous! They wouldn’t look twice at himif he couldn’t do that Wonky-Faint thing —”

“Wronski Feint,” said Harry, through gritted teeth.Quite apart from liking to get Quidditch termscorrect, it caused him another pang to imagine Ron’sexpression if he could have heard Hermione talkingabout Wonky-Faints.

It is a strange thing, but when you are dreadingsomething, and would give anything to slow downtime, it has a disobliging habit of speeding up. Thedays until the first task seemed to slip by as thoughsomeone had fixed the clocks to work at doublespeed. Harry’s feeling of barely controlled panic waswith him wherever he went, as everpresent as thesnide comments about the Daily Prophet article.

Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

On the Saturday before the first task, all students inthe third year and above were permitted to visit thevillage of Hogsmeade. Hermione told Harry that itwould do him good to get away from the castle for abit, and Harry didn’t need much persuasion.

“What about Ron, though?” he said. “Don’t you wantto go with him?”

“Oh ... well ...” Hermione went slightly pink. “Ithought we might meet up with him in the ThreeBroomsticks. ...”

“No,” said Harry flatly.

“Oh Harry, this is so stupid —”

“I’ll come, but I’m not meeting Ron, and I’m wearingmy Invisibility Cloak.”

“Oh all right then ...” Hermione snapped, “but I hatetalking to you in that cloak, I never know if I’mlooking at you or not.”

So Harry put on his Invisibility Cloak in thedormitory, went back downstairs, and together heand Hermione set off for Hogsmeade.

Harry felt wonderfully free under the cloak; hewatched other students walking past them as theyentered the village, most of them sporting SupportCedric Diggory\ badges, but no horrible remarks camehis way for a change, and nobody was quoting thatstupid article.

“People keep looking at me now,” said Hermionegrumpily as they came out of Honeydukes Sweetshoplater, eating large cream-filled chocolates. “They thinkI’m talking to myself.”

Page | 352 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t move your lips so much then.”

“Come on, please just take off your cloak for a bit, noone’s going to bother you here.”

“Oh yeah?” said Harry. “Look behind you.”

Rita Skeeter and her photographer friend had justemerged from the Three Broomsticks pub. Talking inlow voices, they passed right by Hermione withoutlooking at her. Harry backed into the wall ofHoneydukes to stop Rita Skeeter from hitting himwith her crocodile-skin handbag. When they weregone, Harry said, “She’s staying in the village. I betshe’s coming to watch the first task.”

As he said it, his stomach flooded with a wave ofmolten panic. He didn’t mention this; he andHermione hadn’t discussed what was coming in thefirst task much; he had the feeling she didn’t want tothink about it.

“She’s gone,” said Hermione, looking right throughHarry toward the end of the street. “Why don’t we goand have a butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks, it’s abit cold, isn’t it? You don’t have to talk to Ron!” sheadded irritably, correctly interpreting his silence.

The Three Broomsticks was packed, mainly withHogwarts students enjoying their free afternoon, butalso with a variety of magical people Harry rarely sawanywhere else. Harry supposed that as Hogsmeadewas the only all-wizard village in Britain, it was a bitof a haven for creatures like hags, who were not asadept as wizards at disguising themselves.

It was very hard to move through crowds in theInvisibility Cloak, in case you accidentally trod onsomeone, which tended to lead to awkward questions.

Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry edged slowly toward a spare table in the cornerwhile Hermione went to buy drinks. On his waythrough the pub, Harry spotted Ron, who was sittingwith Fred, George, and Lee Jordan. Resisting the urgeto give Ron a good hard poke in the back of the head,he finally reached the table and sat down at it.

Hermione joined him a moment later and slipped hima butterbeer under his cloak.

“I look like such an idiot, sitting here on my own,” shemuttered. “Lucky I brought something to do.”

And she pulled out a notebook in which she had beenkeeping a record of S.P.E.W. members. Harry saw hisand Ron’s names at the top of the very short list. Itseemed a long time ago that they had sat making upthose predictions together, and Hermione had turnedup and appointed them secretary and treasurer.

“You know, maybe I should try and get some of thevillagers involved in S.P.E.W.,” Hermione saidthoughtfully, looking around the pub.

“Yeah, right,” said Harry. He took a swig of butterbeerunder his cloak. “Hermione, when are you going togive up on this spew stuff?”

“When house-elves have decent wages and workingconditions!” she hissed back. “You know, I’m startingto think it’s time for more direct action. I wonder howyou get into the school kitchens?”

“No idea, ask Fred and George,” said Harry.

Hermione lapsed into thoughtful silence, while Harrydrank his butterbeer, watching the people in the pub.All of them looked cheerful and relaxed. ErnieMacmillan and Hannah Abbott were swapping

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Chocolate Frog cards at a nearby table; both of themsporting Support Cedric Diggory\ badges on theircloaks. Right over by the door he saw Cho and a largegroup of her Ravenclaw friends. She wasn’t wearing aCedric badge though. ... This cheered up Harry veryslightly. ...

What wouldn’t he have given to be one of thesepeople, sitting around laughing and talking, withnothing to worry about but homework? He imaginedhow it would have felt to be here if his name hadn’tcome out of the Goblet of Fire. He wouldn’t be wearingthe Invisibility Cloak, for one thing. Ron would besitting with him. The three of them would probably behappily imagining what deadly dangerous task theschool champions would be facing on Tuesday. He’dhave been really looking forward to it, watching themdo whatever it was ... cheering on Cedric witheveryone else, safe in a seat at the back of the stands.

He wondered how the other champions were feeling.Every time he had seen Cedric lately, he had beensurrounded by admirers and looking nervous butexcited. Harry glimpsed Fleur Delacour from time totime in the corridors; she looked exactly as shealways did, haughty and unruffled. And Krum justsat in the library, poring over books.

Harry thought of Sirius, and the tight, tense knot inhis chest seemed to ease slightly. He would bespeaking to him in just over twelve hours, for tonightwas the night they were meeting at the common roomfire — assuming nothing went wrong, as everythingelse had done lately. ...

“Look, it’s Hagrid!” said Hermione.

Page | 355

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The back of Hagrid’s enormous shaggy head — hehad mercifully abandoned his bunches — emergedover the crowd. Harry wondered why he hadn’tspotted him at once, as Hagrid was so large, butstanding up carefully, he saw that Hagrid had beenleaning low, talking to Professor Moody. Hagrid hadhis usual enormous tankard in front of him, butMoody was drinking from his hip flask. MadamRosmerta, the pretty landlady, didn’t seem to thinkmuch of this; she was looking askance at Moody asshe collected glasses from tables around them.Perhaps she thought it was an insult to her mulledmead, but Harry knew better. Moody had told themall during their last Defense Against the Dark Artslesson that he preferred to prepare his own food anddrink at all times, as it was so easy for Dark wizardsto poison an unattended cup.

As Harry watched, he saw Hagrid and Moody get upto leave. He waved, then remembered that Hagridcouldn’t see him. Moody, however, paused, hismagical eye on the corner where Harry was standing.He tapped Hagrid in the small of the back (beingunable to reach his shoulder), muttered something tohim, and then the pair of them made their way backacross the pub toward Harry and Hermione’s table.

“All right, Hermione?” said Hagrid loudly.

“Hello,” said Hermione, smiling back.

Moody limped around the table and bent down; Harrythought he was reading the S.P.E.W. notebook, untilhe muttered, “Nice cloak, Potter.”

Harry stared at him in amazement. The large chunkmissing from Moody’s nose was particularly obviousat a few inches’ distance. Moody grinned.

Page | 356

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Can your eye — I mean, can you — ?”

“Yeah, it can see through Invisibility Cloaks,” Moodysaid quietly. “And it’s come in useful at times, I cantell you.”

Hagrid was beaming down at Harry too. Harry knewHagrid couldn’t see him, but Moody had obviouslytold Hagrid he was there. Hagrid now bent down onthe pretext of reading the S.P.E.W. notebook as well,and said in a whisper so low that only Harry couldhear it, “Harry, meet me tonight at midnight at mecabin. Wear that cloak.”

Straightening up, Hagrid said loudly, “Nice ter seeyeh, Hermione,” winked, and departed. Moodyfollowed him.

“Why does Hagrid want me to meet him at midnight?”Harry said, very surprised.

“Does he?” said Hermione, looking startled. “I wonderwhat he’s up to? I don’t know whether you should go,Harry. ...” She looked nervously around and hissed,

“It might make you late for Sirius.”

It was true that going down to Hagrid’s at midnightwould mean cutting his meeting with Sirius very fineindeed; Hermione suggested sending Hedwig down toHagrid’s to tell him he couldn’t go — always assumingshe would consent to take the note, of course —

Harry, however, thought it better just to be quick atwhatever Hagrid wanted him for. He was very curiousto know what this might be; Hagrid had never askedHarry to visit him so late at night.

At half past eleven that evening, Harry, who hadpretended to go up to bed early, pulled the InvisibilityCloak back over himself and crept back downstairs

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

through the common room. Quite a few people werestill in there. The Creevey brothers had managed toget hold of a stack of Support Cedric Diggoryl badgesand were trying to bewitch them to make them saySupport Harry Potter\ instead. So far, however, all theyhad managed to do was get the badges stuck onPOTTER STINKS. Harry crept past them to the portraithole and waited for a minute or so, keeping an eye onhis watch. Then Hermione opened the Fat Lady forhim from outside as they had planned. He slippedpast her with a whispered “Thanks!” and set offthrough the castle.

The grounds were very dark. Harry walked down thelawn toward the lights shining in Hagrid’s cabin. Theinside of the enormous Beauxbatons carriage wasalso lit up; Harry could hear Madame Maxime talkinginside it as he knocked on Hagrid’s front door.

“You there, Harry?” Hagrid whispered, opening thedoor and looking around.

“Yeah,” said Harry, slipping inside the cabin andpulling the cloak down off his head. “What’s up?”

“Got summat ter show yeh,” said Hagrid.

There was an air of enormous excitement aboutHagrid. He was wearing a flower that resembled anoversized artichoke in his buttonhole. It looked asthough he had abandoned the use of axle grease, buthe had certainly attempted to comb his hair — Harrycould see the comb’s broken teeth tangled in it.

“What’re you showing me?” Harry said warily,wondering if the skrewts had laid eggs, or Hagrid hadmanaged to buy another giant three-headed dog off astranger in a pub.

Page | 358

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Come with me, keep quiet, an’ keep yerself coveredwith that cloak,” said Hagrid. “We won’ take Fang, hewon’ like it. ...”

“Listen, Hagrid, I can’t stay long. ... I’ve got to be backup at the castle by one o’clock —”

But Hagrid wasn’t listening; he was opening the cabindoor and striding off into the night. Harry hurried tofollow and found, to his great surprise, that Hagridwas leading him to the Beauxbatons carriage.

“Hagrid, what — ?”

“Shhh!” said Hagrid, and he knocked three times onthe door bearing the crossed golden wands.

Madame Maxime opened it. She was wearing a silkshawl wrapped around her massive shoulders. Shesmiled when she saw Hagrid.

“Ah, ’Agrid ... it is time?”

“Bong-sewer,” said Hagrid, beaming at her, andholding out a hand to help her down the golden steps.

Madame Maxime closed the door behind her, Hagridoffered her his arm, and they set off around the edgeof the paddock containing Madame Maxime’s giantwinged horses, with Harry, totally bewildered,running to keep up with them. Had Hagrid wanted toshow him Madame Maxime? He could see her any oldtime he wanted ... she wasn’t exactly hard to miss. ...

But it seemed that Madame Maxime was in for thesame treat as Harry, because after a while she saidplayfully, “Wair is it you are taking me, ’Agrid?”

Page | 359

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yeh’ll enjoy this,” said Hagrid gruffly, “worth seem’,trust me. On’y — don’ go tellin’ anyone I showed yeh,right? Yeh’re not s’posed ter know.”

“Of course not,” said Madame Maxime, fluttering herlong black eyelashes.

And still they walked, Harry getting more and moreirritated as he jogged along in their wake, checkinghis watch every now and then. Hagrid had someharebrained scheme in hand, which might make himmiss Sirius. If they didn’t get there soon, he was goingto turn around, go straight back to the castle, andleave Hagrid to enjoy his moonlit stroll with MadameMaxime. ...

But then — when they had walked so far around theperimeter of the forest that the castle and the lakewere out of sight — Harry heard something. Men wereshouting up ahead ... then came a deafening,earsplitting roar. ...

Hagrid led Madame Maxime around a clump of treesand came to a halt. Harry hurried up alongside them— for a split second, he thought he was seeingbonfires, and men darting around them — and thenhis mouth fell open.

Dragons.

Four fully grown, enormous, vicious-looking dragonswere rearing onto their hind legs inside an enclosurefenced with thick planks of wood, roaring andsnorting — torrents of fire were shooting into the darksky from their open, fanged mouths, fifty feet abovethe ground on their outstretched necks. There was asilvery-blue one with long, pointed horns, snappingand snarling at the wizards on the ground; a smooth-scaled green one, which was writhing and stampingPage | 360 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

with all its might; a red one with an odd fringe of finegold spikes around its face, which was shootingmushroom-shaped fire clouds into the air; and agigantic black one, more lizard-like than the others,which was nearest to them.

At least thirty wizards, seven or eight to each dragon,were attempting to control them, pulling on thechains connected to heavy leather straps around theirnecks and legs. Mesmerized, Harry looked up, highabove him, and saw the eyes of the black dragon, withvertical pupils like a cat’s, bulging with either fear orrage, he couldn’t tell which. ... It was making ahorrible noise, a yowling, screeching scream. ...

“Keep back there, Hagrid!” yelled a wizard near thefence, straining on the chain he was holding. “Theycan shoot fire at a range of twenty feet, you know! I’veseen this Horntail do forty!”

“Is’n’ it beautiful?” said Hagrid softly.

“It’s no good!” yelled another wizard. “StunningSpells, on the count of three!”

Harry saw each of the dragon keepers pull out hiswand.

“Stupefy\” they shouted in unison, and the StunningSpells shot into the darkness like fiery rockets,bursting in showers of stars on the dragons’ scalyhides —

Harry watched the dragon nearest to them teeterdangerously on its back legs; its jaws stretched widein a silent howl; its nostrils were suddenly devoid offlame, though still smoking — then, very slowly, itfell. Several tons of sinewy, scaly-black dragon hit the

Page | 361

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

ground with a thud that Harry could have swornmade the trees behind him quake.

The dragon keepers lowered their wands and walkedforward to their fallen charges, each of which was thesize of a small hill. They hurried to tighten the chainsand fasten them securely to iron pegs, which theyforced deep into the ground with their wands.

“Wan’ a closer look?” Hagrid asked Madame Maximeexcitedly. The pair of them moved right up to thefence, and Harry followed. The wizard who hadwarned Hagrid not to come any closer turned, andHarry realized who it was: Charlie Weasley.

“All right, Hagrid?” he panted, coming over to talk.“They should be okay now — we put them out with aSleeping Draft on the way here, thought it might bebetter for them to wake up in the dark and the quiet— but, like you saw, they weren’t happy, not happy atall —”

“What breeds you got here, Charlie?” said Hagrid,gazing at the closest dragon, the black one, withsomething close to reverence. Its eyes were still justopen. Harry could see a strip of gleaming yellowbeneath its wrinkled black eyelid.

“This is a Hungarian Horntail,” said Charlie. “There’sa Common Welsh Green over there, the smaller one —a Swedish Short-Snout, that blue-gray — and aChinese Fireball, that’s the red.”

Charlie looked around; Madame Maxime was strollingaway around the edge of the enclosure, gazing at thestunned dragons.

“I didn’t know you were bringing her, Hagrid,” Charliesaid, frowning. “The champions aren’t supposed to

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

know what’s coming — she’s bound to tell herstudent, isn’t she?”

“Jus’ thought she’d like ter see ’em,” shrugged Hagrid,still gazing, enraptured, at the dragons.

“Really romantic date, Hagrid,” said Charlie, shakinghis head.

“Four ...” said Hagrid, “so it’s one fer each o’ thechampions, is it? What’ve they gotta do — fight ’em?”

“Just get past them, I think,” said Charlie. “We’ll beon hand if it gets nasty, Extinguishing Spells at theready. They wanted nesting mothers, I don’t knowwhy ... but I tell you this, I don’t envy the one whogets the Horntail. Vicious thing. Its back end’s asdangerous as its front, look.”

Charlie pointed toward the Horntail’s tail, and Harrysaw long, bronze-colored spikes protruding along itevery few inches.

Five of Charlie’s fellow keepers staggered up to theHorntail at that moment, carrying a clutch of hugegranite-gray eggs between them in a blanket. Theyplaced them carefully at the Horntail’s side. Hagrid letout a moan of longing.

“I’ve got them counted, Hagrid,” said Charlie sternly.Then he said, “How’s Harry?”

“Fine,” said Hagrid. He was still gazing at the eggs.

“Just hope he’s still fine after he’s faced this lot,” saidCharlie grimly, looking out over the dragons’enclosure. “I didn’t dare tell Mum what he’s got to dofor the first task; she’s already having kittens abouthim. ...” Charlie imitated his mother’s anxious voice. “Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

‘How could they let him enter that tournament, he’smuch too young\ I thought they were all safe, I thoughtthere was going to he an age limiti ’ She was in floodsafter that Daily Prophet article about him. ‘He stillcries about his parents\ Oh bless him, I never knew\ ’ ”

Harry had had enough. Trusting to the fact thatHagrid wouldn’t miss him, with the attractions of fourdragons and Madame Maxime to occupy him, heturned silently and began to walk away, back to thecastle.

He didn’t know whether he was glad he’d seen whatwas coming or not. Perhaps this way was better. Thefirst shock was over now. Maybe if he’d seen thedragons for the first time on Tuesday, he would havepassed out cold in front of the whole school ... butmaybe he would anyway. ... He was going to be armedwith his wand — which, just now, felt like nothingmore than a narrow strip of wood — against a fifty-foot-high, scaly, spike-ridden, fire-breathing dragon.And he had to get past it. With everyone watching.How?

Harry sped up, skirting the edge of the forest; he hadjust under fifteen minutes to get back to the firesideand talk to Sirius, and he couldn’t remember, ever,wanting to talk to someone more than he did rightnow — when, without warning, he ran into somethingvery solid.

Harry fell backward, his glasses askew, clutching thecloak around him. A voice nearby said, “Ouch! Who’sthere?”

Harry hastily checked that the cloak was coveringhim and lay very still, staring up at the dark outlineof the wizard he had hit. He recognized the goatee ...it was Karkaroff.

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Who’s there?” said Karkaroff again, verysuspiciously, looking around in the darkness. Harryremained still and silent. After a minute or so,Karkaroff seemed to decide that he had hit some sortof animal; he was looking around at waist height, asthough expecting to see a dog. Then he crept backunder the cover of the trees and started to edgeforward toward the place where the dragons were.

Very slowly and very carefully, Harry got to his feetand set off again as fast as he could without makingtoo much noise, hurrying through the darkness backtoward Hogwarts.

He had no doubt whatsoever what Karkaroff was upto. He had sneaked off his ship to try and find outwhat the first task was going to be. He might evenhave spotted Hagrid and Madame Maxime heading offaround the forest together — they were hardlydifficult to spot at a distance ... and now all Karkaroffhad to do was follow the sound of voices, and he, likeMadame Maxime, would know what was in store forthe champions.

By the looks of it, the only champion who would befacing the unknown on Tuesday was Cedric.

Harry reached the castle, slipped in through the frontdoors, and began to climb the marble stairs; he wasvery out of breath, but he didn’t dare slow down. ...

He had less than five minutes to get up to the fire. ...

“Balderdash!” he gasped at the Fat Lady, who wassnoozing in her frame in front of the portrait hole.

“If you say so,” she muttered sleepily, without openingher eyes, and the picture swung forward to admithim. Harry climbed inside. The common room wasdeserted, and, judging by the fact that it smelled quite

Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

normal, Hermione had not needed to set off anyDungbombs to ensure that he and Sirius got privacy.

Harry pulled off the Invisibility Cloak and threwhimself into an armchair in front of the fire. The roomwas in semidarkness; the flames were the only sourceof light. Nearby, on a table, the Support CedricDiggoryl badges the Creeveys had been trying toimprove were glinting in the firelight. They now readPOTTER REALLY STINKS. Harry looked back into theflames, and jumped.

Sirius’s head was sitting in the fire. If Harry hadn’tseen Mr. Diggory do exactly this back in the Weasleys’kitchen, it would have scared him out of his wits.Instead, his face breaking into the first smile he hadworn for days, he scrambled out of his chair,crouched down by the hearth, and said, “Sirius —how’re you doing?”

Sirius looked different from Harry’s memory of him.When they had said good-bye, Sirius’s face had beengaunt and sunken, surrounded by a quantity of long,black, matted hair — but the hair was short andclean now, Sirius’s face was fuller, and he lookedyounger, much more like the only photograph Harryhad of him, which had been taken at the Potters’wedding.

“Never mind me, how are you?” said Sirius seriously.

“I’m —” For a second, Harry tried to say “fine” — buthe couldn’t do it. Before he could stop himself, he wastalking more than he’d talked in days — about howno one believed he hadn’t entered the tournament ofhis own free will, how Rita Skeeter had lied about himin the Daily Prophet, how he couldn’t walk down acorridor without being sneered at — and about Ron,Ron not believing him, Ron’s jealousy ...

Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

"... and now Hagrid’s just shown me what’s coming inthe first task, and it’s dragons, Sirius, and I’m agoner,” he finished desperately.

Sirius looked at him, eyes full of concern, eyes thathad not yet lost the look that Azkaban had giventhem — that deadened, haunted look. He had letHarry talk himself into silence without interruption,but now he said, “Dragons we can deal with, Harry,but we’ll get to that in a minute — I haven’t got longhere ... I’ve broken into a wizarding house to use thefire, but they could be back at any time. There arethings I need to warn you about.”

“What?” said Harry, feeling his spirits slip a furtherfew notches. ... Surely there could be nothing worsethan dragons coming?

“Karkaroff,” said Sirius. “Harry, he was a Death Eater.You know what Death Eaters are, don’t you?”

“Yes — he — what?”

“He was caught, he was in Azkaban with me, but hegot released. I’d bet everything that’s why Dumbledorewanted an Auror at Hogwarts this year — to keep aneye on him. Moody caught Karkaroff. Put him intoAzkaban in the first place.”

“Karkaroff got released?” Harry said slowly — hisbrain seemed to be struggling to absorb yet anotherpiece of shocking information. “Why did they releasehim?”

“He did a deal with the Ministry of Magic,” said Siriusbitterly. “He said he’d seen the error of his ways, andthen he named names ... he put a load of other peopleinto Azkaban in his place. ... He’s not very popular inthere, I can tell you. And since he got out, from what IPage | 367 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

can tell, he’s been teaching the Dark Arts to everystudent who passes through that school of his. Sowatch out for the Durmstrang champion as well.”

“Okay,” said Harry slowly. “But ... are you sayingKarkaroff put my name in the goblet? Because if hedid, he’s a really good actor. He seemed furious aboutit. He wanted to stop me from competing.”

“We know he’s a good actor,” said Sirius, “because heconvinced the Ministry of Magic to set him free, didn’the? Now, I’ve been keeping an eye on the DailyProphet, Harry —”

“— you and the rest of the world,” said Harry bitterly.

“— and reading between the lines of that Skeeterwoman’s article last month, Moody was attacked thenight before he started at Hogwarts. Yes, I know shesays it was another false alarm,” Sirius said hastily,seeing Harry about to speak, “but I don’t think so,somehow. I think someone tried to stop him fromgetting to Hogwarts. I think someone knew their jobwould be a lot more difficult with him around. And noone’s going to look into it too closely; Mad-Eye’s heardintruders a bit too often. But that doesn’t mean hecan’t still spot the real thing. Moody was the bestAuror the Ministry ever had.”

“So ... what are you saying?” said Harry slowly.“Karkaroff’s trying to kill me? But — why?”

Sirius hesitated.

“I’ve been hearing some very strange things,” he saidslowly. “The Death Eaters seem to be a bit more activethan usual lately. They showed themselves at theQuidditch World Cup, didn’t they? Someone set off

Page | 368

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the Dark Mark ... and then — did you hear about thatMinistry of Magic witch who’s gone missing?”

“Bertha Jorkins?” said Harry.

“Exactly ... she disappeared in Albania, and that’sdefinitely where Voldemort was rumored to be last ...and she would have known the Triwizard Tournamentwas coming up, wouldn’t she?”

“Yeah, but ... it’s not very likely she’d have walkedstraight into Voldemort, is it?” said Harry.

“Listen, I knew Bertha Jorkins,” said Sirius grimly.“She was at Hogwarts when I was, a few years aboveyour dad and me. And she was an idiot. Very nosy,but no brains, none at all. It’s not a goodcombination, Harry. I’d say she’d be very easy to lureinto a trap.

“So ... so Voldemort could have found out about thetournament?” said Harry. “Is that what you mean?You think Karkaroff might be here on his orders?”

“I don’t know,” said Sirius slowly, “I just don’t know... Karkaroff doesn’t strike me as the type who’d goback to Voldemort unless he knew Voldemort waspowerful enough to protect him. But whoever putyour name in that goblet did it for a reason, and Ican’t help thinking the tournament would be a verygood way to attack you and make it look like anaccident.”

“Looks like a really good plan from where I’mstanding,” said Harry grinning bleakly. “They’ll justhave to stand back and let the dragons do their stuff.”

“Right — these dragons,” said Sirius, speaking veryquickly now. “There’s a way, Harry. Don’t be tempted

Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

to try a Stunning Spell — dragons are strong and toopowerfully magical to be knocked out by a singleStunner, you need about half a dozen wizards at atime to overcome a dragon —”

“Yeah, I know, I just saw,” said Harry.

“But you can do it alone,” said Sirius. “There is a way,and a simple spell’s all you need. Just —”

But Harry held up a hand to silence him, his heartsuddenly pounding as though it would burst. Hecould hear footsteps coming down the spiral staircasebehind him.

“Go!” he hissed at Sirius. “Go! There’s someonecoming!”

Harry scrambled to his feet, hiding the fire — ifsomeone saw Sirius’s face within the walls ofHogwarts, they would raise an almighty uproar — theMinistry would get dragged in — he, Harry, would bequestioned about Sirius’s whereabouts —

Harry heard a tiny pop\ in the fire behind him andknew Sirius had gone. He watched the bottom of thespiral staircase. Who had decided to go for a stroll atone o’clock in the morning, and stopped Sirius fromtelling him how to get past a dragon?

It was Ron. Dressed in his maroon paisley pajamas,Ron stopped dead facing Harry across the room, andlooked around.

“Who were you talking to?” he said.

“What’s that got to do with you?” Harry snarled.

“What are you doing down here at this time of night?”

Page | 370

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I just wondered where you —” Ron broke off,shrugging. “Nothing. I’m going back to bed.”

“Just thought you’d come nosing around, did you?”Harry shouted. He knew that Ron had no idea whathe’d walked in on, knew he hadn’t done it on purpose,but he didn’t care — at this moment he hatedeverything about Ron, right down to the severalinches of bare ankle showing beneath his pajamatrousers.

“Sorry about that,” said Ron, his face reddening withanger. “Should’ve realized you didn’t want to bedisturbed. I’ll let you get on with practicing for yournext interview in peace.”

Harry seized one of the POTTER REALLY STINKSbadges off the table and chucked it, as hard as hecould, across the room. It hit Ron on the foreheadand bounced off.

“There you go,” Harry said. “Something for you towear on Tuesday. You might even have a scar now, ifyou’re lucky. ... That’s what you want, isn’t it?”

He strode across the room toward the stairs; he halfexpected Ron to stop him, he would even have likedRon to throw a punch at him, but Ron just stoodthere in his too-small pajamas, and Harry, havingstormed upstairs, lay awake in bed fuming for a longtime afterward and didn’t hear him come up to bed.

Page | 371

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE FIRST TASK

Harry got up on Sunday morning and dressed soinattentively that it was a while before he realized hewas trying to pull his hat onto his foot instead of hissock. When he’d finally got all his clothes on the rightparts of his body, he hurried off to find Hermione,locating her at the Gryffindor table in the Great Hall,where she was eating breakfast with Ginny. Feelingtoo queasy to eat, Harry waited until Hermione hadswallowed her last spoonful of porridge, then draggedher out onto the grounds. There, he told her all aboutthe dragons, and about everything Sirius had said,while they took another long walk around the lake.

Alarmed as she was by Sirius’s warnings aboutKarkaroff, Hermione still thought that the dragonswere the more pressing problem.

“Let’s just try and keep you alive until Tuesdayevening,” she said desperately, “and then we canworry about Karkaroff.”

Page | 372

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

They walked three times around the lake, trying allthe way to think of a simple spell that would subduea dragon. Nothing whatsoever occurred to them, sothey retired to the library instead. Here, Harry pulleddown every book he could find on dragons, and bothof them set to work searching through the large pile.

“ ‘Talon-clipping by charms ... treating scale-rot...’

This is no good, this is for nutters like Hagrid whowant to keep them healthy. ...”

“ ‘Dragons are extremely difficult to slay, owing to theancient magic that imbues their thick hides, whichnone but the most powerful spells can penetrate ...’

But Sirius said a simple one would do it. ...”

“Let’s try some simple spellbooks, then,” said Harry,throwing aside Men Who Love Dragons Too Much.

He returned to the table with a pile of spellbooks, setthem down, and began to flick through each in turn,Hermione whispering nonstop at his elbow.

“Well, there are Switching Spells ... but what’s thepoint of Switching it? Unless you swapped its fangsfor wine-gums or something that would make it lessdangerous. ... The trouble is, like that book said, notmuch is going to get through a dragon’s hide. ... I’dsay Transfigure it, but something that big, you reallyhaven’t got a hope, I doubt even Professor McGonagall... unless you’re supposed to put the spell onyourself? Maybe to give yourself extra powers? Butthey’re not simple spells, I mean, we haven’t done anyof those in class, I only know about them because I’vebeen doing O.W.L. practice papers. ...”

“Hermione,” Harry said, through gritted teeth, “willyou shut up for a bit, please? I’m trying toconcentrate.”

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But all that happened, when Hermione fell silent, wasthat Harry’s brain filled with a sort of blank buzzing,which didn’t seem to allow room for concentration. Hestared hopelessly down the index of Basic Hexes forthe Busy and Vexed. Instant scalping ... but dragonshad no hair ... pepper breath ... that would probablyincrease a dragon’s firepower ... horn tongue ... justwhat he needed, to give it an extra weapon ...

“Oh no, he’s back again, why can’t he read on hisstupid ship?” said Hermione irritably as Viktor Krumslouched in, cast a surly look over at the pair of them,and settled himself in a distant corner with a pile ofbooks. “Come on, Harry, we’ll go back to the commonroom ... his fan club’ll be here in a moment, twitteringaway. ...”

And sure enough, as they left the library, a gang ofgirls tiptoed past them, one of them wearing aBulgaria scarf tied around her waist.

Harry barely slept that night. When he awoke onMonday morning, he seriously considered for the firsttime ever just running away from Hogwarts. But ashe looked around the Great Hall at breakfast time,and thought about what leaving the castle wouldmean, he knew he couldn’t do it. It was the only placehe had ever been happy ... well, he supposed he musthave been happy with his parents too, but he couldn’tremember that.

Somehow, the knowledge that he would rather behere and facing a dragon than back on Privet Drivewith Dudley was good to know; it made him feelslightly calmer. He finished his bacon with difficulty(his throat wasn’t working too well), and as he andHermione got up, he saw Cedric Diggory leaving theHufflepuff table.

Page | 374

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Cedric still didn’t know about the dragons ... the onlychampion who didn’t, if Harry was right in thinkingthat Maxime and Karkaroff would have told Fleur andKrum. ...

“Hermione, I’ll see you in the greenhouses,” Harrysaid, coming to his decision as he watched Cedricleaving the Hall. “Go on, I’ll catch you up.”

“Harry, you’ll be late, the bell’s about to ring —”

“I’ll catch you up, okay?”

By the time Harry reached the bottom of the marblestaircase, Cedric was at the top. He was with a load ofsixth-year friends. Harry didn’t want to talk to Cedricin front of them; they were among those who hadbeen quoting Rita Skeeter’s article at him every timehe went near them. He followed Cedric at a distanceand saw that he was heading toward the Charmscorridor. This gave Harry an idea. Pausing at adistance from them, he pulled out his wand, and tookcareful aim.

“Diffindol”

Cedric’s bag split. Parchment, quills, and booksspilled out of it onto the floor. Several bottles of inksmashed.

“Don’t bother,” said Cedric in an exasperated voice ashis friends bent down to help him. “Tell Flitwick I’mcoming, go on. ...”

This was exactly what Harry had been hoping for. Heslipped his wand back into his robes, waited untilCedric’s friends had disappeared into their classroom,and hurried up the corridor, which was now empty ofeveryone but himself and Cedric.

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Hi,” said Cedric, picking up a copy of A Guide toAdvanced Transfiguration that was now splatteredwith ink. “My bag just split ... brand-new and all ...”

“Cedric,” said Harry, “the first task is dragons.”

“What?” said Cedric, looking up.

“Dragons,” said Harry, speaking quickly, in caseProfessor Flitwick came out to see where Cedric hadgot to. “They’ve got four, one for each of us, and we’vegot to get past them.”

Cedric stared at him. Harry saw some of the paniche’d been feeling since Saturday night flickering inCedric’s gray eyes.

“Are you sure?” Cedric said in a hushed voice.

“Dead sure,” said Harry. “I’ve seen them.”

“But how did you find out? We’re not supposed toknow. ...”

“Never mind,” said Harry quickly — he knew Hagridwould be in trouble if he told the truth. “But I’m notthe only one who knows. Fleur and Krum will knowby now — Maxime and Karkaroff both saw thedragons too.”

Cedric straightened up, his arms full of inky quills,parchment, and books, his ripped bag dangling offone shoulder. He stared at Harry, and there was apuzzled, almost suspicious look in his eyes.

“Why are you telling me?” he asked.

Harry looked at him in disbelief. He was sure Cedricwouldn’t have asked that if he had seen the dragons

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

himself. Harry wouldn’t have let his worst enemy facethose monsters unprepared — well, perhaps Malfoy orSnape ...

“It’s just ... fair, isn’t it?” he said to Cedric. “We allknow now ... we’re on an even footing, aren’t we?”

Cedric was still looking at him in a slightly suspiciousway when Harry heard a familiar clunking noisebehind him. He turned around and saw Mad-EyeMoody emerging from a nearby classroom.

“Come with me, Potter,” he growled. “Diggory, off yougo.”

Harry stared apprehensively at Moody. Had heoverheard them?

“Er — Professor, I’m supposed to be in Herbology —”

“Never mind that, Potter. In my office, please. ...”

Harry followed him, wondering what was going tohappen to him now. What if Moody wanted to knowhow he’d found out about the dragons? Would Moodygo to Dumbledore and tell on Hagrid, or just turnHarry into a ferret? Well, it might be easier to get pasta dragon if he were a ferret, Harry thought dully, he’dbe smaller, much less easy to see from a height of fiftyfeet ...

He followed Moody into his office. Moody closed thedoor behind them and turned to look at Harry, hismagical eye fixed upon him as well as the normal one.

“That was a very decent thing you just did, Potter,”Moody said quietly.

Page | 377

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry didn’t know what to say; this wasn’t thereaction he had expected at all.

“Sit down,” said Moody, and Harry sat, lookingaround.

He had visited this office under two of its previousoccupants. In Professor Lockhart’s day, the walls hadbeen plastered with beaming, winking pictures ofProfessor Lockhart himself. When Lupin had livedhere, you were more likely to come across a specimenof some fascinating new Dark creature he hadprocured for them to study in class. Now, however,the office was full of a number of exceptionally oddobjects that Harry supposed Moody had used in thedays when he had been an Auror.

On his desk stood what looked like a large, cracked,glass spinning top; Harry recognized it at once as aSneakoscope, because he owned one himself, thoughit was much smaller than Moody’s. In the corner on asmall table stood an object that looked something likean extra-squiggly, golden television aerial. It washumming slightly. What appeared to be a mirror hungopposite Harry on the wall, but it was not reflectingthe room. Shadowy figures were moving aroundinside it, none of them clearly in focus.

“Like my Dark Detectors, do you?” said Moody, whowas watching Harry closely.

“What’s that?” Harry asked, pointing at the squigglygolden aerial.

“Secrecy Sensor. Vibrates when it detectsconcealment and lies ... no use here, of course, toomuch interference — students in every direction lyingabout why they haven’t done their homework. Beenhumming ever since I got here. I had to disable myPage | 378 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Sneakoscope because it wouldn’t stop whistling. It’sextra-sensitive, picks up stuff about a mile around. Ofcourse, it could be picking up more than kid stuff,” headded in a growl.

“And what’s the mirror for?”

“Oh that’s my Foe-Glass. See them out there,skulking around? I’m not really in trouble until I seethe whites of their eyes. That’s when I open mytrunk.”

He let out a short, harsh laugh, and pointed to thelarge trunk under the window. It had seven keyholesin a row. Harry wondered what was in there, untilMoody’s next question brought him sharply back toearth.

“So ... found out about the dragons, have you?”

Harry hesitated. He’d been afraid of this — but hehadn’t told Cedric, and he certainly wasn’t going totell Moody, that Hagrid had broken the rules.

“It’s all right,” said Moody, sitting down andstretching out his wooden leg with a groan.

“Cheating’s a traditional part of the Tri-wizardTournament and always has been.”

“I didn’t cheat,” said Harry sharply. “It was — a sortof accident that I found out.”

Moody grinned. “I wasn’t accusing you, laddie. I’vebeen telling Dumbledore from the start, he can be ashigh-minded as he likes, but you can bet oldKarkaroff and Maxime won’t be. They’ll have told theirchampions everything they can. They want to win.They want to beat Dumbledore. They’d like to provehe’s only human.”

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Moody gave another harsh laugh, and his magical eyeswiveled around so fast it made Harry feel queasy towatch it.

“So ... got any ideas how you’re going to get past yourdragon yet?” said Moody.

“No,” said Harry.

“Well, I’m not going to tell you,” said Moody gruffly. “Idon’t show favoritism, me. I’m just going to give yousome good, general advice. And the first bit is —playto your strengths.”

“I haven’t got any,” said Harry, before he could stophimself.

“Excuse me,” growled Moody, “you’ve got strengths if Isay you’ve got them. Think now. What are you bestat?”

Harry tried to concentrate. What was he best at?

Well, that was easy, really —

“Quidditch,” he said dully, “and a fat lot of help —”

“That’s right,” said Moody, staring at him very hard,his magical eye barely moving at all. “You’re a damngood flier from what I’ve heard.”

“Yeah, but ...” Harry stared at him. “I’m not allowed abroom, I’ve only got my wand —”

“My second piece of general advice,” said Moodyloudly, interrupting him, “is to use a nice, simplespell that will enable you to get what you need.”

Harry looked at him blankly. What did he need?

Page | 380

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Come on, boy ...” whispered Moody. “Put themtogether ... it’s not that difficult. ...”

And it clicked. He was best at flying. He needed topass the dragon in the air. For that, he needed hisFirebolt. And for his Firebolt, he needed —

“Hermione,” Harry whispered, when he had sped intogreenhouse three minutes later, uttering a hurriedapology to Professor Sprout as he passed her.“Hermione — I need you to help me.”

“What d’you think I’ve been trying to do, Harry?” shewhispered back, her eyes round with anxiety over thetop of the quivering Flutterby Bush she was pruning.

“Hermione, I need to learn how to do a SummoningCharm properly by tomorrow afternoon.”

And so they practiced. They didn’t have lunch, butheaded for a free classroom, where Harry tried withall his might to make various objects fly across theroom toward him. He was still having problems. Thebooks and quills kept losing heart halfway across theroom and dropping like stones to the floor.

“Concentrate, Harry, concentrate. ...”

“What d’you think I’m trying to do?” said Harryangrily. “A great big dragon keeps popping up in myhead for some reason. ... Okay, try again. ...”

He wanted to skip Divination to keep practicing, butHermione refused point-blank to skive offArithmancy, and there was no point in stayingwithout her. He therefore had to endure over an hourof Professor Trelawney, who spent half the lessontelling everyone that the position of Mars with relation

Page | 381

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

to Saturn at that moment meant that people born inJuly were in great danger of sudden, violent deaths.

“Well, that’s good,” said Harry loudly, his tempergetting the better of him, “just as long as it’s notdrawn-out. I don’t want to suffer.”

Ron looked for a moment as though he was going tolaugh; he certainly caught Harry’s eye for the firsttime in days, but Harry was still feeling too resentfultoward Ron to care. He spent the rest of the lessontrying to attract small objects toward him under thetable with his wand. He managed to make a fly zoomstraight into his hand, though he wasn’t entirely surethat was his prowess at Summoning Charms —perhaps the fly was just stupid.

He forced down some dinner after Divination, thenreturned to the empty classroom with Hermione,using the Invisibility Cloak to avoid the teachers.

They kept practicing until past midnight. They wouldhave stayed longer, but Peeves turned up and,pretending to think that Harry wanted things thrownat him, started chucking chairs across the room.Harry and Hermione left in a hurry before the noiseattracted Filch, and went back to the Gryffindorcommon room, which was now mercifully empty.

At two o’clock in the morning, Harry stood near thefireplace, surrounded by heaps of objects: books,quills, several upturned chairs, an old set ofGobstones, and Neville’s toad, Trevor. Only in the lasthour had Harry really got the hang of the SummoningCharm.

“That’s better, Harry, that’s loads better,” Hermionesaid, looking exhausted but very pleased.

Page | 382

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Well, now we know what to do next time I can’tmanage a spell,” Harry said, throwing a runedictionary back to Hermione, so he could try again,“threaten me with a dragon. Right ...” He raised hiswand once more. “Accio Dictionary!”

The heavy book soared out of Hermione’s hand, flewacross the room, and Harry caught it.

“Harry, I really think you’ve got it!” said Hermionedelightedly.

“Just as long as it works tomorrow,” Harry said. “TheFirebolt’s going to be much farther away than thestuff in here, it’s going to be in the castle, and I’mgoing to be out there on the grounds. ...”

“That doesn’t matter,” said Hermione firmly “Just aslong as you’re concentrating really, really hard on it,it’ll come. Harry, we’d better get some sleep ... you’regoing to need it.”

Harry had been focusing so hard on learning theSummoning Charm that evening that some of hisblind panic had left him. It returned in full measure,however, on the following morning. The atmospherein the school was one of great tension and excitement.Lessons were to stop at midday, giving all thestudents time to get down to the dragons’ enclosure— though of course, they didn’t yet know what theywould find there.

Harry felt oddly separate from everyone around him,whether they were wishing him good luck or hissing“ We’ll have a box of tissues ready, Potted as hepassed. It was a state of nervousness so advancedthat he wondered whether he mightn’t just lose hishead when they tried to lead him out to his dragon,and start trying to curse everyone in sight. Time wasPage | 383 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

behaving in a more peculiar fashion than ever,rushing past in great dollops, so that one moment heseemed to be sitting down in his first lesson, Historyof Magic, and the next, walking into lunch ... andthen (where had the morning gone? the last of thedragon-free hours?), Professor McGonagall washurrying over to him in the Great Hall. Lots of peoplewere watching.

“Potter, the champions have to come down onto thegrounds now. ... You have to get ready for your firsttask.”

“Okay,” said Harry, standing up, his fork falling ontohis plate with a clatter.

“Good luck, Harry,” Hermione whispered. “You’ll befine!”

“Yeah,” said Harry in a voice that was most unlike hisown.

He left the Great Hall with Professor McGonagall. Shedidn’t seem herself either; in fact, she looked nearlyas anxious as Hermione. As she walked him down thestone steps and out into the cold November afternoon,she put her hand on his shoulder.

“Now, don’t panic,” she said, “just keep a cool head.

... We’ve got wizards standing by to control thesituation if it gets out of hand. ... The main thing isjust to do your best, and nobody will think any theworse of you. ... Are you all right?”

“Yes,” Harry heard himself say. “Yes, I’m fine.”

She was leading him toward the place where thedragons were, around the edge of the forest, but whenthey approached the clump of trees behind which the

Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

enclosure would be clearly visible, Harry saw that atent had been erected, its entrance facing them,screening the dragons from view.

“You’re to go in here with the other champions,” saidProfessor McGonagall, in a rather shaky sort of voice,“and wait for your turn, Potter. Mr. Bagman is inthere ... he’ll be telling you the — the procedure. ...Good luck.”

“Thanks,” said Harry, in a flat, distant voice. She lefthim at the entrance of the tent. Harry went inside.

Fleur Delacour was sitting in a corner on a lowwooden stool. She didn’t look nearly as composed asusual, but rather pale and clammy. Viktor Krumlooked even surlier than usual, which Harrysupposed was his way of showing nerves. Cedric waspacing up and down. When Harry entered, Cedricgave him a small smile, which Harry returned, feelingthe muscles in his face working rather hard, asthough they had forgotten how to do it.

“Harry! Good-o!” said Bagman happily, lookingaround at him. “Come in, come in, make yourself athome!”

Bagman looked somehow like a slightly overblowncartoon figure, standing amid all the pale-facedchampions. He was wearing his old Wasp robes again.

“Well, now we’re all here — time to fill you in!” saidBagman brightly. “When the audience has assembled,I’m going to be offering each of you this bag” — heheld up a small sack of purple silk and shook it atthem — “from which you will each select a smallmodel of the thing you are about to face! There aredifferent — er — varieties, you see. And I have to tell

Page | 385

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

you something else too ... ah, yes ... your task is tocollect the golden egg\”

Harry glanced around. Cedric had nodded once, toshow that he understood Bagman’s words, and thenstarted pacing around the tent again; he lookedslightly green. Fleur Delacour and Krum hadn’treacted at all. Perhaps they thought they might besick if they opened their mouths; that was certainlyhow Harry felt. But they, at least, had volunteered forthis. ...

And in no time at all, hundreds upon hundreds ofpairs of feet could be heard passing the tent, theirowners talking excitedly, laughing, joking. ... Harryfelt as separate from the crowd as though they were adifferent species. And then — it seemed like about asecond later to Harry — Bagman was opening theneck of the purple silk sack.

“Ladies first,” he said, offering it to Fleur Delacour.

She put a shaking hand inside the bag and drew outa tiny, perfect model of a dragon — a Welsh Green. Ithad the number two around its neck. And Harryknew, by the fact that Fleur showed no sign ofsurprise, but rather a determined resignation, that hehad been right: Madame Maxime had told her whatwas coming.

The same held true for Krum. He pulled out thescarlet Chinese Fireball. It had a number threearound its neck. He didn’t even blink, just sat backdown and stared at the ground.

Cedric put his hand into the bag, and out came theblueish-gray Swedish Short-Snout, the number onetied around its neck. Knowing what was left, Harryput his hand into the silk bag and pulled out the

Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hungarian Horntail, and the number four. Itstretched its wings as he looked down at it, and baredits minuscule fangs.

“Well, there you are!” said Bagman. “You have eachpulled out the dragon you will face, and the numbersrefer to the order in which you are to take on thedragons, do you see? Now, I’m going to have to leaveyou in a moment, because I’m commentating. Mr.Diggory, you’re first, just go out into the enclosurewhen you hear a whistle, all right? Now ... Harry ...could I have a quick word? Outside?”

“Er ... yes,” said Harry blankly, and he got up andwent out of the tent with Bagman, who walked him ashort distance away, into the trees, and then turnedto him with a fatherly expression on his face.

“Feeling all right, Harry? Anything I can get you?”

“What?” said Harry. “I — no, nothing.”

“Got a plan?” said Bagman, lowering his voiceconspiratorially. “Because I don’t mind sharing a fewpointers, if you’d like them, you know. I mean,”Bagman continued, lowering his voice still further,“you’re the underdog here, Harry. ... Anything I cando to help ...”

“No,” said Harry so quickly he knew he had soundedrude, “no — I — I know what I’m going to do, thanks.”

“Nobody would know, Harry,” said Bagman, winkingat him.

“No, I’m fine,” said Harry, wondering why he kepttelling people this, and wondering whether he hadever been less fine. “I’ve got a plan worked out, I —”

Page | 387

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

A whistle had blown somewhere.

“Good lord, I’ve got to run!” said Bagman in alarm,and he hurried off.

Harry walked back to the tent and saw Cedricemerging from it, greener than ever. Harry tried towish him luck as he walked past, but all that cameout of his mouth was a sort of hoarse grunt.

Harry went back inside to Fleur and Krum. Secondslater, they heard the roar of the crowd, which meantCedric had entered the enclosure and was now face-to-face with the living counterpart of his model. ...

It was worse than Harry could ever have imagined,sitting there and listening. The crowd screamed ...yelled ... gasped like a single many-headed entity, asCedric did whatever he was doing to get past theSwedish Short-Snout. Krum was still staring at theground. Fleur had now taken to retracing Cedric’ssteps, around and around the tent. And Bagman’scommentary made everything much, much worse. ...Horrible pictures formed in Harry’s mind as he heard:“Oooh, narrow miss there, very narrow” ... “He’staking risks, this one!” ... “Clever move — pity itdidn’t work!”

And then, after about fifteen minutes, Harry heardthe deafening roar that could mean only one thing:Cedric had gotten past his dragon and captured thegolden egg.

“Very good indeed!” Bagman was shouting. “And nowthe marks from the judges!”

But he didn’t shout out the marks; Harry supposedthe judges were holding them up and showing themto the crowd.

Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“One down, three to go!” Bagman yelled as the whistleblew again. “Miss Delacour, if you please!”

Fleur was trembling from head to foot; Harry felt morewarmly toward her than he had done so far as she leftthe tent with her head held high and her handclutching her wand. He and Krum were left alone, atopposite sides of the tent, avoiding each other’s gaze.

The same process started again. ... “Oh I’m not surethat was wise!” they could hear Bagman shoutinggleefully. “Oh ... nearly! Careful now ... good lord, Ithought she’d had it then!”

Ten minutes later, Harry heard the crowd erupt intoapplause once more. ... Fleur must have beensuccessful too. A pause, while Fleur’s marks werebeing shown ... more clapping ... then, for the thirdtime, the whistle.

“And here comes Mr. Krum!” cried Bagman, andKrum slouched out, leaving Harry quite alone.

He felt much more aware of his body than usual; veryaware of the way his heart was pumping fast, and hisfingers tingling with fear ... yet at the same time, heseemed to be outside himself, seeing the walls of thetent, and hearing the crowd, as though from far away.

“Very daring!” Bagman was yelling, and Harry heardthe Chinese Fireball emit a horrible, roaring shriek,while the crowd drew its collective breath. “That’ssome nerve he’s showing — and — yes, he’s got theegg!”

Applause shattered the wintery air like breakingglass; Krum had finished — it would be Harry’s turnany moment.

Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He stood up, noticing dimly that his legs seemed to bemade of marshmallow. He waited. And then he heardthe whistle blow. He walked out through the entranceof the tent, the panic rising into a crescendo insidehim. And now he was walking past the trees, througha gap in the enclosure fence.

He saw everything in front of him as though it was avery highly colored dream. There were hundreds andhundreds of faces staring down at him from standsthat had been magicked there since he’d last stood onthis spot. And there was the Horntail, at the otherend of the enclosure, crouched low over her clutch ofeggs, her wings half-furled, her evil, yellow eyes uponhim, a monstrous, scaly, black lizard, thrashing herspiked tail, leaving yard-long gouge marks in the hardground. The crowd was making a great deal of noise,but whether friendly or not, Harry didn’t know orcare. It was time to do what he had to do ... to focushis mind, entirely and absolutely, upon the thing thatwas his only chance. ...

He raised his wand.

“Accio Firebolti” he shouted.

Harry waited, every fiber of him hoping, praying. ... Ifit hadn’t worked ... if it wasn’t coming ... He seemedto be looking at everything around him through somesort of shimmering, transparent barrier, like a heathaze, which made the enclosure and the hundreds offaces around him swim strangely. ...

And then he heard it, speeding through the air behindhim; he turned and saw his Firebolt hurtling towardhim around the edge of the woods, soaring into theenclosure, and stopping dead in midair beside him,waiting for him to mount. The crowd was makingeven more noise. ... Bagman was shouting somethingPage | 390 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

... but Harry’s ears were not working properlyanymore ... listening wasn’t important. ...

He swung his leg over the broom and kicked off fromthe ground. And a second later, somethingmiraculous happened. ...

As he soared upward, as the wind rushed through hishair, as the crowd’s faces became mere flesh-coloredpinpricks below, and the Horntail shrank to the sizeof a dog, he realized that he had left not only theground behind, but also his fear. ... He was backwhere he belonged. ...

This was just another Quidditch match, that was all... just another Quidditch match, and that Horntailwas just another ugly opposing team. ...

He looked down at the clutch of eggs and spotted thegold one, gleaming against its cement-colored fellows,residing safely between the dragon’s front legs.“Okay,” Harry told himself, “diversionary tactics ...let’s go. ...”

He dived. The Horntail’s head followed him; he knewwhat it was going to do and pulled out of the dive justin time; a jet of fire had been released exactly wherehe would have been had he not swerved away ... butHarry didn’t care ... that was no more than dodging aBludger. ...

“Great Scott, he can fly!” yelled Bagman as the crowdshrieked and gasped. “Are you watching this, Mr.Krum?”

Harry soared higher in a circle; the Horntail was stillfollowing his progress; its head revolving on its longneck — if he kept this up, it would be nicely dizzy —

Page | 391

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

but better not push it too long, or it would bebreathing fire again —

Harry plummeted just as the Horntail opened itsmouth, but this time he was less lucky — he missedthe flames, but the tail came whipping up to meethim instead, and as he swerved to the left, one of thelong spikes grazed his shoulder, ripping his robes —

He could feel it stinging, he could hear screaming andgroans from the crowd, but the cut didn’t seem to bedeep. ... Now he zoomed around the back of theHorntail, and a possibility occurred to him. ...

The Horntail didn’t seem to want to take off, she wastoo protective of her eggs. Though she writhed andtwisted, furling and unfurling her wings and keepingthose fearsome yellow eyes on Harry, she was afraidto move too far from them ... but he had to persuadeher to do it, or he’d never get near them. ... The trickwas to do it carefully, gradually. ...

He began to fly, first this way, then the other, notnear enough to make her breathe fire to stave him off,but still posing a sufficient threat to ensure she kepther eyes on him. Her head swayed this way and that,watching him out of those vertical pupils, her fangsbared. ...

He flew higher. The Horntail’s head rose with him, herneck now stretched to its fullest extent, still swaying,like a snake before its charmer. ...

Harry rose a few more feet, and she let out a roar ofexasperation. He was like a fly to her, a fly she waslonging to swat; her tail thrashed again, but he wastoo high to reach now. ... She shot fire into the air,which he dodged. ... Her jaws opened wide. ...

Page | 392

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Come on,” Harry hissed, swerving tantalizingly aboveher, “come on, come and get me ... up you get now ...”

And then she reared, spreading her great, black,leathery wings at last, as wide as those of a smallairplane — and Harry dived. Before the dragon knewwhat he had done, or where he had disappeared to,he was speeding toward the ground as fast as hecould go, toward the eggs now unprotected by herclawed front legs — he had taken his hands off hisFirebolt — he had seized the golden egg —

And with a huge spurt of speed, he was off, he wassoaring out over the stands, the heavy egg safelyunder his uninjured arm, and it was as thoughsomebody had just turned the volume back up — forthe first time, he became properly aware of the noiseof the crowd, which was screaming and applauding asloudly as the Irish supporters at the World Cup —

“Look at that!” Bagman was yelling. “Will you look atthat! Our youngest champion is quickest to get hisegg! Well, this is going to shorten the odds on Mr.Potter!”

Harry saw the dragon keepers rushing forward tosubdue the Horntail, and, over at the entrance to theenclosure, Professor McGonagall, Professor Moody,and Hagrid hurrying to meet him, all of them wavinghim toward them, their smiles evident even from thisdistance. He flew back over the stands, the noise ofthe crowd pounding his eardrums, and came insmoothly to land, his heart lighter than it had been inweeks. ... He had got through the first task, he hadsurvived. ...

“That was excellent, Potter!” cried ProfessorMcGonagall as he got off the Firebolt — which fromher was extravagant praise. He noticed that her hand

Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

shook as she pointed at his shoulder. “You’ll need tosee Madam Pomfrey before the judges give out yourscore. ... Over there, she’s had to mop up Diggoryalready. ...”

“Yeh did it, Harry!” said Hagrid hoarsely. “Yeh did it!An’ agains’ the Horntail an’ all, an’yeh know Charliesaid that was the wors’ —”

“Thanks, Hagrid,” said Harry loudly, so that Hagridwouldn’t blunder on and reveal that he had shownHarry the dragons beforehand.

Professor Moody looked very pleased too; his magicaleye was dancing in its socket.

“Nice and easy does the trick, Potter,” he growled.

“Right then, Potter, the first aid tent, please ...” saidProfessor McGonagall.

Harry walked out of the enclosure, still panting, andsaw Madam Pomfrey standing at the mouth of asecond tent, looking worried.

“Dragons!” she said, in a disgusted tone, pullingHarry inside. The tent was divided into cubicles; hecould make out Cedric’s shadow through the canvas,but Cedric didn’t seem to be badly injured; he wassitting up, at least. Madam Pomfrey examined Harry’sshoulder, talking furiously all the while. “Last yeardementors, this year dragons, what are they going tobring into this school next? You’re very lucky ... thisis quite shallow ... it’ll need cleaning before I heal itup, though. ...”

She cleaned the cut with a dab of some purple liquidthat smoked and stung, but then poked his shoulderwith her wand, and he felt it heal instantly.

Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Now, just sit quietly for a minute — sit! And then youcan go and get your score.”

She bustled out of the tent and he heard her go nextdoor and say, “How does it feel now, Diggory?”

Harry didn’t want to sit still: He was too full ofadrenaline. He got to his feet, wanting to see whatwas going on outside, but before he’d reached themouth of the tent, two people had come darting inside— Hermione, followed closely by Ron.

“Harry, you were brilliant!” Hermione said squeakily.There were fingernail marks on her face where shehad been clutching it in fear. “You were amazing! Youreally were!”

But Harry was looking at Ron, who was very whiteand staring at Harry as though he were a ghost.

“Harry,” he said, very seriously, “whoever put yourname in that goblet — I — I reckon they’re trying todo you in!”

It was as though the last few weeks had neverhappened — as though Harry were meeting Ron forthe first time, right after he’d been made champion.

“Caught on, have you?” said Harry coldly. “Took youlong enough.”

Hermione stood nervously between them, lookingfrom one to the other. Ron opened his mouthuncertainly. Harry knew Ron was about to apologizeand suddenly he found he didn’t need to hear it.

“It’s okay,” he said, before Ron could get the wordsout. “Forget it.”

Page | 395

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Ron, “I shouldn’t’ve —”

“Forget it,” Harry said.

Ron grinned nervously at him, and Harry grinnedback.

Hermione burst into tears.

“There’s nothing to cry about!” Harry told her,bewildered.

“You two are so stupid).” she shouted, stamping herfoot on the ground, tears splashing down her front.Then, before either of them could stop her, she hadgiven both of them a hug and dashed away, nowpositively howling.

“Barking mad,” said Ron, shaking his head. “Harry,c’mon, they’ll be putting up your scores. ...”

Picking up the golden egg and his Firebolt, feelingmore elated than he would have believed possible anhour ago, Harry ducked out of the tent, Ron by hisside, talking fast.

“You were the best, you know, no competition. Cedricdid this weird thing where he Transfigured a rock onthe ground ... turned it into a dog ... he was trying tomake the dragon go for the dog instead of him. Well,it was a pretty cool bit of Transfiguration, and it sortof worked, because he did get the egg, but he gotburned as well — the dragon changed its mindhalfway through and decided it would rather havehim than the Labrador; he only just got away. Andthat Fleur girl tried this sort of charm, I think shewas trying to put it into a trance — well, that kind ofworked too, it went all sleepy, but then it snored, andthis great jet of flame shot out, and her skirt caughtPage | 396 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

fire — she put it out with a bit of water out of herwand. And Krum — you won’t believe this, but hedidn’t even think of flying! He was probably the bestafter you, though. Hit it with some sort of spell rightin the eye. Only thing is, it went trampling around inagony and squashed half the real eggs — they tookmarks off for that, he wasn’t supposed to do anydamage to them.”

Ron drew breath as he and Harry reached the edge ofthe enclosure. Now that the Horntail had been takenaway, Harry could see where the five judges weresitting — right at the other end, in raised seatsdraped in gold.

“It’s marks out of ten from each one,” Ron said, andHarry, squinting up the field, saw the first judge —Madame Maxime — raise her wand in the air. Whatlooked like a long silver ribbon shot out of it, whichtwisted itself into a large figure eight.

“Not bad!” said Ron as the crowd applauded. “Isuppose she took marks off for your shoulder. ...”

Mr. Crouch came next. He shot a number nine intothe air.

“Looking good!” Ron yelled, thumping Harry on theback.

Next, Dumbledore. He too put up a nine. The crowdwas cheering harder than ever.

Ludo Bagman — ten.

“Ten?” said Harry in disbelief. “But ... I got hurt. ...What’s he playing at?”

“Harry, don’t complain!” Ron yelled excitedly.

Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

And now Karkaroff raised his wand. He paused for amoment, and then a number shot out of his wand too— four.

“What?” Ron bellowed furiously. “Four? You lousy,biased scumbag, you gave Krum ten!”

But Harry didn’t care, he wouldn’t have cared ifKarkaroff had given him zero; Ron’s indignation onhis behalf was worth about a hundred points to him.He didn’t tell Ron this, of course, but his heart feltlighter than air as he turned to leave the enclosure.And it wasn’t just Ron ... those weren’t onlyGryffindors cheering in the crowd. When it had cometo it, when they had seen what he was facing, most ofthe school had been on his side as well as Cedric’s. ...He didn’t care about the Slytherins, he could standwhatever they threw at him now.

“You’re tied in first place, Harry! You and Krum!” saidCharlie Weasley, hurrying to meet them as they set offback toward the school. “Listen, I’ve got to run, I’vegot to go and send Mum an owl, I swore I’d tell herwhat happened — but that was unbelievable! Oh yeah— and they told me to tell you you’ve got to hangaround for a few more minutes. ... Bagman wants aword, back in the champions’ tent.”

Ron said he would wait, so Harry reentered the tent,which somehow looked quite different now: friendlyand welcoming. He thought back to how he’d feltwhile dodging the Horntail, and compared it to thelong wait before he’d walked out to face it. ... Therewas no comparison; the wait had been immeasurablyworse.

Fleur, Cedric, and Krum all came in together. Oneside of Cedric’s face was covered in a thick orange

Page | 398

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

paste, which was presumably mending his burn. Hegrinned at Harry when he saw him.

“Good one, Harry.”

“And you,” said Harry, grinning back.

“Well done, all of you!” said Ludo Bagman, bouncinginto the tent and looking as pleased as though hepersonally had just got past a dragon. “Now, just aquick few words. You’ve got a nice long break beforethe second task, which will take place at half pastnine on the morning of February the twenty-fourth —but we’re giving you something to think about in themeantime! If you look down at those golden eggsyou’re all holding, you will see that they open ... seethe hinges there? You need to solve the clue insidethe egg — because it will tell you what the secondtask is, and enable you to prepare for it! All clear?Sure? Well, off you go, then!”

Harry left the tent, rejoined Ron, and they started towalk back around the edge of the forest, talking hard;Harry wanted to hear what the other champions haddone in more detail. Then, as they rounded the clumpof trees behind which Harry had first heard thedragons roar, a witch leapt out from behind them.

It was Rita Skeeter. She was wearing acid-green robestoday; the Quick-Quotes Quill in her hand blendedperfectly against them.

“Congratulations, Harry!” she said, beaming at him. “Iwonder if you could give me a quick word? How youfelt facing that dragon? How you feel now, about thefairness of the scoring?”

“Yeah, you can have a word,” said Harry savagely.“Good-bye.”

Page | 399 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

And he set off back to the castle with Ron.

Page | 400 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE HOUSE-ELF LIBERATION FRONT

Harry, Ron, and Hermione went up to the Owlery thatevening to find Pigwidgeon, so that Harry could sendSirius a letter telling him that he had managed to getpast his dragon unscathed. On the way, Harry filledRon in on everything Sirius had told him aboutKarkaroff. Though shocked at first to hear thatKarkaroff had been a Death Eater, by the time theyentered the Owlery Ron was saying that they ought tohave suspected it all along.

“Fits, doesn’t it?” he said. “Remember what Malfoysaid on the train, about his dad being friends withKarkaroff? Now we know where they knew each other.They were probably running around in maskstogether at the World Cup. ... I’ll tell you one thing,though, Harry, if it was Karkaroff who put your namein the goblet, he’s going to be feeling really stupidnow, isn’t he? Didn’t work, did it? You only got ascratch! Come here — I’ll do it —”

Pigwidgeon was so overexcited at the idea of a deliveryhe was flying around and around Harry’s head,

Page | 401 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

hooting incessantly. Ron snatched Pigwidgeon out ofthe air and held him still while Harry attached theletter to his leg.

“There’s no way any of the other tasks are going to bethat dangerous, how could they be?” Ron went on ashe carried Pigwidgeon to the window. “You knowwhat? I reckon you could win this tournament, Harry,I’m serious.”

Harry knew that Ron was only saying this to make upfor his behavior of the last few weeks, but heappreciated it all the same. Hermione, however,leaned against the Owlery wall, folded her arms, andfrowned at Ron.

“Harry’s got a long way to go before he finishes thistournament,” she said seriously. “If that was the firsttask, I hate to think what’s coming next.”

“Right little ray of sunshine, aren’t you?” said Ron.“You and Professor Trelawney should get togethersometime.”

He threw Pigwidgeon out of the window. Pigwidgeonplummeted twelve feet before managing to pullhimself back up again; the letter attached to his legwas much longer and heavier than usual — Harryhadn’t been able to resist giving Sirius a blow-by-blowaccount of exactly how he had swerved, circled, anddodged the Horntail. They watched Pigwidgeondisappear into the darkness, and then Ron said,

“Well, we’d better get downstairs for your surpriseparty, Harry — Fred and George should have nickedenough food from the kitchens by now.”

Sure enough, when they entered the Gryffindorcommon room it exploded with cheers and yells again.There were mountains of cakes and flagons of

Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

pumpkin juice and butterbeer on every surface; LeeJordan had let off some Filibuster’s Fireworks, so thatthe air was thick with stars and sparks; and DeanThomas, who was very good at drawing, had put upsome impressive new banners, most of which depictedHarry zooming around the Horntail’s head on hisFirebolt, though a couple showed Cedric with hishead on fire.

Harry helped himself to food; he had almost forgottenwhat it was like to feel properly hungry, and sat downwith Ron and Hermione. He couldn’t believe howhappy he felt; he had Ron back on his side, he’dgotten through the first task, and he wouldn’t have toface the second one for three months.

“Blimey, this is heavy,” said Lee Jordan, picking upthe golden egg, which Harry had left on a table, andweighing it in his hands. “Open it, Harry, go on! Let’sjust see what’s inside it!”

“He’s supposed to work out the clue on his own,”Hermione said swiftly. “It’s in the tournament rules.

“I was supposed to work out how to get past thedragon on my own too,” Harry muttered, so onlyHermione could hear him, and she grinned ratherguiltily.

“Yeah, go on, Harry, open it!” several people echoed.

Lee passed Harry the egg, and Harry dug hisfingernails into the groove that ran all the way aroundit and prised it open.

It was hollow and completely empty — but themoment Harry opened it, the most horrible noise, aloud and screechy wailing, filled the room. The

Page | 403 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

nearest thing to it Harry had ever heard was the ghostorchestra at Nearly Headless Nick’s deathday party,who had all been playing the musical saw.

“Shut it!” Fred bellowed, his hands over his ears.

“What was that?” said Seamus Finnigan, staring atthe egg as Harry slammed it shut again. “Soundedlike a banshee. ... Maybe you’ve got to get past one ofthose next, Harry!”

“It was someone being tortured!” said Neville, whohad gone very white and spilled sausage rolls all overthe floor. “You’re going to have to fight the CruciatusCurse!”

“Don’t be a prat, Neville, that’s illegal,” said George.“They wouldn’t use the Cruciatus Curse on thechampions. I thought it sounded a bit like Percysinging ... maybe you’ve got to attack him while he’sin the shower, Harry.”

“Want a jam tart, Hermione?” said Fred.

Hermione looked doubtfully at the plate he wasoffering her. Fred grinned.

“It’s all right,” he said. “I haven’t done anything tothem. It’s the custard creams you’ve got to watch —”

Neville, who had just bitten into a custard cream,choked and spat it out. Fred laughed.

“Just my little joke, Neville. ...”

Hermione took a jam tart. Then she said, “Did you getall this from the kitchens, Fred?”

Page | 404

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yep,” said Fred, grinning at her. He put on a high-pitched squeak and imitated a house-elf. “ ‘Anythingwe can get you, sir, anything at all!’ They’re deadhelpful ... get me a roast ox if I said I was peckish.”

“How do you get in there?” Hermione said in aninnocently casual sort of voice.

“Easy,” said Fred, “concealed door behind a paintingof a bowl of fruit. Just tickle the pear, and it gigglesand —” He stopped and looked suspiciously at her.“Why?”

“Nothing,” said Hermione quickly.

“Going to try and lead the house-elves out on strikenow, are you?” said George. “Going to give up all theleaflet stuff and try and stir them up into rebellion?”

Several people chortled. Hermione didn’t answer.

“Don’t you go upsetting them and telling them they’vegot to take clothes and salaries!” said Fred warningly.“You’ll put them off their cooking!”

Just then, Neville caused a slight diversion by turninginto a large canary.

“Oh — sorry, Neville!” Fred shouted over all thelaughter. “I forgot — it was the custard creams wehexed —”

Within a minute, however, Neville had molted, andonce his feathers had fallen off, he reappeared lookingentirely normal. He even joined in laughing.

“Canary Creams!” Fred shouted to the excitablecrowd. “George and I invented them — seven Sickleseach, a bargain!”

Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

It was nearly one in the morning when Harry finallywent up to the dormitory with Ron, Neville, Seamus,and Dean. Before he pulled the curtains of his four-poster shut, Harry set his tiny model of theHungarian Horntail on the table next to his bed,where it yawned, curled up, and closed its eyes.

Really, Harry thought, as he pulled the hangings onhis four-poster closed, Hagrid had a point... theywere all right, really, dragons. ...

The start of December brought wind and sleet toHogwarts. Drafty though the castle always was inwinter, Harry was glad of its fires and thick wallsevery time he passed the Durmstrang ship on thelake, which was pitching in the high winds, its blacksails billowing against the dark skies. He thought theBeauxbatons caravan was likely to be pretty chillytoo. Hagrid, he noticed, was keeping MadameMaxime’s horses well provided with their preferreddrink of single-malt whiskey; the fumes wafting fromthe trough in the corner of their paddock was enoughto make the entire Care of Magical Creatures classlight-headed. This was unhelpful, as they were stilltending the horrible skrewts and needed their witsabout them.

“I’m not sure whether they hibernate or not,” Hagridtold the shivering class in the windy pumpkin patchnext lesson. “Thought we’d jus’ try an’ see if theyfancied a kip ... we’ll jus’ settle ’em down in theseboxes. ...”

There were now only ten skrewts left; apparently theirdesire to kill one another had not been exercised outof them. Each of them was now approaching six feetin length. Their thick gray armor; their powerful,scuttling legs; their fire-blasting ends; their stingsand their suckers, combined to make the skrewts themost repulsive things Harry had ever seen. The classPage | 406 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

looked dispiritedly at the enormous boxes Hagrid hadbrought out, all lined with pillows and fluffy blankets.

“Well jus’ lead ’em in here,” Hagrid said, “an’ put thelids on, and we’ll see what happens.”

But the skrewts, it transpired, did not hibernate, anddid not appreciate being forced into pillow-lined boxesand nailed in. Hagrid was soon yelling, “Don’ panic,now, don’ panic!” while the skrewts rampaged aroundthe pumpkin patch, now strewn with the smolderingwreckage of the boxes. Most of the class — Malfoy,Crabbe, and Goyle in the lead — had fled intoHagrid’s cabin through the back door and barricadedthemselves in; Harry, Ron, and Hermione, however,were among those who remained outside trying tohelp Hagrid. Together they managed to restrain andtie up nine of the skrewts, though at the cost ofnumerous burns and cuts; finally, only one skrewtwas left.

“Don’ frighten him, now!” Hagrid shouted as Ron andHarry used their wands to shoot jets of fiery sparks atthe skrewt, which was advancing menacingly onthem, its sting arched, quivering, over its back. “Jus’try an’ slip the rope ’round his sting, so he won’ hurtany o’ the others!”

“Yeah, we wouldn’t want that!” Ron shouted angrilyas he and Harry backed into the wall of Hagrid’scabin, still holding the skrewt off with their sparks.

“Well, well, well ... this does look like fun.”

Rita Skeeter was leaning on Hagrid’s garden fence,looking in at the mayhem. She was wearing a thickmagenta cloak with a furry purple collar today, andher crocodile-skin handbag was over her arm.

Page | 407

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid launched himself forward on top of the skrewtthat was cornering Harry and Ron and flattened it; ablast of fire shot out of its end, withering thepumpkin plants nearby.

“Who’re you?” Hagrid asked Rita Skeeter as heslipped a loop of rope around the skrewt’s sting andtightened it.

“Rita Skeeter, Daily Prophet reporter,” Rita replied,beaming at him. Her gold teeth glinted.

“Thought Dumbledore said you weren’ allowed insidethe school anymore,” said Hagrid, frowning slightly ashe got off the slightly squashed skrewt and startedtugging it over to its fellows.

Rita acted as though she hadn’t heard what Hagridhad said.

“What are these fascinating creatures called?” sheasked, beaming still more widely.

“Blast-Ended Skrewts,” grunted Hagrid.

“Really?” said Rita, apparently full of lively interest.“I’ve never heard of them before ... where do theycome from?”

Harry noticed a dull red flush rising up out ofHagrid’s wild black beard, and his heart sank. Wherehad Hagrid got the skrewts from? Hermione, whoseemed to be thinking along these lines, said quickly,“They’re very interesting, aren’t they? Aren’t they,Harry?”

“What? Oh yeah ... ouch ... interesting,” said Harry asshe stepped on his foot.

Page | 408

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Ah, you’re here, Harry!” said Rita Skeeter as shelooked around. “So you like Care of MagicalCreatures, do you? One of your favorite lessons?”

“Yes,” said Harry stoutly. Hagrid beamed at him.

“Lovely,” said Rita. “Really lovely. Been teachinglong?” she added to Hagrid.

Harry noticed her eyes travel over Dean (who had anasty cut across one cheek), Lavender (whose robeswere badly singed), Seamus (who was nursing severalburnt fingers), and then to the cabin windows, wheremost of the class stood, their noses pressed againstthe glass waiting to see if the coast was clear.

“This is o’ny me second year,” said Hagrid.

“Lovely... I don’t suppose you’d like to give aninterview, would you? Share some of your experienceof magical creatures? The Prophet does a zoologicalcolumn every Wednesday, as I’m sure you know. Wecould feature these — er — Bang-Ended Scoots.”

“Blast-Ended Skrewts,” Hagrid said eagerly. “Er —yeah, why not?”

Harry had a very bad feeling about this, but there wasno way of communicating it to Hagrid without RitaSkeeter seeing, so he had to stand and watch insilence as Hagrid and Rita Skeeter madearrangements to meet in the Three Broomsticks for agood long interview later that week. Then the bellrang up at the castle, signaling the end of the lesson.

“Well, good-bye, Harry!” Rita Skeeter called merrily tohim as he set off with Ron and Hermione. “UntilFriday night, then, Hagrid!”

Page | 409

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Shell twist everything he says,” Harry said under hisbreath.

“Just as long as he didn’t import those skrewtsillegally or anything,” said Hermione desperately.

They looked at one another — it was exactly the sortof thing Hagrid might do.

“Hagrid’s been in loads of trouble before, andDumbledore’s never sacked him,” said Ronconsolingly. “Worst that can happen is Hagrid’ll haveto get rid of the skrewts. Sorry ... did I say worst? Imeant best.”

Harry and Hermione laughed, and, feeling slightlymore cheerful, went off to lunch.

Harry thoroughly enjoyed double Divination thatafternoon; they were still doing star charts andpredictions, but now that he and Ron were friendsonce more, the whole thing seemed very funny again.Professor Trelawney, who had been so pleased withthe pair of them when they had been predicting theirown horrific deaths, quickly became irritated as theysniggered through her explanation of the variousways in which Pluto could disrupt everyday life.

“I would think,” she said, in a mystical whisper thatdid not conceal her obvious annoyance, “that some ofus” — she stared very meaningfully at Harry —

“might be a little less frivolous had they seen what Ihave seen during my crystal gazing last night. As I sathere, absorbed in my needlework, the urge to consultthe orb overpowered me. I arose, I settled myselfbefore it, and I gazed into its crystalline depths ... andwhat do you think I saw gazing back at me?”

“An ugly old bat in outsize specs?” Ron mutteredunder his breath.

Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

Harry fought hard to keep his face straight.

“Death, my dears.”

Parvati and Lavender both put their hands over theirmouths, looking horrified.

“Yes,” said Professor Trelawney, nodding impressively,“it comes, ever closer, it circles overhead like avulture, ever lower ... ever lower over the castle. ...”

She stared pointedly at Harry, who yawned verywidely and obviously.

“It’d be a bit more impressive if she hadn’t done itabout eighty times before,” Harry said as they finallyregained the fresh air of the staircase beneathProfessor Trelawney’s room. “But if I’d dropped deadevery time she’s told me I’m going to, I’d be a medicalmiracle.”

“You’d be a sort of extra-concentrated ghost,” saidRon, chortling, as they passed the Bloody Baron goingin the opposite direction, his wide eyes staringsinisterly. “At least we didn’t get homework. I hopeHermione got loads off Professor Vector, I love notworking when she is. ...”

But Hermione wasn’t at dinner, nor was she in thelibrary when they went to look for her afterward. Theonly person in there was Viktor Krum. Ron hoveredbehind the bookshelves for a while, watching Krum,debating in whispers with Harry whether he shouldask for an autograph — but then Ron realized that sixor seven girls were lurking in the next row of books,debating exactly the same thing, and he lost hisenthusiasm for the idea.

Page | 411

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Wonder where she’s got to?” Ron said as he andHarry went back to Gryffindor Tower.

“Dunno ... balderdash.”

But the Fat Lady had barely begun to swing forwardwhen the sound of racing feet behind themannounced Hermione’s arrival.

“Harry!” she panted, skidding to a halt beside him(the Fat Lady stared down at her, eyebrows raised).“Harry, you’ve got to come — you’ve got to come, themost amazing thing’s happened — please —”

She seized Harry’s arm and started to try to drag himback along the corridor.

“What’s the matter?” Harry said.

“I’ll show you when we get there — oh come on, quick

Harry looked around at Ron; he looked back at Harry,intrigued.

“Okay,” Harry said, starting off back down thecorridor with Hermione, Ron hurrying to keep up.

“Oh don’t mind me!” the Fat Lady called irritably afterthem. “Don’t apologize for bothering me! I’ll just hanghere, wide open, until you get back, shall I?”

“Yeah, thanks!” Ron shouted over his shoulder.

“Hermione, where are we going?” Harry asked, aftershe had led them down through six floors, andstarted down the marble staircase into the entrancehall.

Page | 412

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You’ll see, you’ll see in a minute!” said Hermioneexcitedly.

She turned left at the bottom of the staircase andhurried toward the door through which CedricDiggory had gone the night after the Goblet of Firehad regurgitated his and Harry’s names. Harry hadnever been through here before. He and Ron followedHermione down a flight of stone steps, but instead ofending up in a gloomy underground passage like theone that led to Snape’s dungeon, they foundthemselves in a broad stone corridor, brightly lit withtorches, and decorated with cheerful paintings thatwere mainly of food.

“Oh hang on ...” said Harry slowly, halfway down thecorridor. “Wait a minute, Hermione. ...”

“What?” She turned around to look at him,anticipation all over her face.

“I know what this is about,” said Harry.

He nudged Ron and pointed to the painting justbehind Hermione. It showed a gigantic silver fruitbowl.

“Hermione!” said Ron, cottoning on. “You’re trying torope us into that spew stuff again!”

“No, no, I’m not!” she said hastily. “And it’s not spew,Ron —”

“Changed the name, have you?” said Ron, frowning ather. “What are we now, then, the House-Elf LiberationFront? I’m not barging into that kitchen and trying tomake them stop work, I’m not doing it —”

Page | 413

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm not asking you to!” Hermione said impatiently. “Icame down here just now, to talk to them all, and Ifound — oh come on, Harry, I want to show you!”

She seized his arm again, pulled him in front of thepicture of the giant fruit bowl, stretched out herforefinger, and tickled the huge green pear. It beganto squirm, chuckling, and suddenly turned into alarge green door handle. Hermione seized it, pulledthe door open, and pushed Harry hard in the back,forcing him inside.

He had one brief glimpse of an enormous, high-ceilinged room, large as the Great Hall above it, withmounds of glittering brass pots and pans heapedaround the stone walls, and a great brick fireplace atthe other end, when something small hurtled towardhim from the middle of the room, squealing, “HarryPotter, sir! Harry Potteri”

Next second all the wind had been knocked out ofhim as the squealing elf hit him hard in the midriff,hugging him so tightly he thought his ribs wouldbreak.

“D-Dobby?” Harry gasped.

“It is Dobby, sir, it is!” squealed the voice fromsomewhere around his navel. “Dobby has beenhoping and hoping to see Harry Potter, sir, and HarryPotter has come to see him, sir!”

Dobby let go and stepped back a few paces, beamingup at Harry, his enormous, green, tennis-ball-shapedeyes brimming with tears of happiness. He lookedalmost exactly as Harry remembered him; the pencil-shaped nose, the batlike ears, the long fingers andfeet — all except the clothes, which were verydifferent.

Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

When Dobby had worked for the Malfoys, he hadalways worn the same filthy old pillowcase. Now,however, he was wearing the strangest assortment ofgarments Harry had ever seen; he had done an evenworse job of dressing himself than the wizards at theWorld Cup. He was wearing a tea cozy for a hat, onwhich he had pinned a number of bright badges; a tiepatterned with horseshoes over a bare chest, a pair ofwhat looked like children’s soccer shorts, and oddsocks. One of these, Harry saw, was the black oneHarry had removed from his own foot and tricked Mr.Malfoy into giving Dobby, thereby setting Dobby free.The other was covered in pink and orange stripes.

“Dobby, what’re you doing here?” Harry said inamazement.

“Dobby has come to work at Hogwarts, sir!” Dobbysquealed excitedly. “Professor Dumbledore gaveDobby and Winky jobs, sir!”

“Winky?” said Harry. “She’s here too?”

“Yes, sir, yes!” said Dobby, and he seized Harry’shand and pulled him off into the kitchen between thefour long wooden tables that stood there. Each ofthese tables, Harry noticed as he passed them, waspositioned exactly beneath the four House tablesabove, in the Great Hall. At the moment, they wereclear of food, dinner having finished, but he supposedthat an hour ago they had been laden with dishesthat were then sent up through the ceiling to theircounterparts above.

At least a hundred little elves were standing aroundthe kitchen, beaming, bowing, and curtsying asDobby led Harry past them. They were all wearing thesame uniform: a tea towel stamped with the Hogwartscrest, and tied, as Winky’s had been, like a toga.

Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dobby stopped in front of the brick fireplace andpointed.

“Winky, sir!” he said.

Winky was sitting on a stool by the fire. UnlikeDobby, she had obviously not foraged for clothes. Shewas wearing a neat little skirt and blouse with amatching blue hat, which had holes in it for her largeears. However, while every one of Dobby’s strangecollection of garments was so clean and well cared forthat it looked brand-new, Winky was plainly nottaking care of her clothes at all. There were soupstains all down her blouse and a burn in her skirt.

“Hello, Winky,” said Harry.

Winky’s lip quivered. Then she burst into tears, whichspilled out of her great brown eyes and splasheddown her front, just as they had done at theQuidditch World Cup.

“Oh dear,” said Hermione. She and Ron had followedHarry and Dobby to the end of the kitchen. “Winky,don’t cry, please don’t ...”

But Winky cried harder than ever. Dobby, on theother hand, beamed up at Harry.

“Would Harry Potter like a cup of tea?” he squeakedloudly, over Winky’s sobs.

“Er — yeah, okay,” said Harry.

Instantly, about six house-elves came trotting upbehind him, bearing a large silver tray laden with ateapot, cups for Harry, Ron, and Hermione, a milkjug, and a large plate of biscuits.

Page | 416

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Good service!” Ron said, in an impressed voice.Hermione frowned at him, but the elves all lookeddelighted; they bowed very low and retreated.

“How long have you been here, Dobby?” Harry askedas Dobby handed around the tea.

“Only a week, Harry Potter, sir!” said Dobby happily.“Dobby came to see Professor Dumbledore, sir. Yousee, sir, it is very difficult for a house-elf who hasbeen dismissed to get a new position, sir, very difficultindeed —”

At this, Winky howled even harder, her squashed-tomato of a nose dribbling all down her front, thoughshe made no effort to stem the flow.

“Dobby has traveled the country for two whole years,sir, trying to find work!” Dobby squeaked. “But Dobbyhasn’t found work, sir, because Dobby wants payingnow!”

The house-elves all around the kitchen, who had beenlistening and watching with interest, all looked awayat these words, as though Dobby had said somethingrude and embarrassing. Hermione, however, said,“Good for you, Dobby!”

“Thank you, miss!” said Dobby, grinning toothily ather. “But most wizards doesn’t want a house-elf whowants paying, miss. That’s not the point of a house-elf,’ they says, and they slammed the door in Dobby’sface! Dobby likes work, but he wants to wear clothesand he wants to be paid, Harry Potter. ... Dobby likesbeing free!”

The Hogwarts house-elves had now started edgingaway from Dobby, as though he were carryingsomething contagious. Winky, however, remained

Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

where she was, though there was a definite increasein the volume of her crying.

“And then, Harry Potter, Dobby goes to visit Winky,and finds out Winky has been freed too, sir!” saidDobby delightedly.

At this, Winky flung herself forward off her stool andlay facedown on the flagged stone floor, beating hertiny fists upon it and positively screaming withmisery. Hermione hastily dropped down to her kneesbeside her and tried to comfort her, but nothing shesaid made the slightest difference. Dobby continuedwith his story, shouting shrilly over Winky’sscreeches.

“And then Dobby had the idea, Harry Potter, sir! Whydoesn’t Dobby and Winky find work together?’ Dobbysays. Where is there enough work for two house-elves?’ says Winky. And Dobby thinks, and it comesto him, sir! Hogwarts\ So Dobby and Winky came tosee Professor Dumbledore, sir, and ProfessorDumbledore took us on!”

Dobby beamed very brightly, and happy tears welledin his eyes again.

“And Professor Dumbledore says he will pay Dobby,sir, if Dobby wants paying! And so Dobby is a free elf,sir, and Dobby gets a Galleon a week and one day offa month!”

“That’s not very much!” Hermione shoutedindignantly from the floor, over Winky’s continuedscreaming and fist-beating.

“Professor Dumbledore offered Dobby ten Galleons aweek, and weekends off,” said Dobby, suddenly givinga little shiver, as though the prospect of so much

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

leisure and riches were frightening, “but Dobby beathim down, miss. ... Dobby likes freedom, miss, but heisn’t wanting too much, miss, he likes work better.”

“And how much is Professor Dumbledore paying you,Winky?” Hermione asked kindly.

If she had thought this would cheer up Winky, shewas wildly mistaken. Winky did stop crying, but whenshe sat up she was glaring at Hermione through hermassive brown eyes, her whole face sopping wet andsuddenly furious.

“Winky is a disgraced elf, but Winky is not yet gettingpaid!” she squeaked. “Winky is not sunk so low asthat! Winky is properly ashamed of being freed!”

“Ashamed?” said Hermione blankly. “But — Winky,come on! It’s Mr. Crouch who should be ashamed, notyou! You didn’t do anything wrong, he was reallyhorrible to you —”

But at these words, Winky clapped her hands overthe holes in her hat, flattening her ears so that shecouldn’t hear a word, and screeched, “You is notinsulting my master, miss! You is not insulting Mr.Crouch! Mr. Crouch is a good wizard, miss! Mr.Crouch is right to sack bad Winky!”

“Winky is having trouble adjusting, Harry Potter,”squeaked Dobby confidentially. “Winky forgets she isnot bound to Mr. Crouch anymore; she is allowed tospeak her mind now, but she won’t do it.”

“Can’t house-elves speak their minds about theirmasters, then?” Harry asked.

“Oh no, sir, no,” said Dobby, looking suddenlyserious. “ Tis part of the house-elf’s enslavement, sir.

Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

We keeps their secrets and our silence, sir. Weupholds the family’s honor, and we never speaks ill ofthem — though Professor Dumbledore told Dobby hedoes not insist upon this. Professor Dumbledore saidwe is free to — to —”

Dobby looked suddenly nervous and beckoned Harrycloser. Harry bent forward. Dobby whispered, “Hesaid we is free to call him a — a barmy old codger ifwe likes, sir!”

Dobby gave a frightened sort of giggle.

“But Dobby is not wanting to, Harry Potter,” he said,talking normally again, and shaking his head so thathis ears flapped. “Dobby likes Professor Dumbledorevery much, sir, and is proud to keep his secrets andour silence for him.”

“But you can say what you like about the Malfoysnow?” Harry asked him, grinning.

A slightly fearful look came into Dobby’s immenseeyes.

“Dobby — Dobby could,” he said doubtfully. Hesquared his small shoulders. “Dobby could tell HarryPotter that his old masters were — were — bad Darkwizards'.”

Dobby stood for a moment, quivering all over, horror-struck by his own daring — then he rushed over tothe nearest table and began banging his head on itvery hard, squealing, “Bad Dobby! Bad Dobby\”

Harry seized Dobby by the back of his tie and pulledhim away from the table.

Page | 420

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Thank you, Harry Potter, thank you,” said Dobbybreathlessly, rubbing his head.

“You just need a bit of practice,” Harry said.

“Practice!” squealed Winky furiously. “You is ought tobe ashamed of yourself, Dobby, talking that wayabout your masters!”

“They isn’t my masters anymore, Winky!” said Dobbydefiantly. “Dobby doesn’t care what they thinkanymore!”

“Oh you is a bad elf, Dobby!” moaned Winky, tearsleaking down her face once more. “My poor Mr.Crouch, what is he doing without Winky? He isneeding me, he is needing my help! I is looking afterthe Crouches all my life, and my mother is doing itbefore me, and my grandmother is doing it before her...oh what is they saying if they knew Winky wasfreed? Oh the shame, the shame!” She buried her facein her skirt again and bawled.

“Winky,” said Hermione firmly, “I’m quite sure Mr.Crouch is getting along perfectly well without you.We’ve seen him, you know —”

“You is seeing my master?” said Winky breathlessly,raising her tearstained face out of her skirt once moreand goggling at Hermione. “You is seeing him here atHogwarts?”

“Yes,” said Hermione, “he and Mr. Bagman are judgesin the Tri-wizard Tournament.”

“Mr. Bagman comes too?” squeaked Winky, and toHarry’s great surprise (and Ron’s and Hermione’s too,by the looks on their faces), she looked angry again.

Page | 421

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Mr. Bagman is a bad wizard! A very bad wizard! Mymaster isn’t liking him, oh no, not at all!”

“Bagman — bad?” said Harry.

“Oh yes,” Winky said, nodding her head furiously.

“My master is telling Winky some things! But Winkyis not saying ... Winky — Winky keeps her master’ssecrets. ...”

She dissolved yet again in tears; they could hear hersobbing into her skirt, “Poor master, poor master, noWinky to help him no more!”

They couldn’t get another sensible word out of Winky.They left her to her crying and finished their tea,while Dobby chatted happily about his life as a free elfand his plans for his wages.

“Dobby is going to buy a sweater next, Harry Potter!”he said happily, pointing at his bare chest.

“Tell you what, Dobby,” said Ron, who seemed to havetaken a great liking to the elf, “I’ll give you the one mymum knits me this Christmas, I always get one fromher. You don’t mind maroon, do you?”

Dobby was delighted.

“We might have to shrink it a bit to fit you,” Ron toldhim, “but it’ll go well with your tea cozy.”

As they prepared to take their leave, many of thesurrounding elves pressed in upon them, offeringsnacks to take back upstairs. Hermione refused, witha pained look at the way the elves kept bowing andcurtsying, but Harry and Ron loaded their pocketswith cream cakes and pies.

Page | 422

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Thanks a lot!” Harry said to the elves, who had allclustered around the door to say good night. “Seeyou, Dobby!”

“Harry Potter ... can Dobby come and see yousometimes, sir?” Dobby asked tentatively.

“ ’Course you can,” said Harry, and Dobby beamed.

“You know what?” said Ron, once he, Hermione, andHarry had left the kitchens behind and were climbingthe steps into the entrance hall again. “All these yearsI’ve been really impressed with Fred and George,nicking food from the kitchens — well, it’s not exactlydifficult, is it? They can’t wait to give it away!”

“I think this is the best thing that could havehappened to those elves, you know,” said Hermione,leading the way back up the marble staircase. “Dobbycoming to work here, I mean. The other elves will seehow happy he is, being free, and slowly it’ll dawn onthem that they want that too!”

“Let’s hope they don’t look too closely at Winky,” saidHarry.

“Oh shell cheer up,” said Hermione, though shesounded a bit doubtful. “Once the shock’s worn off,and she’s got used to Hogwarts, she’ll see how muchbetter off she is without that Crouch man.”

“She seems to love him,” said Ron thickly (he had juststarted on a cream cake).

“Doesn’t think much of Bagman, though, does she?”said Harry. “Wonder what Crouch says at home abouthim?”

Page | 423

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Probably says he’s not a very good Head ofDepartment,” said Hermione, “and let’s face it ... he’sgot a point, hasn’t he?”

“I’d still rather work for him than old Crouch,” saidRon. “At least Bagman’s got a sense of humor.”

“Don’t let Percy hear you saying that,” Hermione said,smiling slightly.

“Yeah, well, Percy wouldn’t want to work for anyonewith a sense of humor, would he?” said Ron, nowstarting on a chocolate eclair. “Percy wouldn’trecognize a joke if it danced naked in front of himwearing Dobby’s tea cozy.”

Page | 424

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



THE UNEXPECTED TASK

“Potter! Weasley! Will you pay attention?”

Professor McGonagall’s irritated voice cracked like awhip through the Transfiguration class on Thursday,and Harry and Ron both jumped and looked up.

It was the end of the lesson; they had finished theirwork; the guinea fowl they had been changing intoguinea pigs had been shut away in a large cage onProfessor McGonagall’s desk (Neville’s still hadfeathers); they had copied down their homework fromthe blackboard (“Describe, with examples, the ways inwhich Transforming Spells must be adapted whenperforming Cross-Species Switches”). The bell was dueto ring at any moment, and Harry and Ron, who hadbeen having a sword fight with a couple of Fred andGeorge’s fake wands at the back of the class, lookedup, Ron holding a tin parrot and Harry, a rubberhaddock.

“Now that Potter and Weasley have been kind enoughto act their age,” said Professor McGonagall, with an

Page | 425 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

angry look at the pair of them as the head of Harry’shaddock drooped and fell silently to the floor — Ron’sparrot’s beak had severed it moments before — “Ihave something to say to you all.

“The Yule Ball is approaching — a traditional part ofthe Tri-wizard Tournament and an opportunity for usto socialize with our foreign guests. Now, the ball willbe open only to fourth years and above — althoughyou may invite a younger student if you wish —”

Lavender Brown let out a shrill giggle. Parvati Patilnudged her hard in the ribs, her face workingfuriously as she too fought not to giggle. They bothlooked around at Harry. Professor McGonagallignored them, which Harry thought was distinctlyunfair, as she had just told off him and Ron.

“Dress robes will be worn,” Professor McGonagallcontinued, “and the ball will start at eight o’clock onChristmas Day, finishing at midnight in the GreatHall. Now then —”

Professor McGonagall stared deliberately around theclass.

“The Yule Ball is of course a chance for us all to — er— let our hair down,” she said, in a disapprovingvoice.

Lavender giggled harder than ever, with her handpressed hard against her mouth to stifle the sound.Harry could see what was funny this time: ProfessorMcGonagall, with her hair in a tight bun, looked asthough she had never let her hair down in any sense.

“But that does NOT mean,” Professor McGonagallwent on, “that we will be relaxing the standards ofbehavior we expect from Hogwarts students. I will be

Page | 426 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

most seriously displeased if a Gryffindor studentembarrasses the school in any way.”

The bell rang, and there was the usual scuffle ofactivity as everyone packed their bags and swungthem onto their shoulders.

Professor McGonagall called above the noise, “Potter— a word, if you please.”

Assuming this had something to do with his headlessrubber haddock, Harry proceeded gloomily to theteacher’s desk. Professor McGonagall waited until therest of the class had gone, and then said, “Potter, thechampions and their partners —”

“What partners?” said Harry.

Professor McGonagall looked suspiciously at him, asthough she thought he was trying to be funny.

“Your partners for the Yule Ball, Potter,” she saidcoldly. “Your dance partners.”

Harry’s insides seemed to curl up and shrivel.

“Dance partners?” He felt himself going red. “I don’tdance,” he said quickly.

“Oh yes, you do,” said Professor McGonagall irritably.“That’s what I’m telling you. Traditionally, thechampions and their partners open the ball.”

Harry had a sudden mental image of himself in a tophat and tails, accompanied by a girl in the sort offrilly dress Aunt Petunia always wore to UncleVernon’s work parties.

“I’m not dancing,” he said.

Page | 427 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“It is traditional,” said Professor McGonagall firmly.“You are a Hogwarts champion, and you will do whatis expected of you as a representative of the school.

So make sure you get yourself a partner, Potter.”

“But — I don’t —”

“You heard me, Potter,” said Professor McGonagall ina very final sort of way.

A week ago, Harry would have said finding a partnerfor a dance would be a cinch compared to taking on aHungarian Horntail. But now that he had done thelatter, and was facing the prospect of asking a girl tothe ball, he thought he’d rather have another roundwith the dragon.

Harry had never known so many people to put theirnames down to stay at Hogwarts for Christmas; healways did, of course, because the alternative wasusually going back to Privet Drive, but he had alwaysbeen very much in the minority before now. This year,however, everyone in the fourth year and aboveseemed to be staying, and they all seemed to Harry tobe obsessed with the coming ball — or at least all thegirls were, and it was amazing how many girlsHogwarts suddenly seemed to hold; he had neverquite noticed that before. Girls giggling andwhispering in the corridors, girls shrieking withlaughter as boys passed them, girls excitedlycomparing notes on what they were going to wear onChristmas night. ...

“Why do they have to move in packs?” Harry askedRon as a dozen or so girls walked past them,sniggering and staring at Harry. “How’re yousupposed to get one on their own to ask them?”

Page | 428

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Lasso one?” Ron suggested. “Got any idea who you’regoing to try?”

Harry didn’t answer. He knew perfectly well whomhe’d like to ask, but working up the nerve wassomething else. ... Cho was a year older than he was;she was very pretty; she was a very good Quidditchplayer, and she was also very popular.

Ron seemed to know what was going on insideHarry’s head.

“Listen, you’re not going to have any trouble. You’re achampion. You’ve just beaten a Hungarian Horntail. Ibet they 11 be queuing up to go with you.”

In tribute to their recently repaired friendship, Ronhad kept the bitterness in his voice to a bareminimum. Moreover, to Harry’s amazement, heturned out to be quite right.

A curly-haired third-year Hufflepuff girl to whomHarry had never spoken in his life asked him to go tothe ball with her the very next day. Harry was sotaken aback he said no before he’d even stopped toconsider the matter. The girl walked off looking ratherhurt, and Harry had to endure Dean’s, Seamus’s, andRon’s taunts about her all through History of Magic.The following day, two more girls asked him, a secondyear and (to his horror) a fifth year who looked asthough she might knock him out if he refused.

“She was quite good-looking,” said Ron fairly, afterhe’d stopped laughing.

“She was a foot taller than me,” said Harry, stillunnerved. “Imagine what I’d look like trying to dancewith her.”

Page | 429

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hermione’s words about Krum kept coming back tohim. “They only like him because he’s famous!” Harrydoubted very much if any of the girls who had askedto be his partner so far would have wanted to go tothe ball with him if he hadn’t been a schoolchampion. Then he wondered if this would botherhim if Cho asked him.

On the whole, Harry had to admit that even with theembarrassing prospect of opening the ball before him,life had definitely improved since he had got throughthe first task. He wasn’t attracting nearly as muchunpleasantness in the corridors anymore, which hesuspected had a lot to do with Cedric — he had anidea Cedric might have told the Hufflepuffs to leaveHarry alone, in gratitude for Harry’s tip-off about thedragons. There seemed to be fewer Support CedricDiggoryl badges around too. Draco Malfoy, of course,was still quoting Rita Skeeter’s article to him at everypossible opportunity, but he was getting fewer andfewer laughs out of it — and just to heighten Harry’sfeeling of well-being, no story about Hagrid hadappeared in the Daily Prophet

“She didn’ seem very int’rested in magical creatures,ter tell yeh the truth,” Hagrid said, when Harry, Ron,and Hermione asked him how his interview with RitaSkeeter had gone during the last Care of MagicalCreatures lesson of the term. To their very great relief,Hagrid had given up on direct contact with theskrewts now, and they were merely sheltering behindhis cabin today, sitting at a trestle table andpreparing a fresh selection of food with which totempt the skrewts.

“She jus’ wanted me ter talk about you, Harry,”

Hagrid continued in a low voice. “Well, I told her we’dbeen friends since I went ter fetch yeh from theDursleys. ‘Never had to tell him off in four years?’ she

Page | 430 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

said. ‘Never played you up in lessons, has he?’ I toldher no, an’ she didn’ seem happy at all. Yeh’d thinkshe wanted me to say yeh were horrible, Harry.”

“ ’Course she did,” said Harry, throwing lumps ofdragon liver into a large metal bowl and picking uphis knife to cut some more. “She can’t keep writingabout what a tragic little hero I am, it’ll get boring.”

“She wants a new angle, Hagrid,” said Ron wisely ashe shelled salamander eggs. “You were supposed tosay Harry’s a mad delinquent!”

“But he’s not!” said Hagrid, looking genuinelyshocked.

“She should’ve interviewed Snape,” said Harry grimly.“He’d give her the goods on me any day. ‘Potter hasbeen crossing lines ever since he first arrived at thisschool. ... ’ ”

“Said that, did he?” said Hagrid, while Ron andHermione laughed. “Well, yeh might’ve bent a fewrules, Harry, bu’ yeh’re all righ’ really, aren’ you?”

“Cheers, Hagrid,” said Harry, grinning.

“You coming to this ball thing on Christmas Day,Hagrid?” said Ron.

“Though’ I might look in on it, yeah,” said Hagridgruffly. “Should be a good do, I reckon. You’ll beopenin’ the dancin’, won’ yeh, Harry? Who’re youtakin’?”

“No one, yet,” said Harry, feeling himself going redagain. Hagrid didn’t pursue the subject.

Page | 431

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The last week of term became increasingly boisterousas it progressed. Rumors about the Yule Ball wereflying everywhere, though Harry didn’t believe half ofthem — for instance, that Dumbledore had boughteight hundred barrels of mulled mead from MadamRosmerta. It seemed to be fact, however, that he hadbooked the Weird Sisters. Exactly who or what theWeird Sisters were Harry didn’t know, never havinghad access to a wizard’s wireless, but he deducedfrom the wild excitement of those who had grown uplistening to the WWN (Wizarding Wireless Network)that they were a very famous musical group.

Some of the teachers, like little Professor Flitwick,gave up trying to teach them much when their mindswere so clearly elsewhere; he allowed them to playgames in his lesson on Wednesday, and spent most ofit talking to Harry about the perfect SummoningCharm Harry had used during the first task of theTriwizard Tournament. Other teachers were not sogenerous. Nothing would ever deflect Professor Binns,for example, from plowing on through his notes ongoblin rebellions — as Binns hadn’t let his own deathstand in the way of continuing to teach, theysupposed a small thing like Christmas wasn’t going toput him off. It was amazing how he could make evenbloody and vicious goblin riots sound as boring asPercy’s cauldron-bottom report. ProfessorsMcGonagall and Moody kept them working until thevery last second of their classes too, and Snape, ofcourse, would no sooner let them play games in classthan adopt Harry. Staring nastily around at them all,he informed them that he would be testing them onpoison antidotes during the last lesson of the term.

“Evil, he is,” Ron said bitterly that night in theGryffindor common room. “Springing a test on us onthe last day. Ruining the last bit of term with a wholeload of studying.”

Page | 432 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Mmm ... you’re not exactly straining yourself,though, are you?” said Hermione, looking at him overthe top of her Potions notes. Ron was busy building acard castle out of his Exploding Snap pack — a muchmore interesting pastime than with Muggle cards,because of the chance that the whole thing wouldblow up at any second.

“It’s Christmas, Hermione,” said Harry lazily; he wasrereading Flying with the Cannons for the tenth timein an armchair near the fire.

Hermione looked severely over at him too. “I’d havethought you’d be doing something constructive,

Harry, even if you don’t want to learn your antidotes!”

“Like what?” Harry said as he watched Joey Jenkinsof the Cannons belt a Bludger toward a BallycastleBats Chaser.

“That egg!” Hermione hissed.

“Come on, Hermione, I’ve got till February the twenty-fourth,” Harry said.

He had put the golden egg upstairs in his trunk andhadn’t opened it since the celebration party after thefirst task. There were still two and a half months to gountil he needed to know what all the screechy wailingmeant, after all.

“But it might take weeks to work it out!” saidHermione. “You’re going to look a real idiot if everyoneelse knows what the next task is and you don’t!”

“Leave him alone, Hermione, he’s earned a bit of abreak,” said Ron, and he placed the last two cards ontop of the castle and the whole lot blew up, singeinghis eyebrows.

Page | 433 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Nice look, Ron ... go well with your dress robes, thatwill.”

It was Fred and George. They sat down at the tablewith Harry, Ron, and Hermione as Ron felt how muchdamage had been done.

“Ron, can we borrow Pigwidgeon?” George asked.

“No, he’s off delivering a letter,” said Ron. “Why?”

“Because George wants to invite him to the ball,” saidFred sarcastically.

“Because we want to send a letter, you stupid greatprat,” said George.

“Who d’you two keep writing to, eh?” said Ron.

“Nose out, Ron, or I’ll burn that for you too,” saidFred, waving his wand threateningly. “So ... you lotgot dates for the ball yet?”

“Nope,” said Ron.

“Well, you’d better hurry up, mate, or all the goodones will be gone,” said Fred.

“Who’re you going with, then?” said Ron.

“Angelina,” said Fred promptly, without a trace ofembarrassment.

“What?” said Ron, taken aback. “You’ve already askedher?”

“Good point,” said Fred. He turned his head andcalled across the common room, “Oi! Angelina!”

Page | 434 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Angelina, who had been chatting with Alicia Spinnetnear the fire, looked over at him.

“What?” she called back.

“Want to come to the ball with me?”

Angelina gave Fred an appraising sort of look.

“All right, then,” she said, and she turned back toAlicia and carried on chatting with a bit of a grin onher face.

“There you go,” said Fred to Harry and Ron, “piece ofcake.”

He got to his feet, yawning, and said, “We’d better usea school owl then, George, come on. ...”

They left. Ron stopped feeling his eyebrows andlooked across the smoldering wreck of his card castleat Harry.

“We should get a move on, you know ... ask someone.He’s right. We don’t want to end up with a pair oftrolls.”

Hermione let out a sputter of indignation.

“A pair of ... what, excuse me?”

“Well — you know,” said Ron, shrugging. “I’d rathergo alone than with — with Eloise Midgen, say.”

“Her acne’s loads better lately — and she’s reallynice!”

“Her nose is off-center,” said Ron.

Page | 435 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh I see,” Hermione said, bristling. “So basically,you’re going to take the best-looking girl who’ll haveyou, even if she’s completely horrible?”

“Er — yeah, that sounds about right,” said Ron.

“I’m going to bed,” Hermione snapped, and she sweptoff toward the girls’ staircase without another word.

The Hogwarts staff, demonstrating a continued desireto impress the visitors from Beauxbatons andDurmstrang, seemed determined to show the castle atits best this Christmas. When the decorations wentup, Harry noticed that they were the most stunninghe had yet seen inside the school. Everlasting icicleshad been attached to the banisters of the marblestaircase; the usual twelve Christmas trees in theGreat Hall were bedecked with everything fromluminous holly berries to real, hooting, golden owls,and the suits of armor had all been bewitched to singcarols whenever anyone passed them. It was quitesomething to hear “O Come, All Ye Faithful” sung byan empty helmet that only knew half the words.Several times, Filch the caretaker had to extractPeeves from inside the armor, where he had taken tohiding, filling in the gaps in the songs with lyrics ofhis own invention, all of which were very rude.

And still, Harry hadn’t asked Cho to the ball. He andRon were getting very nervous now, though as Harrypointed out, Ron would look much less stupid thanhe would without a partner; Harry was supposed tobe starting the dancing with the other champions.

“I suppose there’s always Moaning Myrtle,” he saidgloomily, referring to the ghost who haunted the girls’toilets on the second floor.

Page | 436

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Harry — we’ve just got to grit our teeth and do it,”said Ron on Friday morning, in a tone that suggestedthey were planning the storming of an impregnablefortress. “When we get back to the common roomtonight, we’ll both have partners — agreed?”

“Er ... okay,” said Harry.

But every time he glimpsed Cho that day — duringbreak, and then lunchtime, and once on the way toHistory of Magic — she was surrounded by friends.Didn’t she ever go anywhere alone? Could he perhapsambush her as she was going into a bathroom? Butno — she even seemed to go there with an escort offour or five girls. Yet if he didn’t do it soon, she wasbound to have been asked by somebody else.

He found it hard to concentrate on Snape’s Potionstest, and consequently forgot to add the keyingredient — a bezoar — meaning that he receivedbottom marks. He didn’t care, though; he was toobusy screwing up his courage for what he was aboutto do. When the bell rang, he grabbed his bag, andhurried to the dungeon door.

“I’ll meet you at dinner,” he said to Ron andHermione, and he dashed off upstairs.

He’d just have to ask Cho for a private word, that wasall. ... He hurried off through the packed corridorslooking for her, and (rather sooner than he hadexpected) he found her, emerging from a DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts lesson.

“Er — Cho? Could I have a word with you?”

Giggling should be made illegal, Harry thoughtfuriously, as all the girls around Cho started doing it.

Page | 437

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

She didn’t, though. She said, “Okay,” and followedhim out of earshot of her classmates.

Harry turned to look at her and his stomach gave aweird lurch as though he had missed a step goingdownstairs.

“Er,” he said.

He couldn’t ask her. He couldn’t. But he had to. Chostood there looking puzzled, watching him.

The words came out before Harry had quite got histongue around them.

“Wangoballwime?”

“Sorry?” said Cho.

“D’you — d’you want to go to the ball with me?” saidHarry. Why did he have to go red now? Why?

“Oh!” said Cho, and she went red too. “Oh Harry, I’mreally sorry,” and she truly looked it. “I’ve already saidI’ll go with someone else.”

“Oh,” said Harry.

It was odd; a moment before his insides had beenwrithing like snakes, but suddenly he didn’t seem tohave any insides at all.

“Oh okay,” he said, “no problem.”

“I’m really sorry,” she said again.

“That’s okay,” said Harry.

Page | 438

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

They stood there looking at each other, and then Chosaid, “Well —”

“Yeah,” said Harry.

“Well, ’bye,” said Cho, still very red. She walked away.Harry called after her, before he could stop himself.“Who’re you going with?”

“Oh — Cedric,” she said. “Cedric Diggory.”

“Oh right,” said Harry.

His insides had come back again. It felt as thoughthey had been filled with lead in their absence.

Completely forgetting about dinner, he walked slowlyback up to Gryffindor Tower, Cho’s voice echoing inhis ears with every step he took. “Cedric — CedricDiggory.” He had been starting to quite like Cedric —prepared to overlook the fact that he had once beatenhim at Quidditch, and was handsome, and popular,and nearly everyone’s favorite champion. Now hesuddenly realized that Cedric was in fact a uselesspretty boy who didn’t have enough brains to fill aneggcup.

“Fairy lights,” he said dully to the Fat Lady — thepassword had been changed the previous day.

“Yes, indeed, dear!” she trilled, straightening her newtinsel hair band as she swung forward to admit him.

Entering the common room, Harry looked around,and to his surprise he saw Ron sitting ashen-faced ina distant corner. Ginny was sitting with him, talkingto him in what seemed to be a low, soothing voice.

Page | 439 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What’s up, Ron?” said Harry, joining them.

Ron looked up at Harry, a sort of blind horror in hisface.

“Why did I do it?” he said wildly. “I don’t know whatmade me do it!”

“What?” said Harry.

“He — er — just asked Fleur Delacour to go to theball with him,” said Ginny. She looked as though shewas fighting back a smile, but she kept patting Ron’sarm sympathetically.

“You what?” said Harry.

“I don’t know what made me do it!” Ron gasped again.“What was I playing at? There were people — allaround — I’ve gone mad — everyone watching! I wasjust walking past her in the entrance hall — she wasstanding there talking to Diggory — and it sort ofcame over me — and I asked her!”

Ron moaned and put his face in his hands. He kepttalking, though the words were barelydistinguishable.

“She looked at me like I was a sea slug or something.Didn’t even answer. And then — I dunno — I just sortof came to my senses and ran for it.”

“She’s part veela,” said Harry. “You were right — hergrandmother was one. It wasn’t your fault, I bet youjust walked past when she was turning on the oldcharm for Diggory and got a blast of it — but she waswasting her time. He’s going with Cho Chang.”

Ron looked up.

Page | 440 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I asked her to go with me just now,” Harry said dully,“and she told me.”

Ginny had suddenly stopped smiling.

“This is mad,” said Ron. “We’re the only ones left whohaven’t got anyone — well, except Neville. Hey —guess who he asked? Hermionel”

“ What?” said Harry, completely distracted by thisstartling news.

“Yeah, I know!” said Ron, some of the color comingback into his face as he started to laugh. “He told meafter Potions! Said she’s always been really nice,helping him out with work and stuff — but she toldhim she was already going with someone. Ha! As if!She just didn’t want to go with Neville ... I mean, whowould?”

“Don’t!” said Ginny, annoyed. “Don’t laugh —”

Just then Hermione climbed in through the portraithole.

“Why weren’t you two at dinner?” she said, comingover to join them.

“Because — oh shut up laughing, you two — becausethey’ve both just been turned down by girls theyasked to the ball!” said Ginny.

That shut Harry and Ron up.

“Thanks a bunch, Ginny,” said Ron sourly.

“All the good-looking ones taken, Ron?” saidHermione loftily. “Eloise Midgen starting to look quite

Page | 441

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

pretty now, is she? Well, I’m sure you’ll find someonesomewhere who’ll have you.”

But Ron was staring at Hermione as though suddenlyseeing her in a whole new light.

“Hermione, Neville’s right — you are a girl. ...”

“Oh well spotted,” she said acidly.

“Well — you can come with one of us!”

“No, I can’t,” snapped Hermione.

“Oh come on,” he said impatiently, “we need partners,we’re going to look really stupid if we haven’t got any,everyone else has ...”

“I can’t come with you,” said Hermione, now blushing,“because I’m already going with someone.”

“No, you’re not!” said Ron. “You just said that to getrid of Neville!”

“Oh did I?” said Hermione, and her eyes flasheddangerously. “Just because it’s taken you three yearsto notice, Ron, doesn’t mean no one else has spottedI’m a girl!”

Ron stared at her. Then he grinned again.

“Okay, okay, we know you’re a girl,” he said. “Thatdo? Will you come now?”

“I’ve already told you!” Hermione said very angrily.

“I’m going with someone else!”

And she stormed off toward the girls’ dormitoriesagain.

Page | 442 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“She’s lying,” said Ron flatly, watching her go.

“She’s not,” said Ginny quietly.

“Who is it then?” said Ron sharply.

“I’m not telling you, it’s her business,” said Ginny.

“Right,” said Ron, who looked extremely put out, “thisis getting stupid. Ginny, you can go with Harry, andI’ll just—”

“I can’t,” said Ginny, and she went scarlet too. “I’mgoing with — with Neville. He asked me whenHermione said no, and I thought ... well ... I’m notgoing to be able to go otherwise, I’m not in fourthyear.” She looked extremely miserable. “I think I’ll goand have dinner,” she said, and she got up andwalked off to the portrait hole, her head bowed.

Ron goggled at Harry.

“What’s got into them?” he demanded.

But Harry had just seen Parvati and Lavender comein through the portrait hole. The time had come fordrastic action.

“Wait here,” he said to Ron, and he stood up, walkedstraight up to Parvati, and said, “Parvati? Will you goto the ball with me?”

Parvati went into a fit of giggles. Harry waited forthem to subside, his fingers crossed in the pocket ofhis robes.

“Yes, all right then,” she said finally, blushingfuriously.

Page | 443

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Thanks,” said Harry, in relief. “Lavender — will yougo with Ron?”

“She’s going with Seamus,” said Parvati, and the pairof them giggled harder than ever.

Harry sighed.

“Can’t you think of anyone who’d go with Ron?” hesaid, lowering his voice so that Ron wouldn’t hear.

“What about Hermione Granger?” said Parvati.

“She’s going with someone else.”

Parvati looked astonished.

“Ooooh — who?” she said keenly.

Harry shrugged. “No idea,” he said. “So what aboutRon?”

“Well ...” said Parvati slowly, “I suppose my sistermight ... Padma, you know ... in Ravenclaw. I’ll askher if you like.”

“Yeah, that would be great,” said Harry. “Let meknow, will you?”

And he went back over to Ron, feeling that this ballwas a lot more trouble than it was worth, and hopingvery much that Padma Patil’s nose was dead center.

Page | 444

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE YULE BALL

Despite the very heavy load of homework that thefourth years had been given for the holidays, Harrywas in no mood to work when term ended, and spentthe week leading up to Christmas enjoying himself asfully as possible along with everyone else. GryffindorTower was hardly less crowded now than duringterm-time; it seemed to have shrunk slightly too, asits inhabitants were being so much rowdier thanusual. Fred and George had had a great success withtheir Canary Creams, and for the first couple of daysof the holidays, people kept bursting into feather allover the place. Before long, however, all theGryffindors had learned to treat food anybody elseoffered them with extreme caution, in case it had aCanary Cream concealed in the center, and Georgeconfided to Harry that he and Fred were now workingon developing something else. Harry made a mentalnote never to accept so much as a crisp from Fredand George in future. He still hadn’t forgotten Dudleyand the Ton-Tongue Toffee.

Page | 445

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Snow was falling thickly upon the castle and itsgrounds now. The pale blue Beauxbatons carriagelooked like a large, chilly, frosted pumpkin next to theiced gingerbread house that was Hagrid’s cabin, whilethe Durmstrang ship’s portholes were glazed with ice,the rigging white with frost. The house-elves down inthe kitchen were outdoing themselves with a series ofrich, warming stews and savory puddings, and onlyFleur Delacour seemed to be able to find anything tocomplain about.

“It is too ’eavy, all zis ’Ogwarts food,” they heard hersaying grumpily as they left the Great Hall behind herone evening (Ron skulking behind Harry, keen not tobe spotted by Fleur). “I will not fit into my dressrobes!”

“Oooh there’s a tragedy,” Hermione snapped as Fleurwent out into the entrance hall. “She really thinks alot of herself, that one, doesn’t she?”

“Hermione — who are you going to the ball with?”said Ron.

He kept springing this question on her, hoping tostartle her into a response by asking it when she leastexpected it. However, Hermione merely frowned andsaid, “I’m not telling you, you’ll just make fun of me.”

“You’re joking, Weasley!” said Malfoy, behind them.“You’re not telling me someone’s asked that to theball? Not the long-molared Mudblood?”

Harry and Ron both whipped around, but Hermionesaid loudly, waving to somebody over Malfoy’sshoulder, “Hello, Professor Moody!”

Page | 446

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy went pale and jumped backward, lookingwildly around for Moody, but he was still up at thestaff table, finishing his stew.

“Twitchy little ferret, aren’t you, Malfoy?” saidHermione scathingly, and she, Harry, and Ron wentup the marble staircase laughing heartily.

“Hermione,” said Ron, looking sideways at her,suddenly frowning, “your teeth ...”

“What about them?” she said.

“Well, they’re different ... I’ve just noticed. ...”

“Of course they are — did you expect me to keepthose fangs Malfoy gave me?”

“No, I mean, they’re different to how they were beforehe put that hex on you. ... They’re all ... straight and— and normal-sized.”

Hermione suddenly smiled very mischievously, andHarry noticed it too: It was a very different smile fromthe one he remembered.

“Well ... when I went up to Madam Pomfrey to getthem shrunk, she held up a mirror and told me tostop her when they were back to how they normallywere,” she said. “And I just ... let her carry on a bit.”She smiled even more widely. “Mum and Dad won’t betoo pleased. I’ve been trying to persuade them to letme shrink them for ages, but they wanted me to carryon with my braces. You know, they’re dentists, theyjust don’t think teeth and magic should — look!Pigwidgeon’s back!”

Ron’s tiny owl was twittering madly on the top of theicicle-laden banisters, a scroll of parchment tied to

Page | 447 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

his leg. People passing him were pointing andlaughing, and a group of third-year girls paused andsaid, “Oh look at the weeny owl! Isn’t he cute?”

“Stupid little feathery git!” Ron hissed, hurrying upthe stairs and snatching up Pigwidgeon. “You bringletters to the addressee! You don’t hang aroundshowing off!”

Pigwidgeon hooted happily, his head protruding overRon’s fist. The third-year girls all looked veryshocked.

“Clear off!” Ron snapped at them, waving the fistholding Pigwidgeon, who hooted more happily thanever as he soared through the air. “Here — take it,Harry,” Ron added in an undertone as the third-yeargirls scuttled away looking scandalized. He pulledSirius’s reply off Pigwidgeon’s leg, Harry pocketed it,and they hurried back to Gryffindor Tower to read it.

Everyone in the common room was much too busy inletting off more holiday steam to observe what anyoneelse was up to. Ron, Harry, and Hermione sat apartfrom everyone else by a dark window that wasgradually filling up with snow, and Harry read out:

Dear Harry,

Congratulations on getting past the Horntail. Whoeverput your name in that goblet shouldn’t be feeling toohappy right now! I was going to suggest aConjunctivitis Curse, as a dragon’s eyes are itsweakest point — “That’s what Krum did!” Hermionewhispered — but your way was better, I’m impressed.

Don’t get complacent, though, Harry. You’ve only doneone task; whoever put you in for the tournament’s gotplenty more opportunity if they’re trying to hurt you.

Page | 448 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Keep your eyes open — particularly when the personwe discussed is around — and concentrate on keepingyourself out of trouble.

Keep in touch, I still want to hear about anythingunusual.

Sirius

“He sounds exactly like Moody,” said Harry quietly,tucking the letter away again inside his robes. “‘Constant vigilance!’ You’d think I walk around withmy eyes shut, banging off the walls. ...”

“But he’s right, Harry,” said Hermione, “you have stillgot two tasks to do. You really ought to have a look atthat egg, you know, and start working out what itmeans. ...”

“Hermione, he’s got ages!” snapped Ron. “Want agame of chess, Harry?”

“Yeah, okay,” said Harry. Then, spotting the look onHermione’s face, he said, “Come on, how’m Isupposed to concentrate with all this noise going on?

I won’t even be able to hear the egg over this lot.”

“Oh I suppose not,” she sighed, and she sat down towatch their chess match, which culminated in anexciting checkmate of Ron’s, involving a couple ofrecklessly brave pawns and a very violent bishop.

Harry awoke very suddenly on Christmas Day.Wondering what had caused his abrupt return toconsciousness, he opened his eyes, and sawsomething with very large, round, green eyes staringback at him in the darkness, so close they werealmost nose to nose.

Page | 449

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Dobbyl” Harry yelled, scrambling away from the elfso fast he almost fell out of bed. “Don’t do that!”

“Dobby is sorry, sir!” squeaked Dobby anxiously,jumping backward with his long fingers over hismouth. “Dobby is only wanting to wish Harry Potter‘Merry Christmas’ and bring him a present, sir! HarryPotter did say Dobby could come and see himsometimes, sir!”

“It’s okay,” said Harry, still breathing rather fasterthan usual, while his heart rate returned to normal.“Just —just prod me or something in future, all right,don’t bend over me like that. ...”

Harry pulled back the curtains around his four-poster, took his glasses from his bedside table, andput them on. His yell had awoken Ron, Seamus,

Dean, and Neville. All of them were peering throughthe gaps in their own hangings, heavy-eyed andtousle-haired.

“Someone attacking you, Harry?” Seamus askedsleepily.

“No, it’s just Dobby,” Harry muttered. “Go back tosleep.”

“Nah ... presents!” said Seamus, spotting the largepile at the foot of his bed. Ron, Dean, and Nevilledecided that now they were awake they might as wellget down to some present-opening too. Harry turnedback to Dobby, who was now standing nervously nextto Harry’s bed, still looking worried that he had upsetHarry. There was a Christmas bauble tied to the loopon top of his tea cozy.

“Can Dobby give Harry Potter his present?” hesqueaked tentatively.

Page | 450 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“ ’Course you can,” said Harry. “Er ... I’ve gotsomething for you too.”

It was a lie; he hadn’t bought anything for Dobby atall, but he quickly opened his trunk and pulled out aparticularly knobbly rolled-up pair of socks. Theywere his oldest and foulest, mustard yellow, and hadonce belonged to Uncle Vernon. The reason they wereextra-knobbly was that Harry had been using them tocushion his Sneakoscope for over a year now. Hepulled out the Sneakoscope and handed the socks toDobby, saying, “Sorry, I forgot to wrap them. ...”

But Dobby was utterly delighted.

“Socks are Dobby’s favorite, favorite clothes, sir!” hesaid, ripping off his odd ones and pulling on UncleVernon’s. “I has seven now, sir. ... But sir ...” he said,his eyes widening, having pulled both socks up totheir highest extent, so that they reached to thebottom of his shorts, “they has made a mistake in theshop, Harry Potter, they is giving you two the same!”

“Ah, no, Harry, how come you didn’t spot that?” saidRon, grinning over from his own bed, which was nowstrewn with wrapping paper. “Tell you what, Dobby —here you go — take these two, and you can mix themup properly. And here’s your sweater.”

He threw Dobby a pair of violet socks he had justunwrapped, and the hand-knitted sweater Mrs.Weasley had sent. Dobby looked quite overwhelmed.

“Sir is very kind!” he squeaked, his eyes brimmingwith tears again, bowing deeply to Ron. “Dobby knewsir must be a great wizard, for he is Harry Potter’sgreatest friend, but Dobby did not know that he wasalso as generous of spirit, as noble, as selfless —”

Page | 451

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“They’re only socks,” said Ron, who had gone slightlypink around the ears, though he looked ratherpleased all the same. “Wow, Harry —” He had justopened Harry’s present, a Chudley Cannon hat.

“Cool!” He jammed it onto his head, where it clashedhorribly with his hair.

Dobby now handed Harry a small package, whichturned out to be — socks.

“Dobby is making them himself, sir!” the elf saidhappily. “He is buying the wool out of his wages, sir!”

The left sock was bright red and had a pattern ofbroomsticks upon it; the right sock was green with apattern of Snitches.

“They’re ... they’re really ... well, thanks, Dobby,” saidHarry, and he pulled them on, causing Dobby’s eyesto leak with happiness again.

“Dobby must go now, sir, we is already makingChristmas dinner in the kitchens!” said Dobby, andhe hurried out of the dormitory, waving good-bye toRon and the others as he passed.

Harry’s other presents were much more satisfactorythan Dobby’s odd socks — with the obvious exceptionof the Dursleys’, which consisted of a single tissue, anall-time low — Harry supposed they too wereremembering the Ton-Tongue Toffee. Hermione hadgiven Harry a book called Quidditch Teams of Britainand Ireland; Ron, a bulging bag of Dungbombs;

Sirius, a handy penknife with attachments to unlockany lock and undo any knot; and Hagrid, a vast boxof sweets including all Harry’s favorites: Bertie Bott’sEvery Flavor Beans, Chocolate Frogs, Drooble’s BestBlowing Gum, and Fizzing Whizbees. There was also,of course, Mrs. Weasley’s usual package, including aPage | 452 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

new sweater (green, with a picture of a dragon on it —Harry supposed Charlie had told her all about theHorntail), and a large quantity of homemade mincepies.

Harry and Ron met up with Hermione in the commonroom, and they went down to breakfast together. Theyspent most of the morning in Gryffindor Tower, whereeveryone was enjoying their presents, then returnedto the Great Hall for a magnificent lunch, whichincluded at least a hundred turkeys and Christmaspuddings, and large piles of Cribbage’s WizardingCrackers.

They went out onto the grounds in the afternoon; thesnow was untouched except for the deep channelsmade by the Durmstrang and Beauxbatons studentson their way up to the castle. Hermione chose towatch Harry and the Weasleys’ snowball fight ratherthan join in, and at five o’clock said she was goingback upstairs to get ready for the ball.

“What, you need three hours?” said Ron, looking ather incredulously and paying for his lapse inconcentration when a large snowball, thrown byGeorge, hit him hard on the side of the head. “Who’reyou going with?” he yelled after Hermione, but shejust waved and disappeared up the stone steps intothe castle.

There was no Christmas tea today, as the ballincluded a feast, so at seven o’clock, when it hadbecome hard to aim properly, the others abandonedtheir snowball fight and trooped back to the commonroom. The Fat Lady was sitting in her frame with herfriend Violet from downstairs, both of them extremelytipsy, empty boxes of chocolate liqueurs littering thebottom of her picture.

Page | 453

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Lairy fights, that’s the one!” she giggled when theygave the password, and she swung forward to letthem inside.

Harry, Ron, Seamus, Dean, and Neville changed intotheir dress robes up in their dormitory, all of themlooking very self-conscious, but none as much asRon, who surveyed himself in the long mirror in thecorner with an appalled look on his face. There wasjust no getting around the fact that his robes lookedmore like a dress than anything else. In a desperateattempt to make them look more manly, he used aSevering Charm on the ruff and cuffs. It worked fairlywell; at least he was now lace-free, although he hadn’tdone a very neat job, and the edges still lookeddepressingly frayed as the boys set off downstairs.

“I still can’t work out how you two got the best-looking girls in the year,” muttered Dean.

“Animal magnetism,” said Ron gloomily, pulling straythreads out of his cuffs.

The common room looked strange, full of peoplewearing different colors instead of the usual mass ofblack. Parvati was waiting for Harry at the foot of thestairs. She looked very pretty indeed, in robes ofshocking pink, with her long dark plait braided withgold, and gold bracelets glimmering at her wrists.Harry was relieved to see that she wasn’t giggling.

“You — er — look nice,” he said awkwardly.

“Thanks,” she said. “Padma’s going to meet you in theentrance hall,” she added to Ron.

“Right,” said Ron, looking around. “Where’sHermione?”

Page | 454

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Parvati shrugged. “Shall we go down then, Harry?”

“Okay,” said Harry, wishing he could just stay in thecommon room. Fred winked at Harry as he passedhim on the way out of the portrait hole.

The entrance hall was packed with students too, allmilling around waiting for eight o’clock, when thedoors to the Great Hall would be thrown open. Thosepeople who were meeting partners from differentHouses were edging through the crowd trying to findone another. Parvati found her sister, Padma, and ledher over to Harry and Ron.

“Hi,” said Padma, who was looking just as pretty asParvati in robes of bright turquoise. She didn’t looktoo enthusiastic about having Ron as a partner,though; her dark eyes lingered on the frayed neck andsleeves of his dress robes as she looked him up anddown.

“Hi,” said Ron, not looking at her, but staring aroundat the crowd. “Oh no ...”

He bent his knees slightly to hide behind Harry,because Fleur Delacour was passing, lookingstunning in robes of silver-gray satin, andaccompanied by the Ravenclaw Quidditch captain,Roger Davies. When they had disappeared, Ron stoodstraight again and stared over the heads of the crowd.

“Where is Hermione?” he said again.

A group of Slytherins came up the steps from theirdungeon common room. Malfoy was in front; he waswearing dress robes of black velvet with a high collar,which in Harry’s opinion made him look like a vicar.Pansy Parkinson in very frilly robes of pale pink wasclutching Malfoy’s arm. Crabbe and Goyle were bothPage | 455 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

wearing green; they resembled moss-colored boulders,and neither of them, Harry was pleased to see, hadmanaged to find a partner.

The oak front doors opened, and everyone turned tolook as the Durmstrang students entered withProfessor Karkaroff. Krum was at the front of theparty, accompanied by a pretty girl in blue robesHarry didn’t know. Over their heads he saw that anarea of lawn right in front of the castle had beentransformed into a sort of grotto full of fairy lights —meaning hundreds of actual living fairies were sittingin the rosebushes that had been conjured there, andfluttering over the statues of what seemed to beFather Christmas and his reindeer.

Then Professor McGonagall’s voice called,

“Champions over here, please!”

Parvati readjusted her bangles, beaming; she andHarry said “See you in a minute” to Ron and Padmaand walked forward, the chattering crowd parting tolet them through. Professor McGonagall, who waswearing dress robes of red tartan and had arranged arather ugly wreath of thistles around the brim of herhat, told them to wait on one side of the doors whileeveryone else went inside; they were to enter theGreat Hall in procession when the rest of the studentshad sat down. Fleur Delacour and Roger Daviesstationed themselves nearest the doors; Davies lookedso stunned by his good fortune in having Fleur for apartner that he could hardly take his eyes off her.Cedric and Cho were close to Harry too; he lookedaway from them so he wouldn’t have to talk to them.His eyes fell instead on the girl next to Krum. His jawdropped.

It was Hermione.

Page | 456

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But she didn’t look like Hermione at all. She had donesomething with her hair; it was no longer bushy butsleek and shiny, and twisted up into an elegant knotat the back of her head. She was wearing robes madeof a floaty, periwinkle-blue material, and she washolding herself differently, somehow — or maybe itwas merely the absence of the twenty or so books sheusually had slung over her back. She was alsosmiling — rather nervously, it was true — but thereduction in the size of her front teeth was morenoticeable than ever; Harry couldn’t understand howhe hadn’t spotted it before.

“Hi, Harry!” she said. “Hi, Parvati!”

Parvati was gazing at Hermione in unflatteringdisbelief. She wasn’t the only one either; when thedoors to the Great Hall opened, Krum’s fan club fromthe library stalked past, throwing Hermione looks ofdeepest loathing. Pansy Parkinson gaped at her asshe walked by with Malfoy, and even he didn’t seemto be able to find an insult to throw at her. Ron,however, walked right past Hermione without lookingat her.

Once everyone else was settled in the Hall, ProfessorMcGonagall told the champions and their partners toget in line in pairs and to follow her. They did so, andeveryone in the Great Hall applauded as they enteredand started walking up toward a large round table atthe top of the Hall, where the judges were sitting.

The walls of the Hall had all been covered in sparklingsilver frost, with hundreds of garlands of mistletoeand ivy crossing the starry black ceiling. The Housetables had vanished; instead, there were about ahundred smaller, lantern-lit ones, each seating abouta dozen people.

Page | 457

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry concentrated on not tripping over his feet.Parvati seemed to be enjoying herself; she wasbeaming around at everybody, steering Harry soforcefully that he felt as though he were a show dogshe was putting through its paces. He caught sight ofRon and Padma as he neared the top table. Ron waswatching Hermione pass with narrowed eyes. Padmawas looking sulky.

Dumbledore smiled happily as the championsapproached the top table, but Karkaroff wore anexpression remarkably like Ron’s as he watchedKrum and Hermione draw nearer. Ludo Bagman,tonight in robes of bright purple with large yellowstars, was clapping as enthusiastically as any of thestudents; and Madame Maxime, who had changedher usual uniform of black satin for a flowing gown oflavender silk, was applauding them politely. But Mr.Crouch, Harry suddenly realized, was not there. Thefifth seat at the table was occupied by Percy Weasley.

When the champions and their partners reached thetable, Percy drew out the empty chair beside him,staring pointedly at Harry. Harry took the hint andsat down next to Percy, who was wearing brand-new,navy-blue dress robes and an expression of suchsmugness that Harry thought it ought to be fined.

“I’ve been promoted,” Percy said before Harry couldeven ask, and from his tone, he might have beenannouncing his election as supreme ruler of theuniverse. “I’m now Mr. Crouch’s personal assistant,and I’m here representing him.”

“Why didn’t he come?” Harry asked. He wasn’t lookingforward to being lectured on cauldron bottoms allthrough dinner.

Page | 458

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm afraid to say Mr. Crouch isn’t well, not well at all.Hasn’t been right since the World Cup. Hardlysurprising — overwork. He’s not as young as he was— though still quite brilliant, of course, the mindremains as great as it ever was. But the World Cupwas a fiasco for the whole Ministry, and then, Mr.Crouch suffered a huge personal shock with themisbehavior of that house-elf of his, Blinky, orwhatever she was called. Naturally, he dismissed herimmediately afterward, but — well, as I say, he’sgetting on, he needs looking after, and I think he’sfound a definite drop in his home comforts since sheleft. And then we had the tournament to arrange, andthe aftermath of the Cup to deal with — that revoltingSkeeter woman buzzing around — no, poor man, he’shaving a well earned, quiet Christmas. I’m just gladhe knew he had someone he could rely upon to takehis place.”

Harry wanted very much to ask whether Mr. Crouchhad stopped calling Percy “Weatherby” yet, butresisted the temptation.

There was no food as yet on the glittering goldenplates, but small menus were lying in front of each ofthem. Harry picked his up uncertainly and lookedaround — there were no waiters. Dumbledore,however, looked carefully down at his own menu,then said very clearly to his plate, “Pork chops!”

And pork chops appeared. Getting the idea, the rest ofthe table placed their orders with their plates too.Harry glanced up at Hermione to see how she feltabout this new and more complicated method ofdining — surely it meant plenty of extra work for thehouse-elves? — but for once, Hermione didn’t seem tobe thinking about S.P.E.W. She was deep in talk withViktor Krum and hardly seemed to notice what shewas eating.

Page | 459 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

It now occurred to Harry that he had never actuallyheard Krum speak before, but he was certainlytalking now, and very enthusiastically at that.

“Veil, ve have a castle also, not as big as this, nor ascomfortable, I am thinking,” he was telling Hermione.“Ve have just four floors, and the fires are lit only formagical purposes. But ve have grounds larger eventhan these — though in vinter, ve have very littledaylight, so ve are not enjoying them. But in summerve are flying every day, over the lakes and themountains —”

“Now, now, Viktor!” said Karkaroff with a laugh thatdidn’t reach his cold eyes, “don’t go giving awayanything else, now, or your charming friend will knowexactly where to find us!”

Dumbledore smiled, his eyes twinkling. “Igor, all thissecrecy ... one would almost think you didn’t wantvisitors.”

“Well, Dumbledore,” said Karkaroff, displaying hisyellowing teeth to their fullest extent, “we are allprotective of our private domains, are we not? Do wenot jealously guard the halls of learning that havebeen entrusted to us? Are we not right to be proudthat we alone know our school’s secrets, and right toprotect them?”

“Oh I would never dream of assuming I know allHogwarts’ secrets, Igor,” said Dumbledore amicably.“Only this morning, for instance, I took a wrongturning on the way to the bathroom and found myselfin a beautifully proportioned room I have never seenbefore, containing a really rather magnificentcollection of chamber pots. When I went back toinvestigate more closely, I discovered that the roomhad vanished. But I must keep an eye out for it.

Page | 460 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Possibly it is only accessible at five-thirty in themorning. Or it may only appear at the quarter moon— or when the seeker has an exceptionally fullbladder.”

Harry snorted into his plate of goulash. Percyfrowned, but Harry could have sworn Dumbledorehad given him a very small wink.

Meanwhile Fleur Delacour was criticizing theHogwarts decorations to Roger Davies.

“Zis is nothing,” she said dismissively, looking aroundat the sparkling walls of the Great Hall. “At ze Palaceof Beauxbatons, we ’ave ice sculptures all around zedining chamber at Chreestmas. Zey do not melt, ofcourse ... zey are like ’uge statues of diamond,glittering around ze place. And ze food is seemplysuperb. And we ’ave choirs of wood nymphs, ’ooserenade us as we eat. We ’ave none of zis ugly armorin ze ’alls, and eef a poltergeist ever entaired intoBeauxbatons, ’e would be expelled like zat.” Sheslapped her hand onto the table impatiently.

Roger Davies was watching her talk with a very dazedlook on his face, and he kept missing his mouth withhis fork. Harry had the impression that Davies wastoo busy staring at Fleur to take in a word she wassaying.

“Absolutely right,” he said quickly, slapping his ownhand down on the table in imitation of Fleur. “Likethat. Yeah.”

Harry looked around the Hall. Hagrid was sitting atone of the other staff tables; he was back in hishorrible hairy brown suit and gazing up at the toptable. Harry saw him give a small wave, and looking

Page | 461

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

around, saw Madame Maxime return it, her opalsglittering in the candlelight.

Hermione was now teaching Krum to say her nameproperly; he kept calling her “Hermy-own.”

“Her-my-oh-nee,” she said slowly and clearly.

“Herm-own-ninny.”

“Close enough,” she said, catching Harry’s eye andgrinning.

When all the food had been consumed, Dumbledorestood up and asked the students to do the same.

Then, with a wave of his wand, all the tables zoomedback along the walls leaving the floor clear, and thenhe conjured a raised platform into existence along theright wall. A set of drums, several guitars, a lute, acello, and some bagpipes were set upon it.

The Weird Sisters now trooped up onto the stage towildly enthusiastic applause; they were all extremelyhairy and dressed in black robes that had beenartfully ripped and torn. They picked up theirinstruments, and Harry, who had been so interestedin watching them that he had almost forgotten whatwas coming, suddenly realized that the lanterns on allthe other tables had gone out, and that the otherchampions and their partners were standing up.

“Come on!” Parvati hissed. “We’re supposed to dance!”

Harry tripped over his dress robes as he stood up.

The Weird Sisters struck up a slow, mournful tune;Harry walked onto the brightly lit dance floor,carefully avoiding catching anyone’s eye (he could seeSeamus and Dean waving at him and sniggering), andnext moment, Parvati had seized his hands, placedPage | 462 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

one around her waist, and was holding the othertightly in hers.

It wasn’t as bad as it could have been, Harry thought,revolving slowly on the spot (Parvati was steering). Hekept his eyes fixed over the heads of the watchingpeople, and very soon many of them too had comeonto the dance floor, so that the champions were nolonger the center of attention. Neville and Ginny weredancing nearby — he could see Ginny wincingfrequently as Neville trod on her feet — andDumbledore was waltzing with Madame Maxime. Hewas so dwarfed by her that the top of his pointed hatbarely tickled her chin; however, she moved verygracefully for a woman so large. Mad-Eye Moody wasdoing an extremely ungainly two-step with ProfessorSinistra, who was nervously avoiding his wooden leg.

“Nice socks, Potter,” Moody growled as he passed, hismagical eye staring through Harry’s robes.

“Oh — yeah, Dobby the house-elf knitted them forme,” said Harry, grinning.

“He is so creepy\” Parvati whispered as Moodyclunked away. “I don’t think that eye should beallowed]”

Harry heard the final, quavering note from thebagpipe with relief. The Weird Sisters stopped playing,applause filled the hall once more, and Harry let go ofParvati at once.

“Let’s sit down, shall we?”

“Oh — but — this is a really good one!” Parvati saidas the Weird Sisters struck up a new song, which wasmuch faster.

Page | 463

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No, I don’t like it,” Harry lied, and he led her awayfrom the dance floor, past Fred and Angelina, whowere dancing so exhuberantly that people aroundthem were backing away in fear of injury, and over tothe table where Ron and Padma were sitting.

“How’s it going?” Harry asked Ron, sitting down andopening a bottle of butterbeer.

Ron didn’t answer. He was glaring at Hermione andKrum, who were dancing nearby. Padma was sittingwith her arms and legs crossed, one foot jiggling intime to the music. Every now and then she threw adisgruntled look at Ron, who was completely ignoringher. Parvati sat down on Harry’s other side, crossedher arms and legs too, and within minutes was askedto dance by a boy from Beauxbatons.

“You don’t mind, do you, Harry?” Parvati said.

“What?” said Harry, who was now watching Cho andCedric.

“Oh never mind,” snapped Parvati, and she went offwith the boy from Beauxbatons. When the songended, she did not return.

Hermione came over and sat down in Parvati’s emptychair. She was a bit pink in the face from dancing.

“Hi,” said Harry. Ron didn’t say anything.

“It’s hot, isn’t it?” said Hermione, fanning herself withher hand. “Viktor’s just gone to get some drinks.”

Ron gave her a withering look. “Viktor?” he said.“Hasn’t he asked you to call him Vicky yet?”

Page | 464

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hermione looked at him in surprise. “What’s up withyou?” she said.

“If you don’t know,” said Ron scathingly, “I’m notgoing to tell you.”

Hermione stared at him, then at Harry, whoshrugged.

“Ron, what — ?”

“He’s from Durmstrang!” spat Ron. “He’s competingagainst Harry! Against Hogwarts! You — you’re —”Ron was obviously casting around for words strongenough to describe Hermione’s crime, “fraternizingwith the enemy, that’s what you’re doing!”

Hermione’s mouth fell open.

“Don’t be so stupid!” she said after a moment. “Theenemy\ Honestly — who was the one who was allexcited when they saw him arrive? Who was the onewho wanted his autograph? Who’s got a model of himup in their dormitory?”

Ron chose to ignore this. “I s’pose he asked you tocome with him while you were both in the library?”

“Yes, he did,” said Hermione, the pink patches on hercheeks glowing more brightly. “So what?”

“What happened — trying to get him to join spew,were you?”

“No, I wasn’t! If you really want to know, he — he saidhe’d been coming up to the library every day to tryand talk to me, but he hadn’t been able to pluck upthe courage!”

Page | 465

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hermione said this very quickly, and blushed sodeeply that she was the same color as Parvati’s robes.

“Yeah, well — that’s his story,” said Ron nastily.

“And what’s that supposed to mean?”

“Obvious, isn’t it? He’s Karkaroff’s student, isn’t he?He knows who you hang around with. ... He’s justtrying to get closer to Harry — get inside informationon him — or get near enough to jinx him —”

Hermione looked as though Ron had slapped her.When she spoke, her voice quivered.

“For your information, he hasn’t asked me one singlething about Harry, not one —”

Ron changed tack at the speed of light.

“Then he’s hoping you’ll help him find out what hisegg means! I suppose you’ve been putting your headstogether during those cozy little library sessions —”

“I’d never help him work out that egg!” said Hermione,looking outraged. “Never. How could you saysomething like that — I want Harry to win thetournament, Harry knows that, don’t you, Harry?”

“You’ve got a funny way of showing it,” sneered Ron.

“This whole tournament’s supposed to be aboutgetting to know foreign wizards and making friendswith them!” said Hermione hotly.

“No it isn’t!” shouted Ron. “It’s about winning!”

People were starting to stare at them.

Page | 466

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Ron,” said Harry quietly, “I haven’t got a problemwith Hermione coming with Krum —”

But Ron ignored Harry too.

“Why don’t you go and find Vicky, he’ll be wonderingwhere you are,” said Ron.

“Don’t call him Vickyl”

Hermione jumped to her feet and stormed off acrossthe dance floor, disappearing into the crowd. Ronwatched her go with a mixture of anger andsatisfaction on his face.

“Are you going to ask me to dance at all?” Padmaasked him.

“No,” said Ron, still glaring after Hermione.

“Fine,” snapped Padma, and she got up and went tojoin Parvati and the Beauxbatons boy, who conjuredup one of his friends to join them so fast that Harrycould have sworn he had zoomed him there by aSummoning Charm.

“Vare is Herm-own-ninny?” said a voice.

Krum had just arrived at their table clutching twobutterbeers.

“No idea,” said Ron mulishly, looking up at him. “Losther, have you?”

Krum was looking surly again.

“Veil, if you see her, tell her I haff drinks,” he said,and he slouched off.

Page | 467

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Made friends with Viktor Krum, have you, Ron?”

Percy had bustled over, rubbing his hands togetherand looking extremely pompous. “Excellent! That’sthe whole point, you know — international magicalcooperation!”

To Harry’s displeasure, Percy now took Padma’svacated seat. The top table was now empty; ProfessorDumbledore was dancing with Professor Sprout, LudoBagman with Professor McGonagall; Madame Maximeand Hagrid were cutting a wide path around thedance floor as they waltzed through the students, andKarkaroff was nowhere to be seen. When the nextsong ended, everybody applauded once more, andHarry saw Ludo Bagman kiss Professor McGonagall’shand and make his way back through the crowds, atwhich point Fred and George accosted him.

“What do they think they’re doing, annoying seniorMinistry members?” Percy hissed, watching Fred andGeorge suspiciously. “No respect ...”

Ludo Bagman shook off Fred and George fairlyquickly, however, and, spotting Harry, waved andcame over to their table.

“I hope my brothers weren’t bothering you, Mr.Bagman?” said Percy at once.

“What? Oh not at all, not at all!” said Bagman. “No,they were just telling me a bit more about those fakewands of theirs. Wondering if I could advise them onthe marketing. I’ve promised to put them in touchwith a couple of contacts of mine at Zonko’s JokeShop. ...”

Percy didn’t look happy about this at all, and Harrywas prepared to bet he would be rushing to tell Mrs.

Page | 468 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Weasley about this the moment he got home.Apparently Fred and George’s plans had grown evenmore ambitious lately, if they were hoping to sell tothe public. Bagman opened his mouth to ask Harrysomething, but Percy diverted him.

“How do you feel the tournament’s going, Mr.

Bagman? Our department’s quite satisfied — thehitch with the Goblet of Fire” — he glanced at Harry— “was a little unfortunate, of course, but it seems tohave gone very smoothly since, don’t you think?”

“Oh yes,” Bagman said cheerfully, “it’s all beenenormous fun. How’s old Barty doing? Shame hecouldn’t come.”

“Oh I’m sure Mr. Crouch will be up and about in notime,” said Percy importantly, “but in the meantime,I’m more than willing to take up the slack. Of course,it’s not all attending balls” — he laughed airily — “ohno, I’ve had to deal with all sorts of things that havecropped up in his absence — you heard Ali Bashirwas caught smuggling a consignment of flying carpetsinto the country? And then we’ve been trying topersuade the Transylvanians to sign the InternationalBan on Dueling. I’ve got a meeting with their Head ofMagical Cooperation in the new year —”

“Let’s go for a walk,” Ron muttered to Harry, “getaway from Percy. ...”

Pretending they wanted more drinks, Harry and Ronleft the table, edged around the dance floor, andslipped out into the entrance hall. The front doorsstood open, and the fluttering fairy lights in the rosegarden winked and twinkled as they went down thefront steps, where they found themselves surroundedby bushes; winding, ornamental paths; and largestone statues. Harry could hear splashing water,

Page | 469 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

which sounded like a fountain. Here and there, peoplewere sitting on carved benches. He and Ron set offalong one of the winding paths through therosebushes, but they had gone only a short way whenthey heard an unpleasantly familiar voice.

"... don’t see what there is to fuss about, Igor.”

“Severus, you cannot pretend this isn’t happening!”Karkaroff’s voice sounded anxious and hushed, asthough keen not to be overheard. “It’s been gettingclearer and clearer for months. I am becomingseriously concerned, I can’t deny it —”

“Then flee,” said Snape’s voice curtly. “Flee — I willmake your excuses. I, however, am remaining atHogwarts.”

Snape and Karkaroff came around the corner. Snapehad his wand out and was blasting rosebushes apart,his expression most ill-natured. Squeals issued frommany of the bushes, and dark shapes emerged fromthem.

“Ten points from Ravenclaw, Fawcett!” Snape snarledas a girl ran past him. “And ten points from Hufflepufftoo, Stebbins!” as a boy went rushing after her. “Andwhat are you two doing?” he added, catching sight ofHarry and Ron on the path ahead. Karkaroff, Harrysaw, looked slightly discomposed to see themstanding there. His hand went nervously to hisgoatee, and he began winding it around his finger.

“We’re walking,” Ron told Snape shortly. “Not againstthe law, is it?”

“Keep walking, then!” Snape snarled, and he brushedpast them, his long black cloak billowing out behind

Page | 470

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

him. Karkaroff hurried away after Snape. Harry andRon continued down the path.

“What’s got Karkaroff all worried?” Ron muttered.

“And since when have he and Snape been on first-name terms?” said Harry slowly.

They had reached a large stone reindeer now, overwhich they could see the sparkling jets of a tallfountain. The shadowy outlines of two enormouspeople were visible on a stone bench, watching thewater in the moonlight. And then Harry heard Hagridspeak.

“Momen’ I saw yeh, I knew,” he was saying, in anoddly husky voice.

Harry and Ron froze. This didn’t sound like the sort ofscene they ought to walk in on, somehow. ... Harrylooked around, back up the path, and saw FleurDelacour and Roger Davies standing half-concealed ina rosebush nearby. He tapped Ron on the shoulderand jerked his head toward them, meaning that theycould easily sneak off that way without being noticed(Fleur and Davies looked very busy to Harry), butRon, eyes widening in horror at the sight of Fleur,shook his head vigorously, and pulled Harry deeperinto the shadows behind the reindeer.

“What did you know, ’Agrid?” said Madame Maxime, apurr in her low voice.

Harry definitely didn’t want to listen to this; he knewHagrid would hate to be overheard in a situation likethis (he certainly would have) — if it had beenpossible he would have put his fingers in his ears andhummed loudly, but that wasn’t really an option.Instead he tried to interest himself in a beetlePage | 471 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

crawling along the stone reindeer’s back, but thebeetle just wasn’t interesting enough to block outHagrid’s next words.

“I jus’ knew ... knew you were like me. ... Was it yermother or yer father?”

“I — I don’t know what you mean, ’Agrid. ...”

“It was my mother,” said Hagrid quietly. “She was oneo’ the las’ ones in Britain. ’Course, I can’ rememberher too well ... she left, see. When I was abou’ three.She wasn’ really the maternal sort. Well ... it’s not intheir natures, is it? Dunno what happened to her ...might be dead fer all I know. ...”

Madame Maxime didn’t say anything. And Harry, inspite of himself, took his eyes off the beetle andlooked over the top of the reindeer’s antlers, listening.

... He had never heard Hagrid talk about hischildhood before.

“Me dad was broken-hearted when she wen’. Tinylittle bloke, my dad was. By the time I was six I couldlift him up an’ put him on top o’ the dresser if heannoyed me. Used ter make him laugh. ...” Hagrid’sdeep voice broke. Madame Maxime was listening,motionless, apparently staring at the silvery fountain.“Dad raised me ... but he died, o’ course, jus’ after Istarted school. Sorta had ter make me own way afterthat. Dumbledore was a real help, mind. Very kind terme, he was. ...”

Hagrid pulled out a large spotted silk handkerchiefand blew his nose heavily.

“So ... anyway ... enough abou’ me. What about you?Which side you got it on?”

Page | 472

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But Madame Maxime had suddenly got to her feet.

“It is chilly,” she said — but whatever the weatherwas doing, it was nowhere near as cold as her voice.

“I think I will go in now.”

“Eh?” said Hagrid blankly. “No, don’ go! I’ve — I’venever met another one before!”

“Anuzzer what, precisely?” said Madame Maxime, hertone icy.

Harry could have told Hagrid it was best not toanswer; he stood there in the shadows gritting histeeth, hoping against hope he wouldn’t — but it wasno good.

“Another half-giant, o’ course!” said Hagrid.

“ ’Ow dare you!” shrieked Madame Maxime. Her voiceexploded through the peaceful night air like afoghorn; behind him, Harry heard Fleur and Roger fallout of their rosebush. “I ’ave nevair been moreinsulted in my life! ’Alf-giant? Moi? I ’ave — I ’ave bigbones!”

She stormed away; great multicolored swarms offairies rose into the air as she passed, angrily pushingaside bushes. Hagrid was still sitting on the bench,staring after her. It was much too dark to make outhis expression. Then, after about a minute, he stoodup and strode away, not back to the castle, but offout into the dark grounds in the direction of hiscabin.

“C’mon,” Harry said, very quietly to Ron. “Let’s go. ...”But Ron didn’t move.

Page | 473

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What’s up?” said Harry, looking at him.

Ron looked around at Harry, his expression veryserious indeed.

“Did you know?” he whispered. “About Hagrid beinghalf-giant?”

“No,” Harry said, shrugging. “So what?”

He knew immediately, from the look Ron was givinghim, that he was once again revealing his ignoranceof the wizarding world. Brought up by the Dursleys,there were many things that wizards took for grantedthat were revelations to Harry, but these surpriseshad become fewer with each successive year. Now,however, he could tell that most wizards would nothave said “So what?” upon finding out that one oftheir friends had a giantess for a mother.

“I’ll explain inside,” said Ron quietly, “c’mon. ...”

Fleur and Roger Davies had disappeared, probablyinto a more private clump of bushes. Harry and Ronreturned to the Great Hall. Parvati and Padma werenow sitting at a distant table with a whole crowd ofBeauxbatons boys, and Hermione was once moredancing with Krum. Harry and Ron sat down at atable far removed from the dance floor.

“So?” Harry prompted Ron. “What’s the problem withgiants?”

“Well, they’re ... they’re ...” Ron struggled for words."... not very nice,” he finished lamely.

“Who cares?” Harry said. “There’s nothing wrong withHagrid!”

Page | 474

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I know there isn’t, but ... blimey, no wonder he keepsit quiet,” Ron said, shaking his head. “I alwaysthought he’d got in the way of a bad EngorgementCharm when he was a kid or something. Didn’t like tomention it. ...”

“But what’s it matter if his mother was a giantess?”said Harry.

“Well ... no one who knows him will care, ’cos they’llknow he’s not dangerous,” said Ron slowly. “But ...Harry, they’re just vicious, giants. It’s like Hagridsaid, it’s in their natures, they’re like trolls ... theyjust like killing, everyone knows that. There aren’tany left in Britain now, though.”

“What happened to them?”

“Well, they were dying out anyway, and then loads gotthemselves killed by Aurors. There’re supposed to begiants abroad, though. ... They hide out in mountainsmostly. ...”

“I don’t know who Maxime thinks she’s kidding,”

Harry said, watching Madame Maxime sitting alone atthe judges’ table, looking very somber. “If Hagrid’shalf-giant, she definitely is. Big bones ... the onlything that’s got bigger bones than her is a dinosaur.”

Harry and Ron spent the rest of the ball discussinggiants in their corner, neither of them having anyinclination to dance. Harry tried not to watch Choand Cedric too much; it gave him a strong desire tokick something.

When the Weird Sisters finished playing at midnight,everyone gave them a last, loud round of applauseand started to wend their way into the entrance hall.Many people were expressing the wish that the ball

Page | 475 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

could have gone on longer, but Harry was perfectlyhappy to be going to bed; as far as he was concerned,the evening hadn’t been much fun.

Out in the entrance hall, Harry and Ron sawHermione saying good night to Krum before he wentback to the Durmstrang ship. She gave Ron a verycold look and swept past him up the marble staircasewithout speaking. Harry and Ron followed her, buthalfway up the staircase Harry heard someone callinghim.

“Hey — Harry!”

It was Cedric Diggory. Harry could see Cho waiting forhim in the entrance hall below.

“Yeah?” said Harry coldly as Cedric ran up the stairstoward him.

Cedric looked as though he didn’t want to saywhatever it was in front of Ron, who shrugged,looking bad-tempered, and continued to climb thestairs.

“Listen ...” Cedric lowered his voice as Rondisappeared. “I owe you one for telling me about thedragons. You know that golden egg? Does yours wailwhen you open it?”

“Yeah,” said Harry.

“Well ... take a bath, okay?”

“What?”

“Take a bath, and — er — take the egg with you, and— er — just mull things over in the hot water. It’llhelp you think. ... Trust me.”

Page | 476 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry stared at him.

“Tell you what,” Cedric said, “use the prefects’bathroom. Fourth door to the left of that statue ofBoris the Bewildered on the fifth floor. Password’s‘pine fresh. ’ Gotta go ... want to say good night —”

He grinned at Harry again and hurried back down thestairs to Cho.

Harry walked back to Gryffindor Tower alone. Thathad been extremely strange advice. Why would a bathhelp him to work out what the wailing egg meant?Was Cedric pulling his leg? Was he trying to makeHarry look like a fool, so Cho would like him evenmore by comparison?

The Fat Lady and her friend Vi were snoozing in thepicture over the portrait hole. Harry had to yell “Fairylights!” before he woke them up, and when he did,they were extremely irritated. He climbed into thecommon room and found Ron and Hermione having ablazing row. Standing ten feet apart, they werebellowing at each other, each scarlet in the face.

“Well, if you don’t like it, you know what the solutionis, don’t you?” yelled Hermione; her hair was comingdown out of its elegant bun now, and her face wasscrewed up in anger.

“Oh yeah?” Ron yelled back. “What’s that?”

“Next time there’s a ball, ask me before someone elsedoes, and not as a last resort!”

Ron mouthed soundlessly like a goldfish out of wateras Hermione turned on her heel and stormed up thegirls’ staircase to bed. Ron turned to look at Harry.

Page | 477

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Well,” he sputtered, looking thunderstruck, “well —that just proves — completely missed the point —”

Harry didn’t say anything. He liked being back onspeaking terms with Ron too much to speak his mindright now — but he somehow thought that Hermionehad gotten the point much better than Ron had.

Page | 478

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





RITA SKEBTER’S SCOOP

Everybody got up late on Boxing Day. The Gryffindorcommon room was much quieter than it had beenlately, many yawns punctuating the lazyconversations. Hermione’s hair was bushy again; sheconfessed to Harry that she had used liberal amountsof Sleekeazy’s Hair Potion on it for the ball, “but it’sway too much bother to do every day,” she saidmatter-of-factly, scratching a purring Crookshanksbehind the ears.

Ron and Hermione seemed to have reached anunspoken agreement not to discuss their argument.They were being quite friendly to each other, thoughoddly formal. Ron and Harry wasted no time in tellingHermione about the conversation they had overheardbetween Madame Maxime and Hagrid, but Hermionedidn’t seem to find the news that Hagrid was a half-giant nearly as shocking as Ron did.

“Well, I thought he must be,” she said, shrugging. “Iknew he couldn’t be pure giant because they’re abouttwenty feet tall. But honestly, all this hysteria about

Page | 479 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling



giants. They can’t all be horrible. ... It’s the same sortof prejudice that people have toward werewolves. ...

It’s just bigotry, isn’t it?”

Ron looked as though he would have liked to replyscathingly, but perhaps he didn’t want another row,because he contented himself with shaking his headdisbelievingly while Hermione wasn’t looking.

It was time now to think of the homework they hadneglected during the first week of the holidays.Everybody seemed to be feeling rather flat now thatChristmas was over — everybody except Harry, thatis, who was starting (once again) to feel slightlynervous.

The trouble was that February the twenty-fourthlooked a lot closer from this side of Christmas, and hestill hadn’t done anything about working out the clueinside the golden egg. He therefore started taking theegg out of his trunk every time he went up to thedormitory, opening it, and listening intently, hopingthat this time it would make some sense. He strainedto think what the sound reminded him of, apart fromthirty musical saws, but he had never heard anythingelse like it. He closed the egg, shook it vigorously, andopened it again to see if the sound had changed, butit hadn’t. He tried asking the egg questions, shoutingover all the wailing, but nothing happened. He eventhrew the egg across the room — though he hadn’treally expected that to help.

Harry had not forgotten the hint that Cedric hadgiven him, but his less-than-friendly feelings towardCedric just now meant that he was keen not to takehis help if he could avoid it. In any case, it seemed tohim that if Cedric had really wanted to give Harry ahand, he would have been a lot more explicit. He,Harry, had told Cedric exactly what was coming inPage | 480 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the first task — and Cedric’s idea of a fair exchangehad been to tell Harry to take a bath. Well, he didn’tneed that sort of rubbishy help — not from someonewho kept walking down corridors hand in hand withCho, anyway. And so the first day of the new termarrived, and Harry set off to lessons, weighed downwith books, parchment, and quills as usual, but alsowith the lurking worry of the egg heavy in hisstomach, as though he were carrying that aroundwith him too.

Snow was still thick upon the grounds, and thegreenhouse windows were covered in condensation sothick that they couldn’t see out of them in Herbology.Nobody was looking forward to Care of MagicalCreatures much in this weather, though as Ron said,the skrewts would probably warm them up nicely,either by chasing them, or blasting off so forcefullythat Hagrid’s cabin would catch fire.

When they arrived at Hagrid’s cabin, however, theyfound an elderly witch with closely cropped gray hairand a very prominent chin standing before his frontdoor.

“Hurry up, now, the bell rang five minutes ago,” shebarked at them as they struggled toward her throughthe snow.

“Who’re you?” said Ron, staring at her. “Where’sHagrid?”

“My name is Professor Grubbly-Plank,” she saidbriskly. “I am your temporary Care of MagicalCreatures teacher.”

“Where’s Hagrid?” Harry repeated loudly.

Page | 481

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“He is indisposed,” said Professor Grubbly-Plankshortly.

Soft and unpleasant laughter reached Harry’s ears.

He turned; Draco Malfoy and the rest of theSlytherins were joining the class. All of them lookedgleeful, and none of them looked surprised to seeProfessor Grubbly-Plank.

“This way, please,” said Professor Grubbly-Plank, andshe strode off around the paddock where theBeauxbatons horses were shivering. Harry, Ron, andHermione followed her, looking back over theirshoulders at Hagrid’s cabin. All the curtains wereclosed. Was Hagrid in there, alone and ill?

“What’s wrong with Hagrid?” Harry said, hurrying tocatch up with Professor Grubbly-Plank.

“Never you mind,” she said as though she thought hewas being nosy.

“I do mind, though,” said Harry hotly. “What’s up withhim?”

Professor Grubbly-Plank acted as though she couldn’thear him. She led them past the paddock where thehuge Beauxbatons horses were standing, huddledagainst the cold, and toward a tree on the edge of theforest, where a large and beautiful unicorn wastethered.

Many of the girls “ooooohed!” at the sight of theunicorn.

“Oh it’s so beautiful!” whispered Lavender Brown.“How did she get it? They’re supposed to be reallyhard to catch!”

Page | 482

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The unicorn was so brightly white it made the snowall around look gray. It was pawing the groundnervously with its golden hooves and throwing backits horned head.

“Boys keep back!” barked Professor Grubbly-Plank,throwing out an arm and catching Harry hard in thechest. “They prefer the woman’s touch, unicorns.Girls to the front, and approach with care, come on,easy does it. ...”

She and the girls walked slowly forward toward theunicorn, leaving the boys standing near the paddockfence, watching. The moment Professor Grubbly-Plank was out of earshot, Harry turned to Ron.

“What d’you reckon’s wrong with him? You don’tthink a skrewt — ?”

“Oh he hasn’t been attacked, Potter, if that’s whatyou’re thinking,” said Malfoy softly. “No, he’s just tooashamed to show his big, ugly face.”

“What d’you mean?” said Harry sharply.

Malfoy put his hand inside the pocket of his robesand pulled out a folded page of newsprint.

“There you go,” he said. “Hate to break it to you,Potter. ...”

He smirked as Harry snatched the page, unfolded it,and read it, with Ron, Seamus, Dean, and Nevillelooking over his shoulder. It was an article toppedwith a picture of Hagrid looking extremely shifty.

DUMBLEDORE’S GIANT MISTAKE

Page | 483

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Albus Dumbledore, eccentric Headmaster of HogwartsSchool of Witchcraft and Wizardry, has never beenafraid to make controversial staff appointments, writesRita Skeeter, Special Correspondent. In September ofthis year, he hired Alastor “Mad-Eye” Moody, thenotoriously jinx-happy ex-Auror, to teach DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts, a decision that caused manyraised eyebrows at the Ministry of Magic, givenMoody’s well-known habit of attacking anybody whomakes a sudden movement in his presence. Mad-EyeMoody, however, looks responsible and kindly whenset beside the part-human Dumbledore employs toteach Care of Magical Creatures.

Rubeus Hagrid, who admits to being expelled fromHogwarts in his third year, has enjoyed the position ofgamekeeper at the school ever since, a job secured forhim by Dumbledore. Last year, however, Hagrid usedhis mysterious influence over the headmaster tosecure the additional post of Care of MagicalCreatures teacher, over the heads of many better-qualified candidates.

An alarmingly large and ferocious-looking man,

Hagrid has been using his newfound authority toterrify the students in his care with a succession ofhorrific creatures. While Dumbledore turns a blindeye, Hagrid has maimed several pupils during a seriesof lessons that many admit to being “veryfrightening.”

“I was attacked by a hippogriff, and my friend VincentCrabbe got a bad bite off a flobberworm,” says DracoMalfoy, a fourth-year student. “We all hate Hagrid,but we’re just too scared to say anything.”

Hagrid has no intention of ceasing his campaign ofintimidation, however. In conversation with a DailyProphet reporter last month, he admitted breeding

Page | 484 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

creatures he has dubbed “Blast-Ended Skrewts, ”highly dangerous crosses between manticores and fire-crabs. The creation of new breeds of magical creatureis, of course, an activity usually closely observed bythe Department for the Regulation and Control ofMagical Creatures. Hagrid, however, considers himselfto be above such petty restrictions.

“I was just having some fun,” he says, before hastilychanging the subject.

As if this were not enough, the Daily Prophet has nowunearthed evidence that Hagrid is not — as he hasalways pretended — a pure-blood wizard. He is not, infact, even pure human. His mother, we can exclusivelyreveal, is none other than the giantess Fridwulfa,whose whereabouts are currently unknown.

Bloodthirsty and brutal, the giants broughtthemselves to the point of extinction by warringamongst themselves during the last century. Thehandful that remained joined the ranks of He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named, and were responsible for someof the worst mass Muggle killings of his reign ofterror.

While many of the giants who served He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named were killed by Aurors working againstthe Dark Side, Fridwulfa was not among them. It ispossible she escaped to one of the giant communitiesstill existing in foreign mountain ranges. If his anticsduring Care of Magical Creatures lessons are anyguide, however, Fridwulfa’s son appears to haveinherited her brutal nature.

In a bizarre twist, Hagrid is reputed to have developeda close friendship with the boy who brought aroundYou-Know-Who’s fall from power — thereby drivingHagrid’s own mother, like the rest of You-Know-Who’s

Page | 485 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

supporters, into hiding. Perhaps Harry Potter isunaware of the unpleasant truth about his largefriend — but Albus Dumbledore surely has a duty toensure that Harry Potter, along with his fellowstudents, is warned about the dangers of associatingwith part-giants.

Harry finished reading and looked up at Ron, whosemouth was hanging open.

“How did she find out?” he whispered.

But that wasn’t what was bothering Harry.

“What d’you mean, “we all hate Hagrid’?” Harry spatat Malfoy. “What’s this rubbish about him” — hepointed at Crabbe — “getting a bad bite off aflobberworm? They haven’t even got teeth!”

Crabbe was sniggering, apparently very pleased withhimself.

“Well, I think this should put an end to the oaf’steaching career,” said Malfoy, his eyes glinting. “Half-giant ... and there was me thinking he’d justswallowed a bottle of Skele-Gro when he was young.

... None of the mummies and daddies are going to likethis at all. ... They’ll be worried he’ll eat their kids, ha,ha. ...”

“You —”

“Are you paying attention over there?”

Professor Grubbly-Plank’s voice carried over to theboys; the girls were all clustered around the unicornnow, stroking it. Harry was so angry that the Daily

Page |486 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Prophet article shook in his hands as he turned tostare unseeingly at the unicorn, whose many magicalproperties Professor Grubbly-Plank was nowenumerating in a loud voice, so that the boys couldhear too.

“I hope she stays, that woman!” said Parvati Patilwhen the lesson had ended and they were all headingback to the castle for lunch. “That’s more what Ithought Care of Magical Creatures would be like ...proper creatures like unicorns, not monsters. ...”

“What about Hagrid?” Harry said angrily as they wentup the steps.

“What about him?” said Parvati in a hard voice. “Hecan still be gamekeeper, can’t he?”

Parvati had been very cool toward Harry since theball. He supposed that he ought to have paid her a bitmore attention, but she seemed to have had a goodtime all the same. She was certainly telling anybodywho would listen that she had made arrangements tomeet the boy from Beauxbatons in Hogsmeade on thenext weekend trip.

“That was a really good lesson,” said Hermione asthey entered the Great Hall. “I didn’t know half thethings Professor Grubbly-Plank told us about uni —”

“Look at this!” Harry snarled, and he shoved the DailyProphet article under Hermione’s nose.

Hermione’s mouth fell open as she read. Her reactionwas exactly the same as Ron’s.

“How did that horrible Skeeter woman find out? Youdon’t think Hagrid told her?”

Page | 487

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry, leading the way over to theGryffindor table and throwing himself into a chair,furious. “He never even told us, did he? I reckon shewas so mad he wouldn’t give her loads of horriblestuff about me, she went ferreting around to get himback.”

“Maybe she heard him telling Madame Maxime at theball,” said Hermione quietly.

“We’d have seen her in the garden!” said Ron.“Anyway, she’s not supposed to come into schoolanymore, Hagrid said Dumbledore banned her. ...”

“Maybe she’s got an Invisibility Cloak,” said Harry,ladling chicken casserole onto his plate and splashingit everywhere in his anger. “Sort of thing she’d do,isn’t it, hide in bushes listening to people.”

“Like you and Ron did, you mean,” said Hermione.

“We weren’t trying to hear him!” said Ron indignantly.“We didn’t have any choice! The stupid prat, talkingabout his giantess mother where anyone could haveheard him!”

“We’ve got to go and see him,” said Harry. “Thisevening, after Divination. Tell him we want him back... you do want him back?” he shot at Hermione.

“I — well, I’m not going to pretend it didn’t make anice change, having a proper Care of MagicalCreatures lesson for once — but I do want Hagridback, of course I do!” Hermione added hastily,quailing under Harry’s furious stare.

So that evening after dinner, the three of them left thecastle once more and went down through the frozen

Page | 488

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

grounds to Hagrid’s cabin. They knocked, and Fang’sbooming barks answered.

“Hagrid, it’s us!” Harry shouted, pounding on thedoor. “Open up!

Hagrid didn’t answer. They could hear Fangscratching at the door, whining, but it didn’t open.They hammered on it for ten more minutes; Ron evenwent and banged on one of the windows, but therewas no response.

“What’s he avoiding us for?” Hermione said when theyhad finally given up and were walking back to theschool. “He surely doesn’t think we’d care about himbeing half-giant?”

But it seemed that Hagrid did care. They didn’t see asign of him all week. He didn’t appear at the stafftable at mealtimes, they didn’t see him going abouthis gamekeeper duties on the grounds, and ProfessorGrubbly-Plank continued to take the Care of MagicalCreatures classes. Malfoy was gloating at everypossible opportunity.

“Missing your half-breed pal?” he kept whispering toHarry whenever there was a teacher around, so thathe was safe from Harry’s retaliation. “Missing theelephant-man?”

There was a Hogsmeade visit halfway throughJanuary. Hermione was very surprised that Harrywas going to go.

“I just thought you’d want to take advantage of thecommon room being quiet,” she said. “Really get towork on that egg.”

Page | 489

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh I — I reckon I’ve got a pretty good idea what it’sabout now,” Harry lied.

“Have you really?” said Hermione, looking impressed.“Well done!”

Harry’s insides gave a guilty squirm, but he ignoredthem. He still had five weeks to work out that eggclue, after all, and that was ages ... whereas if hewent into Hogsmeade, he might run into Hagrid, andget a chance to persuade him to come back.

He, Ron, and Hermione left the castle together onSaturday and set off through the cold, wet groundstoward the gates. As they passed the Durmstrangship moored in the lake, they saw Viktor Krumemerge onto the deck, dressed in nothing butswimming trunks. He was very skinny indeed, butapparently a lot tougher than he looked, because heclimbed up onto the side of the ship, stretched out hisarms, and dived, right into the lake.

“He’s mad!” said Harry, staring at Krum’s dark headas it bobbed out into the middle of the lake. “It mustbe freezing, it’s January!”

“It’s a lot colder where he comes from,” saidHermione. “I suppose it feels quite warm to him.”

“Yeah, but there’s still the giant squid,” said Ron. Hedidn’t sound anxious — if anything, he soundedhopeful. Hermione noticed his tone of voice andfrowned.

“He’s really nice, you know,” she said. “He’s not at alllike you’d think, coming from Durmstrang. He likes itmuch better here, he told me.”

Page | 490

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Ron said nothing. He hadn’t mentioned Viktor Krumsince the ball, but Harry had found a miniature armunder his bed on Boxing Day, which had looked verymuch as though it had been snapped off a smallmodel figure wearing Bulgarian Quidditch robes.

Harry kept his eyes skinned for a sign of Hagrid allthe way down the slushy High Street, and suggested avisit to the Three Broomsticks once he hadascertained that Hagrid was not in any of the shops.

The pub was as crowded as ever, but one quick lookaround at all the tables told Harry that Hagrid wasn’tthere. Heart sinking, he went up to the bar with Ronand Hermione, ordered three butter-beers fromMadam Rosmerta, and thought gloomily that hemight just as well have stayed behind and listened tothe egg wailing after all.

“Doesn’t he ever go into the office?” Hermionewhispered suddenly. “Look!”

She pointed into the mirror behind the bar, and Harrysaw Ludo Bagman reflected there, sitting in ashadowy corner with a bunch of goblins. Bagman wastalking very fast in a low voice to the goblins, all ofwhom had their arms crossed and were looking rathermenacing.

It was indeed odd, Harry thought, that Bagman washere at the Three Broomsticks on a weekend whenthere was no Triwizard event, and therefore nojudging to be done. He watched Bagman in themirror. He was looking strained again, quite asstrained as he had that night in the forest before theDark Mark had appeared. But just then Bagmanglanced over at the bar, saw Harry, and stood up.

Page | 491

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“In a moment, in a moment!” Harry heard him saybrusquely to the goblins, and Bagman hurriedthrough the pub toward Harry, his boyish grin backin place.

“Harry!” he said. “How are you? Been hoping to runinto you! Everything going all right?”

“Fine, thanks,” said Harry.

“Wonder if I could have a quick, private word, Harry?”said Bagman eagerly. “You couldn’t give us amoment, you two, could you?”

“Er — okay,” said Ron, and he and Hermione went offto find a table.

Bagman led Harry along the bar to the end furthestfrom Madam Rosmerta.

“Well, I just thought I’d congratulate you again onyour splendid performance against that Horntail,Harry,” said Bagman. “Really superb.”

“Thanks,” said Harry, but he knew this couldn’t be allthat Bagman wanted to say, because he could havecongratulated Harry in front of Ron and Hermione.Bagman didn’t seem in any particular rush to spillthe beans, though. Harry saw him glance into themirror over the bar at the goblins, who were allwatching him and Harry in silence through theirdark, slanting eyes.

“Absolute nightmare,” said Bagman to Harry in anundertone, noticing Harry watching the goblins too.“Their English isn’t too good ... it’s like being backwith all the Bulgarians at the Quidditch World Cup ...but at least they used sign language another humancould recognize. This lot keep gabbling inPage | 492 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Gobbledegook ... and I only know one word ofGobbledegook. Bladvak. It means ‘pickax.’ I don’t liketo use it in case they think I’m threatening them.”

He gave a short, booming laugh.

“What do they want?” Harry said, noticing how thegoblins were still watching Bagman very closely.

“Er — well ...” said Bagman, looking suddenlynervous. “They ... er ... they’re looking for BarryCrouch.”

“Why are they looking for him here?” said Harry. “He’sat the Ministry in London, isn’t he?”

“Er ... as a matter of fact, I’ve no idea where he is,”said Bagman. “He’s sort of ... stopped coming to work.Been absent for a couple of weeks now. Young Percy,his assistant, says he’s ill. Apparently he’s just beensending instructions in by owl. But would you mindnot mentioning that to anyone, Harry? Because RitaSkeeter’s still poking around everywhere she can, andI’m willing to bet she’d work up Barty’s illness intosomething sinister. Probably say he’s gone missinglike Bertha Jorkins.”

“Have you heard anything about Bertha Jorkins?”Harry asked.

“No,” said Bagman, looking strained again. “I’ve gotpeople looking, of course ...” (About time, thoughtHarry) “and it’s all very strange. She definitely arrivedin Albania, because she met her second cousin there.And then she left the cousin’s house to go south andsee an aunt ... and she seems to have vanishedwithout trace en route. Blowed if I can see whereshe’s got to ... she doesn’t seem the type to elope, forinstance ... but still. ... What are we doing, talkingPage | 493 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

about goblins and Bertha Jorkins? I really wanted toask you” — he lowered his voice — “how are yougetting on with your golden egg?”

“Er ... not bad,” Harry said untruthfully.

Bagman seemed to know he wasn’t being honest.

“Listen, Harry,” he said (still in a very low voice), “Ifeel very bad about all this ... you were thrown intothis tournament, you didn’t volunteer for it... and if...” (his voice was so quiet now, Harry had to leancloser to listen) “if I can help at all ... a prod in theright direction ... I’ve taken a liking to you ... the wayyou got past that dragon! ... well, just say the word.”

Harry stared up into Bagman’s round, rosy face andhis wide, baby-blue eyes.

“We’re supposed to work out the clues alone, aren’twe?” he said, careful to keep his voice casual and notsound as though he was accusing the head of theDepartment of Magical Games and Sports of breakingthe rules.

“Well ... well, yes,” said Bagman impatiently, “but —come on, Harry — we all want a Hogwarts victory,don’t we?”

“Have you offered Cedric help?” Harry said.

The smallest of frowns creased Bagman’s smoothface. “No, I haven’t,” he said. “I — well, like I say, I’vetaken a liking to you. Just thought I’d offer ...”

“Well, thanks,” said Harry, “but I think I’m nearlythere with the egg ... couple more days should crackit.”

Page | 494

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He wasn’t entirely sure why he was refusingBagman’s help, except that Bagman was almost astranger to him, and accepting his assistance wouldfeel somehow much more like cheating than askingadvice from Ron, Hermione, or Sirius.

Bagman looked almost affronted, but couldn’t saymuch more as Fred and George turned up at thatpoint.

“Hello, Mr. Bagman,” said Fred brightly. “Can we buyyou a drink?”

“Er ... no,” said Bagman, with a last disappointedglance at Harry, “no, thank you, boys ...”

Fred and George looked quite as disappointed asBagman, who was surveying Harry as though he hadlet him down badly.

“Well, I must dash,” he said. “Nice seeing you all.

Good luck, Harry.”

He hurried out of the pub. The goblins all slid off theirchairs and exited after him. Harry went to rejoin Ronand Hermione.

“What did he want?” Ron said, the moment Harry hadsat down.

“He offered to help me with the golden egg,” saidHarry.

“He shouldn’t be doing that!” said Hermione, lookingvery shocked. “He’s one of the judges! And anyway,you’ve already worked it out — haven’t you?”

“Er ... nearly,” said Harry.

Page | 495

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Well, I don’t think Dumbledore would like it if heknew Bagman was trying to persuade you to cheat!”said Hermione, still looking deeply disapproving. “Ihope he’s trying to help Cedric as much!”

“He’s not, I asked,” said Harry.

“Who cares if Diggory’s getting help?” said Ron. Harryprivately agreed.

“Those goblins didn’t look very friendly,” saidHermione, sipping her butterbeer. “What were theydoing here?”

“Looking for Crouch, according to Bagman,” saidHarry. “He’s still ill. Hasn’t been into work.”

“Maybe Percy’s poisoning him,” said Ron. “Probablythinks if Crouch snuffs it he’ll be made head of theDepartment of International Magical Cooperation.”

Hermione gave Ron a don’t-joke-about-things-like-that look, and said, “Funny, goblins looking for Mr.Crouch. ... They’d normally deal with the Departmentfor the Regulation and Control of Magical Creatures.”

“Crouch can speak loads of different languages,though,” said Harry. “Maybe they need aninterpreter.”

“Worrying about poor ’ickle goblins, now, are you?”Ron asked Hermione. “Thinking of starting upS.P.U.G. or something? Society for the Protection ofUgly Goblins?”

“Ha, ha, ha,” said Hermione sarcastically. “Goblinsdon’t need protection. Haven’t you been listening towhat Professor Binns has been telling us about goblinrebellions?”

Page | 496 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry and Ron together.

“Well, they’re quite capable of dealing with wizards,”said Hermione, taking another sip of butterbeer.“They’re very clever. They’re not like house-elves, whonever stick up for themselves.”

“Uh-oh,” said Ron, staring at the door.

Rita Skeeter had just entered. She was wearingbanana-yellow robes today; her long nails werepainted shocking pink, and she was accompanied byher paunchy photographer. She bought drinks, andshe and the photographer made their way throughthe crowds to a table nearby, Harry, Ron, andHermione glaring at her as she approached. She wastalking fast and looking very satisfied aboutsomething.

"... didn’t seem very keen to talk to us, did he, Bozo?Now, why would that be, do you think? And what’s hedoing with a pack of goblins in tow anyway? Showingthem the sights ... what nonsense ... he was always abad liar. Reckon something’s up? Think we should doa bit of digging? ‘Disgraced Ex-Head of MagicalGames and Sports, Ludo Bagman ...’ Snappy start toa sentence, Bozo — we just need to find a story to fitit —”

“Trying to ruin someone else’s life?” said Harry loudly.

A few people looked around. Rita Skeeter’s eyeswidened behind her jeweled spectacles as she sawwho had spoken.

“Harry!” she said, beaming. “How lovely! Why don’tyou come and join — ?”

Page | 497

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I wouldn’t come near you with a ten-footbroomstick,” said Harry furiously. “What did you dothat to Hagrid for, eh?”

Rita Skeeter raised her heavily penciled eyebrows.

“Our readers have a right to the truth, Harry. I ammerely doing my —”

“Who cares if he’s half-giant?” Harry shouted. “There’snothing wrong with him!”

The whole pub had gone very quiet. Madam Rosmertawas staring over from behind the bar, apparentlyoblivious to the fact that the flagon she was fillingwith mead was overflowing.

Rita Skeeter’s smile flickered very slightly, but shehitched it back almost at once; she snapped open hercrocodile-skin handbag, pulled out her Quick-QuotesQuill, and said, “How about giving me an interviewabout the Hagrid you know, Harry? The man behindthe muscles? Your unlikely friendship and thereasons behind it. Would you call him a fathersubstitute?”

Hermione stood up very abruptly, her butterbeerclutched in her hand as though it were a grenade.

“You horrible woman,” she said, through gritted teeth,“you don’t care, do you, anything for a story, andanyone will do, won’t they? Even Ludo Bagman —”

“Sit down, you silly little girl, and don’t talk aboutthings you don’t understand,” said Rita Skeetercoldly, her eyes hardening as they fell on Hermione. “Iknow things about Ludo Bagman that would makeyour hair curl ... not that it needs it —” she added,eyeing Hermione’s bushy hair.

Page | 498 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Let’s go,” said Hermione, “c’mon, Harry — Ron ...”

They left; many people were staring at them as theywent. Harry glanced back as they reached the door.Rita Skeeter’s Quick-Quotes Quill was out; it waszooming backward and forward over a piece ofparchment on the table.

“She’ll be after you next, Hermione,” said Ron in a lowand worried voice as they walked quickly back up thestreet.

“Let her try!” said Hermione defiantly; she wasshaking with rage. “I’ll show her! Silly little girl, am I?Oh, I’ll get her back for this. First Harry, then Hagrid

“You don’t want to go upsetting Rita Skeeter,” saidRon nervously. “I’m serious, Hermione, she’ll dig upsomething on you —”

“My parents don’t read the Daily Prophet She can’tscare me into hiding!” said Hermione, now stridingalong so fast that it was all Harry and Ron could do tokeep up with her. The last time Harry had seenHermione in a rage like this, she had hit Draco Malfoyaround the face. “And Hagrid isn’t hiding anymore!

He should never have let that excuse for a humanbeing upset him! Come on!”

Breaking into a run, she led them all the way back upthe road, through the gates flanked by winged boars,and up through the grounds to Hagrid’s cabin.

The curtains were still drawn, and they could hearFang barking as they approached.

“Hagrid!” Hermione shouted, pounding on his frontdoor. “Hagrid, that’s enough! We know you’re in there!

Page | 499 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Nobody cares if your mum was a giantess, Hagrid!

You can’t let that foul Skeeter woman do this to you!Hagrid, get out here, you’re just being —”

The door opened. Hermione said, “About t — !” andthen stopped, very suddenly, because she had foundherself face-to-face, not with Hagrid, but with AlbusDumbledore.

“Good afternoon,” he said pleasantly, smiling down atthem.

“We — er — we wanted to see Hagrid,” said Hermionein a rather small voice.

“Yes, I surmised as much,” said Dumbledore, his eyestwinkling. “Why don’t you come in?”

“Oh ... um ... okay,” said Hermione.

She, Ron, and Harry went into the cabin; Fanglaunched himself upon Harry the moment he entered,barking madly and trying to lick his ears. Harryfended off Fang and looked around.

Hagrid was sitting at his table, where there were twolarge mugs of tea. He looked a real mess. His face wasblotchy, his eyes swollen, and he had gone to theother extreme where his hair was concerned; far fromtrying to make it behave, it now looked like a wig oftangled wire.

“Hi, Hagrid,” said Harry.

Hagrid looked up.

“ ’Lo,” he said in a very hoarse voice.

Page | 500

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“More tea, I think,” said Dumbledore, closing the doorbehind Harry, Ron, and Hermione, drawing out hiswand, and twiddling it; a revolving tea tray appearedin midair along with a plate of cakes. Dumbledoremagicked the tray onto the table, and everybody satdown. There was a slight pause, and thenDumbledore said, “Did you by any chance hear whatMiss Granger was shouting, Hagrid?”

Hermione went slightly pink, but Dumbledore smiledat her and continued, “Hermione, Harry, and Ron stillseem to want to know you, judging by the way theywere attempting to break down the door.”

“Of course we still want to know you!” Harry said,staring at Hagrid. “You don’t think anything thatSkeeter cow — sorry, Professor,” he added quickly,looking at Dumbledore.

“I have gone temporarily deaf and haven’t any ideawhat you said, Harry,” said Dumbledore, twiddlinghis thumbs and staring at the ceiling.

“Er — right,” said Harry sheepishly. “I just meant —Hagrid, how could you think we’d care what that —woman — wrote about you?”

Two fat tears leaked out of Hagrid’s beetle-black eyesand fell slowly into his tangled beard.

“Living proof of what I’ve been telling you, Hagrid,”said Dumbledore, still looking carefully up at theceiling. “I have shown you the letters from thecountless parents who remember you from their owndays here, telling me in no uncertain terms that if Isacked you, they would have something to say aboutit —”

Page | 501

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Not all of ’em,” said Hagrid hoarsely. “Not all of ’emwan’ me ter stay.”

“Really, Hagrid, if you are holding out for universalpopularity, I’m afraid you will be in this cabin for avery long time,” said Dumbledore, now peering sternlyover his half-moon spectacles. “Not a week haspassed since I became headmaster of this schoolwhen I haven’t had at least one owl complainingabout the way I run it. But what should I do?Barricade myself in my study and refuse to talk toanybody?”

“Yeh — yeh’re not half-giant!” said Hagrid croakily.

“Hagrid, look what I’ve got for relatives!” Harry saidfuriously. “Look at the Dursleys!”

“An excellent point,” said Professor Dumbledore. “Myown brother, Aberforth, was prosecuted for practicinginappropriate charms on a goat. It was all over thepapers, but did Aberforth hide? No, he did not! Heheld his head high and went about his business asusual! Of course, I’m not entirely sure he can read, sothat may not have been bravery. ...”

“Come back and teach, Hagrid,” said Hermionequietly, “please come back, we really miss you.”

Hagrid gulped. More tears leaked out down his cheeksand into his tangled beard.

Dumbledore stood up. “I refuse to accept yourresignation, Hagrid, and I expect you back at work onMonday,” he said. “You will join me for breakfast ateight-thirty in the Great Hall. No excuses. Goodafternoon to you all.”

Page | 502

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore left the cabin, pausing only to scratchFang’s ears. When the door had shut behind him,Hagrid began to sob into his dustbin-lid-sized hands.Hermione kept patting his arm, and at last, Hagridlooked up, his eyes very red indeed, and said, “Greatman, Dumbledore ... great man ...”

“Yeah, he is,” said Ron. “Can I have one of thesecakes, Hagrid?”

“Help yerself,” said Hagrid, wiping his eyes on theback of his hand. “Ar, he’s righ’, o’ course — yeh’re allrigh’ ... I bin stupid ... my ol’ dad woulda binashamed o’ the way I’ve bin behavin’. ...” More tearsleaked out, but he wiped them away more forcefully,and said, “Never shown you a picture of my old dad,have I? Here ...”

Hagrid got up, went over to his dresser, opened adrawer, and pulled out a picture of a short wizardwith Hagrid’s crinkled black eyes, beaming as he saton top of Hagrid’s shoulder. Hagrid was a good sevenor eight feet tall, judging by the apple tree beside him,but his face was beardless, young, round, and smooth— he looked hardly older than eleven.

“Tha’ was taken jus’ after I got inter Hogwarts,”

Hagrid croaked. “Dad was dead chuffed ... thought Imigh’ not be a wizard, see, ’cos me mum ... well,anyway. ’Course, I never was great shakes at magic,really ... but at least he never saw me expelled. Died,see, in me second year. ...

“Dumbledore was the one who stuck up for me afterDad went. Got me the gamekeeper job ... trustspeople, he does. Gives ’em second chances ... tha’swhat sets him apar’ from other heads, see. He’llaccept anyone at Hogwarts, s’long as they’ve got thetalent. Knows people can turn out okay even if theirPage | 503 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

families weren’ ... well ... all tha’ respectable. Butsome don’ understand that. There’s some who’dalways hold it against yeh ... there’s some who’d evenpretend they just had big bones rather than stand upan’ say — I am what I am, an’ I’m not ashamed.

‘Never be ashamed,’ my ol’ dad used ter say, ‘there’ssome wholl hold it against you, but they’re not worthbotherin’ with.’ An’ he was right. I’ve bin an idiot. I’mnot botherin’ with her no more, I promise yeh that.

Big bones ... I’ll give her big bones.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one anothernervously; Harry would rather have taken fifty Blast-Ended Skrewts for a walk than admit to Hagrid thathe had overheard him talking to Madame Maxime,but Hagrid was still talking, apparently unaware thathe had said anything odd.

“Yeh know wha’, Harry?” he said, looking up from thephotograph of his father, his eyes very bright, “when Ifirs’ met you, you reminded me o’ me a bit. Mum an’Dad gone, an’ you was feelin’ like yeh wouldn’ fit in atHogwarts, remember? Not sure yeh were really up toit ... an’ now look at yeh, Harry! School champion!”

He looked at Harry for a moment and then said, veryseriously, “Yeh know what I’d love, Harry? I’d love yehter win, I really would. It’d show ’em all ... yeh don’have ter be pureblood ter do it. Yeh don’ have ter beashamed of what yeh are. It’d show ’em Dumbledore’sthe one who’s got it righ’, lettin’ anyone in as long asthey can do magic. How you doin’ with that egg,Harry?”

“Great,” said Harry. “Really great.”

Hagrid’s miserable face broke into a wide, waterysmile.

Page | 504

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Tha’s my boy ... you show ’em, Harry, you show ’em.Beat ’em all.”

Lying to Hagrid wasn’t quite like lying to anyone else.Harry went back to the castle later that afternoonwith Ron and Hermione, unable to banish the imageof the happy expression on Hagrid’s whiskery face ashe had imagined Harry winning the tournament. Theincomprehensible egg weighed more heavily than everon Harry’s conscience that evening, and by the timehe had got into bed, he had made up his mind — itwas time to shelve his pride and see if Cedric’s hintwas worth anything.

Page | 505

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE EGG AND THE EYE

As Harry had no idea how long a bath he would needto work out the secret of the golden egg, he decided todo it at night, when he would be able to take as muchtime as he wanted. Reluctant though he was to acceptmore favours from Cedric, he also decided to use theprefects’ bathroom; far fewer people were allowed inthere, so it was much less likely that he would bedisturbed.

Harry planned his excursion carefully, because hehad been caught out of bed and out-of-bounds byFilch the caretaker in the middle of the night oncebefore, and had no desire to repeat the experience.

The Invisibility Cloak would, of course, be essential,and as an added precaution, Harry thought he wouldtake the Marauder’s Map, which, next to the cloak,was the most useful aid to rule-breaking Harryowned. The map showed the whole of Hogwarts,including its many shortcuts and secret passagewaysand, most important of all, it revealed the peopleinside the castle as minuscule, labeled dots, movingaround the corridors, so that Harry would bePage | 506 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

forewarned if somebody was approaching thebathroom.

On Thursday night, Harry sneaked up to bed, put onthe cloak, crept back downstairs, and, just as he haddone on the night when Hagrid had shown him thedragons, waited for the portrait hole to open. Thistime it was Ron who waited outside to give the FatLady the password (“banana fritters”). “Good luck,”Ron muttered, climbing into the room as Harry creptout past him.

It was awkward moving under the cloak tonight,because Harry had the heavy egg under one arm andthe map held in front of his nose with the other.However, the moonlit corridors were empty and silent,and by checking the map at strategic intervals, Harrywas able to ensure that he wouldn’t run into anyonehe wanted to avoid. When he reached the statue ofBoris the Bewildered, a lost-looking wizard with hisgloves on the wrong hands, he located the right door,leaned close to it, and muttered the password, “Pinefresh,” just as Cedric had told him.

The door creaked open. Harry slipped inside, boltedthe door behind him, and pulled off the InvisibilityCloak, looking around.

His immediate reaction was that it would be worthbecoming a prefect just to be able to use thisbathroom. It was softly lit by a splendid candle-filledchandelier, and everything was made of white marble,including what looked like an empty, rectangularswimming pool sunk into the middle of the floor.

About a hundred golden taps stood all around thepool’s edges, each with a differently colored jewel setinto its handle. There was also a diving board. Longwhite linen curtains hung at the windows; a large pileof fluffy white towels sat in a corner, and there was aPage | 507 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

single golden-framed painting on the wall. It featureda blonde mermaid who was fast asleep on a rock, herlong hair over her face. It fluttered every time shesnored.

Harry moved forward, looking around, his footstepsechoing off the walls. Magnificent though thebathroom was — and quite keen though he was to tryout a few of those taps — now he was here hecouldn’t quite suppress the feeling that Cedric mighthave been having him on. How on earth was thissupposed to help solve the mystery of the egg?Nevertheless, he put one of the fluffy towels, thecloak, the map, and the egg at the side of theswimming-pool-sized bath, then knelt down andturned on a few of the taps.

He could tell at once that they carried different sortsof bubble bath mixed with the water, though it wasn’tbubble bath as Harry had ever experienced it. Onetap gushed pink and blue bubbles the size offootballs; another poured ice-white foam so thick thatHarry thought it would have supported his weight ifhe’d cared to test it; a third sent heavily perfumedpurple clouds hovering over the surface of the water.Harry amused himself for a while turning the taps onand off, particularly enjoying the effect of one whosejet bounced off the surface of the water in large arcs.Then, when the deep pool was full of hot water, foam,and bubbles, which took a very short timeconsidering its size, Harry turned off all the taps,pulled off his pajamas, slippers, and dressing gown,and slid into the water.

It was so deep that his feet barely touched thebottom, and he actually did a couple of lengths beforeswimming back to the side and treading water,staring at the egg. Highly enjoyable though it was toswim in hot and foamy water with clouds of different-Page | 508 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

colored steam wafting all around him, no stroke ofbrilliance came to him, no sudden burst ofunderstanding.

Harry stretched out his arms, lifted the egg in his wethands, and opened it. The wailing, screeching soundfilled the bathroom, echoing and reverberating off themarble walls, but it sounded just asincomprehensible as ever, if not more so with all theechoes. He snapped it shut again, worried that thesound would attract Filch, wondering whether thathadn’t been Cedric’s plan — and then, making himjump so badly that he dropped the egg, whichclattered away across the bathroom floor, someonespoke.

“I’d try putting it in the water, if I were you.”

Harry had swallowed a considerable amount ofbubbles in shock. He stood up, sputtering, and sawthe ghost of a very glum-looking girl sitting cross-legged on top of one of the taps. It was MoaningMyrtle, who was usually to be heard sobbing in the S-bend of a toilet three floors below.

“Myrtle!” Harry said in outrage, “I’m — I’m notwearing anything!”

The foam was so dense that this hardly mattered, buthe had a nasty feeling that Myrtle had been spying onhim from out of one of the taps ever since he hadarrived.

“I closed my eyes when you got in,” she said, blinkingat him through her thick spectacles. “You haven’tbeen to see me for ages.”

“Yeah ... well ...” said Harry, bending his kneesslightly, just to make absolutely sure Myrtle couldn’t

Page | 509 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

see anything but his head, “I’m not supposed to comeinto your bathroom, am I? It’s a girls’ one.”

“You didn’t used to care,” said Myrtle miserably. “Youused to be in there all the time.”

This was true, though only because Harry, Ron, andHermione had found Myrtle’s out-of-order toilets aconvenient place to brew Polyjuice Potion in secret —a forbidden potion that had turned him and Ron intoliving replicas of Crabbe and Goyle for an hour, sothat they could sneak into the Slytherin commonroom.

“I got told off for going in there,” said Harry, whichwas half-true; Percy had once caught him coming outof Myrtle’s bathroom. “I thought I’d better not comeback after that.”

“Oh ... I see ...” said Myrtle, picking at a spot on herchin in a morose sort of way. “Well... anyway ... I’d trythe egg in the water. That’s what Cedric Diggory did.”

“Have you been spying on him too?” said Harryindignantly. “What d’you do, sneak up here in theevenings to watch the prefects take baths?”

“Sometimes,” said Myrtle, rather slyly, “but I’ve nevercome out to speak to anyone before.”

“I’m honored,” said Harry darkly. “You keep your eyesshut!”

He made sure Myrtle had her glasses well coveredbefore hoisting himself out of the bath, wrapping thetowel firmly around his waist, and going to retrievethe egg. Once he was back in the water, Myrtle peeredthrough her fingers and said, “Go on, then ... open itunder the water!”

Page | 510 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

Harry lowered the egg beneath the foamy surface andopened it ... and this time, it did not wail. A gurglingsong was coming out of it, a song whose words hecouldn’t distinguish through the water.

“You need to put your head under too,” said Myrtle,who seemed to be thoroughly enjoying bossing himaround. “Go on!”

Harry took a great breath and slid under the surface— and now, sitting on the marble bottom of thebubble-filled bath, he heard a chorus of eerie voicessinging to him from the open egg in his hands:

“Come seek us where our voices sound,

We cannot sing above the ground,

And while you’re searching ponder this:

We’ve taken what you’ll sorely miss,

An hour long you’ll have to look,

And to recover what we took,

But past an hour — the prospect’s black,

Too late, it’s gone, it won’t come back.”

Harry let himself float back upward and broke thebubbly surface, shaking his hair out of his eyes.

“Hear it?” said Myrtle.

“Yeah ... ‘Come seek us where our voices sound ...’and if I need persuading ... hang on, I need to listenagain. ...”

Page | 511

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He sank back beneath the water. It took three moreunderwater renditions of the egg’s song before Harryhad it memorized; then he trod water for a while,thinking hard, while Myrtle sat and watched him.

“I’ve got to go and look for people who can’t use theirvoices above the ground. ...” he said slowly. “Er ...who could that be?”

“Slow, aren’t you?”

He had never seen Moaning Myrtle so cheerful, apartfrom the day when a dose of Polyjuice Potion hadgiven Hermione the hairy face and tail of a cat. Harrystared around the bathroom, thinking ... if the voicescould only be heard underwater, then it made sensefor them to belong to underwater creatures. He ranthis theory past Myrtle, who smirked at him.

“Well, that’s what Diggory thought,” she said. “He laythere talking to himself for ages about it. Ages andages ... nearly all the bubbles had gone. ...”

“Underwater ...” Harry said slowly. “Myrtle ... whatlives in the lake, apart from the giant squid?”

“Oh all sorts,” she said. “I sometimes go down there... sometimes don’t have any choice, if someoneflushes my toilet when I’m not expecting it. ...”

Trying not to think about Moaning Myrtle zoomingdown a pipe to the lake with the contents of a toilet,Harry said, “Well, does anything in there have ahuman voice? Hang on —”

Harry’s eyes had fallen on the picture of the snoozingmermaid on the wall.

“Myrtle, there aren’t merpeople in there, are there?”

Page | 512 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oooh, very good,” she said, her thick glassestwinkling, “it took Diggory much longer than that!

And that was with her awake too” — Myrtle jerked herhead toward the mermaid with an expression of greatdislike on her glum face — “giggling and showing offand flashing her fins. ...”

“That’s it, isn’t it?” said Harry excitedly. “The secondtask’s to go and find the merpeople in the lake and ...and ...”

But he suddenly realized what he was saying, and hefelt the excitement drain out of him as thoughsomeone had just pulled a plug in his stomach. Hewasn’t a very good swimmer; he’d never had muchpractice. Dudley had had lessons in his youth, butAunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon, no doubt hopingthat Harry would drown one day, hadn’t bothered togive him any. A couple of lengths of this bath were allvery well, but that lake was very large, and very deep... and merpeople would surely live right at thebottom. ...

“Myrtle,” Harry said slowly, “how am I supposed tobreathe?”

At this, Myrtle’s eyes filled with sudden tears again.

“Tactless!” she muttered, groping in her robes for ahandkerchief.

“What’s tactless?” said Harry, bewildered.

“Talking about breathing in front of me!” she saidshrilly, and her voice echoed loudly around thebathroom. “When I can’t ... when I haven’t ... not forages ...”

Page | 513

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

She buried her face in her handkerchief and sniffedloudly. Harry remembered how touchy Myrtle hadalways been about being dead, but none of the otherghosts he knew made such a fuss about it.

“Sorry,” he said impatiently. “I didn’t mean — I justforgot ...”

“Oh yes, very easy to forget Myrtle’s dead,” saidMyrtle, gulping, looking at him out of swollen eyes.“Nobody missed me even when I was alive. Took themhours and hours to find my body — I know, I wassitting there waiting for them. Olive Hornby came intothe bathroom — ‘Are you in here again, sulking,Myrtle?’ she said, ‘because Professor Dippet asked meto look for you —’ And then she saw my body ...ooooh, she didn’t forget it until her dying day, I madesure of that ... followed her around and reminded her,I did. I remember at her brother’s wedding —”

But Harry wasn’t listening; he was thinking about themerpeople’s song again. “We’ve taken what you’llsorely miss.” That sounded as though they were goingto steal something of his, something he had to getback. What were they going to take?

“— and then, of course, she went to the Ministry ofMagic to stop me stalking her, so I had to come backhere and live in my toilet.”

“Good,” said Harry vaguely. “Well, I’m a lot further onthan I was. ... Shut your eyes again, will you? I’mgetting out.”

He retrieved the egg from the bottom of the bath,climbed out, dried himself, and pulled on his pajamasand dressing gown again.

Page | 514

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Will you come and visit me in my bathroom againsometime?” Moaning Myrtle asked mournfully asHarry picked up the Invisibility Cloak.

“Er ... I’ll try,” Harry said, though privately thinkingthe only way he’d be visiting Myrtle’s bathroom againwas if every other toilet in the castle got blocked. “Seeyou, Myrtle ... thanks for your help.”

“ ’Bye, ’bye,” she said gloomily, and as Harry put onthe Invisibility Cloak he saw her zoom back up thetap.

Out in the dark corridor, Harry examined theMarauder’s Map to check that the coast was stillclear. Yes, the dots belonging to Filch and his cat,

Mrs. Norris, were safely in their office ... nothing elseseemed to be moving apart from Peeves, though hewas bouncing around the trophy room on the floorabove. ... Harry had taken his first step back towardGryffindor Tower when something else on the mapcaught his eye ... something distinctly odd.

Peeves was not the only thing that was moving. Asingle dot was flitting around a room in the bottomleft-hand corner — Snape’s office. But the dot wasn’tlabeled “Severus Snape” ... it was Bartemius Crouch.

Harry stared at the dot. Mr. Crouch was supposed tobe too ill to go to work or to come to the Yule Ball —so what was he doing, sneaking into Hogwarts at oneo’clock in the morning? Harry watched closely as thedot moved around and around the room, pausinghere and there. ...

Harry hesitated, thinking ... and then his curiosity gotthe better of him. He turned and set off in theopposite direction toward the nearest staircase. Hewas going to see what Crouch was up to.

Page | 515 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry walked down the stairs as quietly as possible,though the faces in some of the portraits still turnedcuriously at the squeak of a floorboard, the rustle ofhis pajamas. He crept along the corridor below,pushed aside a tapestry about halfway along, andproceeded down a narrower staircase, a shortcut thatwould take him down two floors. He kept glancingdown at the map, wondering ... It just didn’t seem incharacter, somehow, for correct, law-abiding Mr.Crouch to be sneaking around somebody else’s officethis late at night. ...

And then, halfway down the staircase, not thinkingabout what he was doing, not concentrating onanything but the peculiar behavior of Mr. Crouch,Harry’s leg suddenly sank right through the trick stepNeville always forgot to jump. He gave an ungainlywobble, and the golden egg, still damp from the bath,slipped from under his arm. He lurched forward to tryand catch it, but too late; the egg fell down the longstaircase with a bang as loud as a bass drum onevery step — the Invisibility Cloak slipped — Harrysnatched at it, and the Marauder’s Map fluttered outof his hand and slid down six stairs, where, sunk inthe step to above his knee, he couldn’t reach it.

The golden egg fell through the tapestry at the bottomof the staircase, burst open, and began wailing loudlyin the corridor below. Harry pulled out his wand andstruggled to touch the Marauder’s Map, to wipe itblank, but it was too far away to reach —

Pulling the cloak back over himself Harrystraightened up, listening hard with his eyes screwedup with fear ... and, almost immediately —

“PEEVES!”

Page | 516

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

It was the unmistakable hunting cry of Filch thecaretaker. Harry could hear his rapid, shufflingfootsteps coming nearer and nearer, his wheezy voiceraised in fury.

“What’s this racket? Wake up the whole castle, willyou? I’ll have you, Peeves, I’ll have you, you’ll ... andwhat is this?”

Filch’s footsteps halted; there was a clink of metal onmetal and the wailing stopped — Filch had picked upthe egg and closed it. Harry stood very still, one legstill jammed tightly in the magical step, listening. Anymoment now, Filch was going to pull aside thetapestry, expecting to see Peeves ... and there wouldbe no Peeves ... but if he came up the stairs, he wouldspot the Marauder’s Map ... and Invisibility Cloak ornot, the map would show “Harry Potter” standingexactly where he was.

“Egg?” Filch said quietly at the foot of the stairs. “Mysweet!” — Mrs. Norris was obviously with him — “Thisis a Triwizard clue! This belongs to a schoolchampion!”

Harry felt sick; his heart was hammering very fast —

“PEEVES!” Filch roared gleefully. “You’ve beenstealing!”

He ripped back the tapestry below, and Harry saw hishorrible, pouchy face and bulging, pale eyes staringup the dark and (to Filch) deserted staircase.

“Hiding, are you?” he said softly. “I’m coming to getyou, Peeves. ... You’ve gone and stolen a Triwizardclue, Peeves. ... Dumbledore’ll have you out of herefor this, you filthy, pilfering poltergeist. ...”

Page | 517

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Filch started to climb the stairs, his scrawny, dust-colored cat at his heels. Mrs. Norris’s lamp-like eyes,so very like her master’s, were fixed directly uponHarry. He had had occasion before now to wonderwhether the Invisibility Cloak worked on cats. ... Sickwith apprehension, he watched Filch drawing nearerand nearer in his old flannel dressing gown — hetried desperately to pull his trapped leg free, but itmerely sank a few more inches — any second now,Filch was going to spot the map or walk right into him

“Filch? What’s going on?”

Filch stopped a few steps below Harry and turned. Atthe foot of the stairs stood the only person who couldmake Harry’s situation worse: Snape. He was wearinga long gray nightshirt and he looked livid.

“It’s Peeves, Professor,” Filch whispered malevolently.“He threw this egg down the stairs.”

Snape climbed up the stairs quickly and stoppedbeside Filch. Harry gritted his teeth, convinced hisloudly thumping heart would give him away at anysecond. ...

“Peeves?” said Snape softly, staring at the egg inFilch’s hands. “But Peeves couldn’t get into my office.

“This egg was in your office, Professor?”

“Of course not,” Snape snapped. “I heard banging andwailing —”

“Yes, Professor, that was the egg —”

“— I was coming to investigate —”

Page | 518 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“— Peeves threw it, Professor —”

“— and when I passed my office, I saw that thetorches were lit and a cupboard door was ajar!Somebody has been searching it!”

“But Peeves couldn’t —”

“I know he couldn’t, Filch!” Snape snapped again. “Iseal my office with a spell none but a wizard couldbreak!” Snape looked up the stairs, straight throughHarry, and then down into the corridor below. “I wantyou to come and help me search for the intruder,Filch.”

“I — yes, Professor — but —”

Filch looked yearningly up the stairs, right throughHarry, who could see that he was very reluctant toforgo the chance of cornering Peeves. Go, Harrypleaded with him silently, go with Snape ... go ... Mrs.Norris was peering around Filch’s legs. ... Harry hadthe distinct impression that she could smell him. ...Why had he filled that bath with so much perfumedfoam?

“The thing is, Professor,” said Filch plaintively, “theheadmaster will have to listen to me this time. Peeveshas been stealing from a student, it might be mychance to get him thrown out of the castle once andfor all —”

“Filch, I don’t give a damn about that wretchedpoltergeist; it’s my office that’s —”

Clunk. Clunk. Clunk.

Snape stopped talking very abruptly. He and Filchboth looked down at the foot of the stairs. Harry saw

Page | 519 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mad-Eye Moody limp into sight through the narrowgap between their heads. Moody was wearing his oldtraveling cloak over his nightshirt and leaning on hisstaff as usual.

“Pajama party, is it?” he growled up the stairs.

“Professor Snape and I heard noises, Professor,” saidFilch at once. “Peeves the Poltergeist, throwing thingsaround as usual — and then Professor Snapediscovered that someone had broken into his off —”

“Shut up!” Snape hissed to Filch.

Moody took a step closer to the foot of the stairs.

Harry saw Moody’s magical eye travel over Snape, andthen, unmistakably, onto himself.

Harry’s heart gave a horrible jolt. Moody could seethrough Invisibility Cloaks ... he alone could see thefull strangeness of the scene: Snape in his nightshirt,Filch clutching the egg, and he, Harry, trapped in thestairs behind them. Moody’s lopsided gash of a mouthopened in surprise. For a few seconds, he and Harrystared straight into each other’s eyes. Then Moodyclosed his mouth and turned his blue eye upon Snapeagain.

“Did I hear that correctly, Snape?” he asked slowly.“Someone broke into your office?”

“It is unimportant,” said Snape coldly.

“On the contrary,” growled Moody, “it is veryimportant. Who’d want to break into your office?”

“A student, I daresay,” said Snape. Harry could see avein flickering horribly on Snape’s greasy temple. “Ithas happened before. Potion ingredients have gone

Page | 520 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

missing from my private store cupboard ... studentsattempting illicit mixtures, no doubt. ...”

“Reckon they were after potion ingredients, eh?” saidMoody. “Not hiding anything else in your office, areyou?”

Harry saw the edge of Snape’s sallow face turn anasty brick color, the vein in his temple pulsing morerapidly.

“You know I’m hiding nothing, Moody,” he said in asoft and dangerous voice, “as you’ve searched myoffice pretty thoroughly yourself.”

Moody’s face twisted into a smile. “Auror’s privilege,Snape. Dumbledore told me to keep an eye —”

“Dumbledore happens to trust me,” said Snapethrough clenched teeth. “I refuse to believe that hegave you orders to search my office!”

“ ’Course Dumbledore trusts you,” growled Moody.“He’s a trusting man, isn’t he? Believes in secondchances. But me — I say there are spots that don’tcome off, Snape. Spots that never come off, d’youknow what I mean?”

Snape suddenly did something very strange. Heseized his left forearm convulsively with his righthand, as though something on it had hurt him.

Moody laughed. “Get back to bed, Snape.”

“You don’t have the authority to send me anywhere!”Snape hissed, letting go of his arm as though angrywith himself. “I have as much right to prowl thisschool after dark as you do!”

Page | 521

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Prowl away,” said Moody, but his voice was full ofmenace. “I look forward to meeting you in a darkcorridor some time. ... You’ve dropped something, bythe way. ...”

With a stab of horror, Harry saw Moody point at theMarauder’s Map, still lying on the staircase six stepsbelow him. As Snape and Filch both turned to look atit, Harry threw caution to the winds; he raised hisarms under the cloak and waved furiously at Moodyto attract his attention, mouthing “It’s mine! Mine!”

Snape had reached out for it, a horrible expression ofdawning comprehension on his face —

“Accio Parchments

The map flew up into the air, slipped through Snape’soutstretched fingers, and soared down the stairs intoMoody’s hand.

“My mistake,” Moody said calmly. “It’s mine —must’ve dropped it earlier —”

But Snape’s black eyes were darting from the egg inFilch’s arms to the map in Moody’s hand, and Harrycould tell he was putting two and two together, asonly Snape could. ...

“Potter,” he said quietly.

“What’s that?” said Moody calmly, folding up the mapand pocketing it.

“Potter!” Snape snarled, and he actually turned hishead and stared right at the place where Harry was,as though he could suddenly see him. “That egg isPotter’s egg. That piece of parchment belongs to

Page | 522

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Potter. I have seen it before, I recognize it! Potter ishere! Potter, in his Invisibility Cloak!”

Snape stretched out his hands like a blind man andbegan to move up the stairs; Harry could have swornhis over-large nostrils were dilating, trying to sniffHarry out — trapped, Harry leaned backward, tryingto avoid Snape’s fingertips, but any moment now —

“There’s nothing there, Snape!” barked Moody, “butI’ll be happy to tell the headmaster how quickly yourmind jumped to Harry Potter!”

“Meaning what?” Snape turned again to look atMoody, his hands still outstretched, inches fromHarry’s chest.

“Meaning that Dumbledore’s very interested to knowwho’s got it in for that boy!” said Moody, limpingnearer still to the foot of the stairs. “And so am I,Snape ... very interested. ...” The torchlight flickeredacross his mangled face, so that the scars, and thechunk missing from his nose, looked deeper anddarker than ever.

Snape was looking down at Moody, and Harrycouldn’t see the expression on his face. For amoment, nobody moved or said anything. Then Snapeslowly lowered his hands.

“I merely thought,” said Snape, in a voice of forcedcalm, “that if Potter was wandering around afterhours again ... it’s an unfortunate habit of his ... heshould be stopped. For — for his own safety.”

“Ah, I see,” said Moody softly. “Got Potter’s bestinterests at heart, have you?”

Page | 523

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

There was a pause. Snape and Moody were stillstaring at each other. Mrs. Norris gave a loud meow,still peering around Filch’s legs, looking for the sourceof Harry’s bubble-bath smell.

“I think I will go back to bed,” Snape said curtly.

“Best idea you’ve had all night,” said Moody. “Now,Filch, if you’ll just give me that egg —”

“No!” said Filch, clutching the egg as though it werehis firstborn son. “Professor Moody, this is evidence ofPeeves’ treachery!”

“It’s the property of the champion he stole it from,”said Moody. “Hand it over, now.”

Snape swept downstairs and passed Moody withoutanother word. Filch made a chirruping noise to Mrs.Norris, who stared blankly at Harry for a few moreseconds before turning and following her master. Stillbreathing very fast, Harry heard Snape walking awaydown the corridor; Filch handed Moody the egg anddisappeared from view too, muttering to Mrs. Norris.“Never mind, my sweet ... we’ll see Dumbledore in themorning ... tell him what Peeves was up to. ...”

A door slammed. Harry was left staring down atMoody, who placed his staff on the bottommost stairand started to climb laboriously toward him, a dullclunk on every other step.

“Close shave, Potter,” he muttered.

“Yeah ... I — er ... thanks,” said Harry weakly.

“What is this thing?” said Moody, drawing theMarauders Map out of his pocket and unfolding it.

Page | 524

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Map of Hogwarts,” said Harry, hoping Moody wasgoing to pull him out of the staircase soon; his legwas really hurting him.

“Merlin’s beard,” Moody whispered, staring at themap, his magical eye going haywire. “This ... this issome map, Potter!”

“Yeah, it’s ... quite useful,” Harry said. His eyes werestarting to water from the pain. “Er — ProfessorMoody, d’you think you could help me — ?”

“What? Oh! Yes ... yes, of course ...”

Moody took hold of Harry’s arms and pulled; Harry’sleg came free of the trick step, and he climbed ontothe one above it. Moody was still gazing at the map.

“Potter ...” he said slowly, “you didn’t happen, by anychance, to see who broke into Snape’s office, did you?On this map, I mean?”

“Er ... yeah, I did ...” Harry admitted. “It was Mr.Crouch.”

Moody’s magical eye whizzed over the entire surface ofthe map. He looked suddenly alarmed.

“Crouch?” he said. “You’re — you’re sure, Potter?”

“Positive,” said Harry.

“Well, he’s not here anymore,” said Moody, his eyestill whizzing over the map. “Crouch ... that’s very —very interesting. ...”

He said nothing for almost a minute, still staring atthe map. Harry could tell that this news meantsomething to Moody and very much wanted to know

Page | 525 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

what it was. He wondered whether he dared ask.Moody scared him slightly ... yet Moody had justhelped him avoid an awful lot of trouble. ...

“Er ... Professor Moody ... why d’you reckon Mr.Crouch wanted to look around S nape’s office?”

Moody’s magical eye left the map and fixed, quivering,upon Harry. It was a penetrating glare, and Harry hadthe impression that Moody was sizing him up,wondering whether to answer or not, or how much totell him.

“Put it this way, Potter,” Moody muttered finally, “theysay old Mad-Eye’s obsessed with catching Darkwizards ... but I’m nothing — nothing— compared toBarty Crouch.”

He continued to stare at the map. Harry was burningto know more.

“Professor Moody?” he said again. “D’you think ...could this have anything to do with ... maybe Mr.Crouch thinks there’s something going on. ...”

“Like what?” said Moody sharply.

Harry wondered how much he dare say. He didn’twant Moody to guess that he had a source ofinformation outside Hogwarts; that might lead totricky questions about Sirius.

“I don’t know,” Harry muttered, “odd stuff’s beenhappening lately, hasn’t it? It’s been in the DailyProphet... the Dark Mark at the World Cup, and theDeath Eaters and everything. ...”

Both of Moody’s mismatched eyes widened.

Page | 526

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You’re a sharp boy, Potter,” he said. His magical eyeroved back to the Marauder’s Map. “Crouch could bethinking along those lines,” he said slowly. “Verypossible ... there have been some funny rumors flyingaround lately — helped along by Rita Skeeter, ofcourse. It’s making a lot of people nervous, I reckon.”

A grim smile twisted his lopsided mouth. “Oh ifthere’s one thing I hate,” he muttered, more to himselfthan to Harry, and his magical eye was fixed on theleft-hand corner of the map, “it’s a Death Eater whowalked free. ...”

Harry stared at him. Could Moody possibly meanwhat Harry thought he meant?

“And now I want to ask you a question, Potter,” saidMoody in a more businesslike tone.

Harry’s heart sank; he had thought this was coming.Moody was going to ask where he had got this map,which was a very dubious magical object — and thestory of how it had fallen into his hands incriminatednot only him, but his own father, Fred and GeorgeWeasley, and Professor Lupin, their last DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts teacher. Moody waved the mapin front of Harry, who braced himself —

“Can I borrow this?”

“Oh!” said Harry.

He was very fond of his map, but on the other hand,he was extremely relieved that Moody wasn’t askingwhere he’d got it, and there was no doubt that heowed Moody a favor.

“Yeah, okay.”

Page | 527

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Good boy,” growled Moody. “I can make good use ofthis ... this might be exactly what I’ve been lookingfor. ... Right, bed, Potter, come on, now. ...”

They climbed to the top of the stairs together, Moodystill examining the map as though it was a treasurethe like of which he had never seen before. Theywalked in silence to the door of Moody’s office, wherehe stopped and looked up at Harry.

“You ever thought of a career as an Auror, Potter?”

“No,” said Harry, taken aback.

“You want to consider it,” said Moody, nodding andlooking at Harry thoughtfully. “Yes, indeed ... andincidentally ... I’m guessing you weren’t just takingthat egg for a walk tonight?”

“Er — no,” said Harry, grinning. “I’ve been workingout the clue.”

Moody winked at him, his magical eye going haywireagain.

“Nothing like a nighttime stroll to give you ideas,Potter. ... See you in the morning. ...”

He went back into his office, staring down at theMarauder’s Map again, and closed the door behindhim.

Harry walked slowly back to Gryffindor Tower, lost inthought about Snape, and Crouch, and what it allmeant. ... Why was Crouch pretending to be ill, if hecould manage to get to Hogwarts when he wanted to?What did he think Snape was concealing in his office?

Page | 528

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

And Moody thought he, Harry, ought to be an Auror!Interesting idea ... but somehow, Harry thought, ashe got quietly into his four-poster ten minutes later,the egg and the cloak now safely back in his trunk, hethought he’d like to check how scarred the rest ofthem were before he chose it as a career.

Page | 529

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE SECOND TASK

“You said you’d already worked out that egg clue!”said Hermione indignantly.

“Keep your voice down!” said Harry crossly. “I justneed to — sort of fine-tune it, all right?”

He, Ron, and Hermione were sitting at the very backof the Charms class with a table to themselves. Theywere supposed to be practicing the opposite of theSummoning Charm today — the Banishing Charm.Owing to the potential for nasty accidents whenobjects kept flying across the room, Professor Flitwickhad given each student a stack of cushions on whichto practice, the theory being that these wouldn’t hurtanyone if they went off target. It was a good theory,but it wasn’t working very well. Neville’s aim was sopoor that he kept accidentally sending much heavierthings flying across the room — Professor Flitwick, forinstance.

“Just forget the egg for a minute, all right?” Harryhissed as Professor Flitwick went whizzing resignedly

Page | 530 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

past them, landing on top of a large cabinet. “I’mtrying to tell you about Snape and Moody. ...”

This class was an ideal cover for a privateconversation, as everyone was having far too muchfun to pay them any attention. Harry had beenrecounting his adventures of the previous night inwhispered installments for the last half hour.

“Snape said Moody’s searched his office as well?” Ronwhispered, his eyes alight with interest as heBanished a cushion with a sweep of his wand (itsoared into the air and knocked Parvati’s hat off).“What ... d’you reckon Moody’s here to keep an eye onSnape as well as Karkaroff?”

“Well, I dunno if that’s what Dumbledore asked himto do, but he’s definitely doing it,” said Harry, wavinghis wand without paying much attention, so that hiscushion did an odd sort of belly flop off the desk.“Moody said Dumbledore only lets Snape stay herebecause he’s giving him a second chance orsomething. ...”

“What?” said Ron, his eyes widening, his next cushionspinning high into the air, ricocheting off thechandelier, and dropping heavily onto Flitwick’s desk.“Harry ... maybe Moody thinks Snape put your namein the Goblet of Fire!”

“Oh Ron,” said Hermione, shaking her headsceptically, “we thought Snape was trying to killHarry before, and it turned out he was saving Harry’slife, remember?”

She Banished a cushion and it flew across the roomand landed in the box they were all supposed to beaiming at. Harry looked at Hermione, thinking ... itwas true that Snape had saved his life once, but the

Page | 531 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

odd thing was, Snape definitely loathed him, just ashe’d loathed Harry’s father when they had been atschool together. Snape loved taking points fromHarry, and had certainly never missed an opportunityto give him punishments, or even to suggest that heshould be suspended from the school.

“I don’t care what Moody says,” Hermione went on.“Dumbledore’s not stupid. He was right to trustHagrid and Professor Lupin, even though loads ofpeople wouldn’t have given them jobs, so whyshouldn’t he be right about Snape, even if Snape is abit —”

“— evil,” said Ron promptly. “Come on, Hermione,why are all these Dark wizard catchers searching hisoffice, then?”

“Why has Mr. Crouch been pretending to be ill?” saidHermione, ignoring Ron. “It’s a bit funny, isn’t it, thathe can’t manage to come to the Yule Ball, but he canget up here in the middle of the night when he wantsto?”

“You just don’t like Crouch because of that elf,Winky,” said Ron, sending a cushion soaring into thewindow.

“You just want to think Snape’s up to something,”said Hermione, sending her cushion zooming neatlyinto the box.

“I just want to know what Snape did with his firstchance, if he’s on his second one,” said Harry grimly,and his cushion, to his very great surprise, flewstraight across the room and landed neatly on top ofHermione’s.

Page | 532

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Obedient to Sirius’s wish of hearing about anythingodd at Hogwarts, Harry sent him a letter by brownowl that night, explaining all about Mr. Crouchbreaking into Snape’s office, and Moody and Snape’sconversation. Then Harry turned his attention inearnest to the most urgent problem facing him: howto survive underwater for an hour on the twenty-fourth of February.

Ron quite liked the idea of using the SummoningCharm again — Harry had explained about Aqua-Lungs, and Ron couldn’t see why Harry shouldn’tSummon one from the nearest Muggle town.

Hermione squashed this plan by pointing out that, inthe unlikely event that Harry managed to learn howto operate an Aqua-Lung within the set limit of anhour, he was sure to be disqualified for breaking theInternational Code of Wizarding Secrecy — it was toomuch to hope that no Muggles would spot an Aqua-Lung zooming across the countryside to Hogwarts.

“Of course, the ideal solution would be for you toTransfigure yourself into a submarine or something,”Hermione said. “If only we’d done humanTransfiguration already! But I don’t think we startthat until sixth year, and it can go badly wrong if youdon’t know what you’re doing. ...”

“Yeah, I don’t fancy walking around with a periscopesticking out of my head,” said Harry. “I s’pose I couldalways attack someone in front of Moody; he might doit for me. ...”

“I don’t think he’d let you choose what you wanted tobe turned into, though,” said Hermione seriously.

“No, I think your best chance is some sort of charm.”

So Harry, thinking that he would soon have hadenough of the library to last him a lifetime, buried

Page | 533 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

himself once more among the dusty volumes, lookingfor any spell that might enable a human to survivewithout oxygen. However, though he, Ron, andHermione searched through their lunchtimes,evenings, and whole weekends — though Harry askedProfessor McGonagall for a note of permission to usethe Restricted Section, and even asked the irritable,vulture-like librarian, Madam Pince, for help — theyfound nothing whatsoever that would enable Harry tospend an hour underwater and live to tell the tale.

Familiar flutterings of panic were starting to disturbHarry now, and he was finding it difficult toconcentrate in class again. The lake, which Harry hadalways taken for granted as just another feature ofthe grounds, drew his eyes whenever he was near aclassroom window, a great, iron-gray mass of chillywater, whose dark and icy depths were starting toseem as distant as the moon.

Just as it had before he faced the Horntail, time wasslipping away as though somebody had bewitched theclocks to go extra-fast. There was a week to go beforeFebruary the twenty-fourth (there was still time) ...there were five days to go (he was bound to findsomething soon) ... three days to go (please let me findsomething ... please) ...

With two days left, Harry started to go off food again.The only good thing about breakfast on Monday wasthe return of the brown owl he had sent to Sirius. Hepulled off the parchment, unrolled it, and saw theshortest letter Sirius had ever written to him.

Send date of next Hogsmeade weekend by return owl.

Harry turned the parchment over and looked at theback, hoping to see something else, but it was blank.

Page | 534

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Weekend after next,” whispered Hermione, who hadread the note over Harry’s shoulder. “Here — take myquill and send this owl back straight away.”

Harry scribbled the dates down on the back ofSirius’s letter, tied it onto the brown owl’s leg, andwatched it take flight again. What had he expected?Advice on how to survive underwater? He had been sointent on telling Sirius all about Snape and Moody hehad completely forgotten to mention the egg’s clue.

“What’s he want to know about the next Hogsmeadeweekend for?” said Ron.

“Dunno,” said Harry dully. The momentary happinessthat had flared inside him at the sight of the owl haddied. “Come on ... Care of Magical Creatures.”

Whether Hagrid was trying to make up for the Blast-Ended Skrewts, or because there were now only twoskrewts left, or because he was trying to prove hecould do anything that Professor Grubbly-Plankcould, Harry didn’t know, but Hagrid had beencontinuing her lessons on unicorns ever since he’dreturned to work. It turned out that Hagrid knewquite as much about unicorns as he did aboutmonsters, though it was clear that he found their lackof poisonous fangs disappointing.

Today he had managed to capture two unicorn foals.Unlike full-grown unicorns, they were pure gold.Parvati and Lavender went into transports of delightat the sight of them, and even Pansy Parkinson hadto work hard to conceal how much she liked them.

“Easier ter spot than the adults,” Hagrid told theclass. “They turn silver when they’re abou’ two yearsold, an’ they grow horns at aroun’ four. Don’ go purewhite till they’re full grown, ’round about seven.

Page | 535 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

They’re a bit more trustin’ when they’re babies ... don’mind boys so much. ... C’mon, move in a bit, yeh canpat ’em if yeh want ... give ’em a few o’ these sugarlumps. ...

“You okay, Harry?” Hagrid muttered, moving asideslightly, while most of the others swarmed around thebaby unicorns.

“Yeah,” said Harry.

“Jus’ nervous, eh?” said Hagrid.

“Bit,” said Harry.

“Harry,” said Hagrid, clapping a massive hand on hisshoulder, so that Harry’s knees buckled under itsweight, “I’d’ve bin worried before I saw yeh take ontha’ Horntail, but I know now yeh can do anythin’ yehset yer mind ter. I’m not worried at all. Yeh’re goin’ terbe fine. Got yer clue worked out, haven’ yeh?”

Harry nodded, but even as he did so, an insane urgeto confess that he didn’t have any idea how to surviveat the bottom of the lake for an hour came over him.He looked up at Hagrid — perhaps he had to go intothe lake sometimes, to deal with the creatures in it?He looked after everything else on the grounds, afterall —

“Yeh’re goin’ ter win,” Hagrid growled, patting Harry’sshoulder again, so that Harry actually felt himselfsink a couple of inches into the soft ground. “I knowit. I can feel it. Yeh’re goin’ ter win, Harry.”

Harry just couldn’t bring himself to wipe the happy,confident smile off Hagrid’s face. Pretending he wasinterested in the young unicorns, he forced a smile in

Page | 536

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

return, and moved forward to pat them with theothers.

By the evening before the second task, Harry felt asthough he were trapped in a nightmare. He was fullyaware that even if, by some miracle, he managed tofind a suitable spell, he’d have a real job mastering itovernight. How could he have let this happen? Whyhadn’t he got to work on the egg’s clue sooner? Whyhad he ever let his mind wander in class — what if ateacher had once mentioned how to breatheunderwater?

He sat with Hermione and Ron in the library as thesun set outside, tearing feverishly through page afterpage of spells, hidden from one another by themassive piles of books on the desk in front of each ofthem. Harry’s heart gave a huge leap every time hesaw the word “water” on a page, but more often thannot it was merely “Take two pints of water, half apound of shredded mandrake leaves, and a newt ...”

“I don’t reckon it can be done,” said Ron’s voice flatlyfrom the other side of the table. “There’s nothing.Nothing. Closest was that thing to dry up puddles andponds, that Drought Charm, but that was nowherenear powerful enough to drain the lake.”

“There must be something,” Hermione muttered,moving a candle closer to her. Her eyes were so tiredshe was poring over the tiny print of Olde andForgotten Bewitchments and Charmes with her noseabout an inch from the page. “They’d never have set atask that was undoable.”

“They have,” said Ron. “Harry, just go down to thelake tomorrow, right, stick your head in, yell at themerpeople to give back whatever they’ve nicked, andsee if they chuck it out. Best you can do, mate.”

Page | 537 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“There’s a way of doing it!” Hermione said crossly.“There just has to be!”

She seemed to be taking the library’s lack of usefulinformation on the subject as a personal insult; it hadnever failed her before.

“I know what I should have done,” said Harry, resting,facedown, on Saucy Tricks for Tricky Sorts. “Ishould’ve learned to be an Animagus like Sirius.”

An Animagus was a wizard who could transform intoan animal.

“Yeah, you could’ve turned into a goldfish any timeyou wanted!” said Ron.

“Or a frog,” yawned Harry. He was exhausted.

“It takes years to become an Animagus, and then youhave to register yourself and everything,” saidHermione vaguely, now squinting down the index ofWeird Wizarding Dilemmas and Their Solutions.“Professor McGonagall told us, remember ... you’vegot to register yourself with the Improper Use of MagicOffice ... what animal you become, and yourmarkings, so you can’t abuse it. ...”

“Hermione, I was joking,” said Harry wearily. “I know Ihaven’t got a chance of turning into a frog bytomorrow morning. ...”

“Oh this is no use,” Hermione said, snapping shutWeird Wizarding Dilemmas. “Who on earth wants tomake their nose hair grow into ringlets?”

“I wouldn’t mind,” said Fred Weasley’s voice. “Be atalking point, wouldn’t it?”

Page | 538

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked up. Fred andGeorge had just emerged from behind somebookshelves.

“What’re you two doing here?” Ron asked.

“Looking for you,” said George. “McGonagall wantsyou, Ron. And you, Hermione.”

“Why?” said Hermione, looking surprised.

“Dunno ... she was looking a bit grim, though,” saidFred.

“We’re supposed to take you down to her office,” saidGeorge.

Ron and Hermione stared at Harry, who felt hisstomach drop. Was Professor McGonagall about to tellRon and Hermione off? Perhaps she’d noticed howmuch they were helping him, when he ought to beworking out how to do the task alone?

“Well meet you back in the common room,” Hermionetold Harry as she got up to go with Ron — both ofthem looked very anxious. “Bring as many of thesebooks as you can, okay?”

“Right,” said Harry uneasily.

By eight o’clock, Madam Pince had extinguished allthe lamps and came to chivvy Harry out of the library.Staggering under the weight of as many books as hecould carry, Harry returned to the Gryffindor commonroom, pulled a table into a corner, and continued tosearch. There was nothing in Madcap Magic forWacky Warlocks ... nothing in A Guide to MedievalSorcery ... not one mention of underwater exploits inAn Anthology of Eighteenth-Century Charms, or inPage | 539 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dreadful Denizens of the Deep, or Powers You NeverKnew You Had and What to Do with Them Now You’veWised Up.

Crookshanks crawled into Harry’s lap and curled up,purring deeply. The common room emptied slowlyaround Harry. People kept wishing him luck for thenext morning in cheery, confident voices like Hagrid’s,all of them apparently convinced that he was about topull off another stunning performance like the one hehad managed in the first task. Harry couldn’t answerthem, he just nodded, feeling as though there were agolfball stuck in his throat. By ten to midnight, hewas alone in the room with Crookshanks. He hadsearched all the remaining books, and Ron andHermione had not come back.

It’s over, he told himself. You can’t do it. You’ll justhave to go down to the lake in the morning and tellthe judges. ...

He imagined himself explaining that he couldn’t dothe task. He pictured Bagman’s look of round-eyedsurprise, Karkaroff’s satisfied, yellow-toothed smile.

He could almost hear Fleur Delacour saying “I knew it... ’e is too young, ’e is only a little boy.” He saw Malfoyflashing his POTTER STINKS badge at the front of thecrowd, saw Hagrid’s crestfallen, disbelieving face. ...

Forgetting that Crookshanks was on his lap, Harrystood up very suddenly; Crookshanks hissed angrilyas he landed on the floor, gave Harry a disgustedlook, and stalked away with his bottlebrush tail in theair, but Harry was already hurrying up the spiralstaircase to his dormitory. ... He would grab theInvisibility Cloak and go back to the library, he’d staythere all night if he had to. ...

Page | 540

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Lumos,” Harry whispered fifteen minutes later as heopened the library door.

Wand tip alight, he crept along the bookshelves,pulling down more books — books of hexes andcharms, books on merpeople and water monsters,books on famous witches and wizards, on magicalinventions, on anything at all that might include onepassing reference to underwater survival. He carriedthem over to a table, then set to work, searching themby the narrow beam of his wand, occasionallychecking his watch. ...

One in the morning ... two in the morning ... the onlyway he could keep going was to tell himself, over andover again, next book ...in the next one ... the next one

The mermaid in the painting in the prefects’bathroom was laughing. Harry was bobbing like acork in bubbly water next to her rock, while she heldhis Firebolt over his head.

“Come and get it!” she giggled maliciously. “Come on,jump!”

“I can’t,” Harry panted, snatching at the Firebolt, andstruggling not to sink. “Give it to me!”

But she just poked him painfully in the side with theend of the broomstick, laughing at him.

“That hurts — get off — ouch —”

“Harry Potter must wake up, sir!”

“Stop poking me —”

Page | 541

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Dobby must poke Harry Potter, sir, he must wakeup!”

Harry opened his eyes. He was still in the library; theInvisibility Cloak had slipped off his head as he’dslept, and the side of his face was stuck to the pagesof Where There’s a Wand, There’s a Way. He sat up,straightening his glasses, blinking in the brightdaylight.

“Harry Potter needs to hurry!” squeaked Dobby. “Thesecond task starts in ten minutes, and Harry Potter

“Ten minutes?” Harry croaked. “Ten — ten minutes?”

He looked down at his watch. Dobby was right. It wastwenty past nine. A large, dead weight seemed to fallthrough Harry’s chest into his stomach.

“Hurry, Harry Potter!” squeaked Dobby, plucking atHarry’s sleeve. “You is supposed to be down by thelake with the other champions, sir!”

“It’s too late, Dobby,” Harry said hopelessly. “I’m notdoing the task, I don’t know how —”

“Harry Potter will do the task!” squeaked the elf.“Dobby knew Harry had not found the right book, soDobby did it for him!”

“What?” said Harry. “But you don’t know what thesecond task is —”

“Dobby knows, sir! Harry Potter has to go into thelake and find his Wheezy —”

“Find my what?”

Page | 542

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“— and take his Wheezy back from the merpeople!”

“What’s a Wheezy?”

“Your Wheezy, sir, your Wheezy — Wheezy who isgiving Dobby his sweater!”

Dobby plucked at the shrunken maroon sweater hewas now wearing over his shorts.

“What?” Harry gasped. “They’ve got ... they’ve gotRon?”

“The thing Harry Potter will miss most, sir!” squeakedDobby. “ ‘But past an hour —’ ”

“— ‘the prospect’s black,’ ” Harry recited, staring,horror-struck, at the elf. “ ‘Too late, it’s gone, it won’tcome back.’ Dobby — what’ve I got to do?”

“You has to eat this, sir!” squeaked the elf, and he puthis hand in the pocket of his shorts and drew out aball of what looked like slimy, grayish-green rat tails.“Right before you go into the lake, sir — gillyweed!”

“What’s it do?” said Harry, staring at the gillyweed.

“It will make Harry Potter breathe underwater, sir!”

“Dobby,” said Harry frantically, “listen — are you sureabout this?”

He couldn’t quite forget that the last time Dobby hadtried to “help” him, he had ended up with no bones inhis right arm.

“Dobby is quite sure, sir!” said the elf earnestly.“Dobby hears things, sir, he is a house-elf, he goes allover the castle as he lights the fires and mops the

Page | 543 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

floors. Dobby heard Professor McGonagall andProfessor Moody in the staffroom, talking about thenext task. ... Dobby cannot let Harry Potter lose hisWheezy!”

Harry’s doubts vanished. Jumping to his feet hepulled off the Invisibility Cloak, stuffed it into his bag,grabbed the gillyweed, and put it into his pocket, thentore out of the library with Dobby at his heels.

“Dobby is supposed to be in the kitchens, sir!” Dobbysquealed as they burst into the corridor. “Dobby willbe missed — good luck, Harry Potter, sir, good luck!”

“See you later, Dobby!” Harry shouted, and hesprinted along the corridor and down the stairs, threeat a time.

The entrance hall contained a few last-minutestragglers, all leaving the Great Hall after breakfastand heading through the double oak doors to watchthe second task. They stared as Harry flashed past,sending Colin and Dennis Creevey flying as he leaptdown the stone steps and out onto the bright, chillygrounds.

As he pounded down the lawn he saw that the seatsthat had encircled the dragons’ enclosure inNovember were now ranged along the opposite bank,rising in stands that were packed to the burstingpoint and reflected in the lake below. The excitedbabble of the crowd echoed strangely across the wateras Harry ran flat-out around the other side of the laketoward the judges, who were sitting at another gold-draped table at the water’s edge. Cedric, Fleur, andKrum were beside the judges’ table, watching Harrysprint toward them.

Page | 544

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm ... here ...” Harry panted, skidding to a halt inthe mud and accidentally splattering Fleur’s robes.

“Where have you been?” said a bossy, disapprovingvoice. “The task’s about to start!”

Harry looked around. Percy Weasley was sitting at thejudges’ table — Mr. Crouch had failed to turn upagain.

“Now, now, Percy!” said Ludo Bagman, who waslooking intensely relieved to see Harry. “Let him catchhis breath!”

Dumbledore smiled at Harry, but Karkaroff andMadame Maxime didn’t look at all pleased to see him.... It was obvious from the looks on their faces thatthey had thought he wasn’t going to turn up.

Harry bent over, hands on his knees, gasping forbreath; he had a stitch in his side that felt as thoughhe had a knife between his ribs, but there was notime to get rid of it; Ludo Bagman was now movingamong the champions, spacing them along the bankat intervals of ten feet. Harry was on the very end ofthe line, next to Krum, who was wearing swimmingtrunks and was holding his wand ready.

“All right, Harry?” Bagman whispered as he movedHarry a few feet farther away from Krum. “Know whatyou’re going to do?”

“Yeah,” Harry panted, massaging his ribs.

Bagman gave Harry’s shoulder a quick squeeze andreturned to the judges’ table; he pointed his wand athis throat as he had done at the World Cup, said,“Sonorusl” and his voice boomed out across the darkwater toward the stands.

Page | 545 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Well, all our champions are ready for the secondtask, which will start on my whistle. They haveprecisely an hour to recover what has been takenfrom them. On the count of three, then. One ... two ...three!”

The whistle echoed shrilly in the cold, still air; thestands erupted with cheers and applause; withoutlooking to see what the other champions were doing,Harry pulled off his shoes and socks, pulled thehandful of gillyweed out of his pocket, stuffed it intohis mouth, and waded out into the lake.

It was so cold he felt the skin on his legs searing asthough this were fire, not icy water. His sodden robesweighed him down as he walked in deeper; now thewater was over his knees, and his rapidly numbingfeet were slipping over silt and flat, slimy stones. Hewas chewing the gillyweed as hard and fast as hecould; it felt unpleasantly slimy and rubbery, likeoctopus tentacles. Waist-deep in the freezing water hestopped, swallowed, and waited for something tohappen.

He could hear laughter in the crowd and knew hemust look stupid, walking into the lake withoutshowing any sign of magical power. The part of himthat was still dry was covered in goose pimples; halfimmersed in the icy water, a cruel breeze lifting hishair, Harry started to shiver violently. He avoidedlooking at the stands; the laughter was becominglouder, and there were catcalls and jeering from theSlytherins. ...

Then, quite suddenly, Harry felt as though aninvisible pillow had been pressed over his mouth andnose. He tried to draw breath, but it made his headspin; his lungs were empty, and he suddenly felt apiercing pain on either side of his neck —

Page | 546 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry clapped his hands around his throat and felttwo large slits just below his ears, flapping in the coldair. ... He had gills. Without pausing to think, he didthe only thing that made sense — he flung himselfforward into the water.

The first gulp of icy lake water felt like the breath oflife. His head had stopped spinning; he took anothergreat gulp of water and felt it pass smoothly throughhis gills, sending oxygen back to his brain. Hestretched out his hands in front of him and stared atthem. They looked green and ghostly under the water,and they had become webbed. He twisted around andlooked at his bare feet — they had become elongatedand the toes were webbed too: It looked as though hehad sprouted flippers.

The water didn’t feel icy anymore either ... on thecontrary, he felt pleasantly cool and very light. ...Harry struck out once more, marveling at how far andfast his flipper-like feet propelled him through thewater, and noticing how clearly he could see, and howhe no longer seemed to need to blink. He had soonswum so far into the lake that he could no longer seethe bottom. He flipped over and dived into its depths.

Silence pressed upon his ears as he soared over astrange, dark, foggy landscape. He could only see tenfeet around him, so that as he sped through the waternew scenes seemed to loom suddenly out of theoncoming darkness: forests of rippling, tangled blackweed, wide plains of mud littered with dull,glimmering stones. He swam deeper and deeper, outtoward the middle of the lake, his eyes wide, staringthrough the eerily gray-lit water around him to theshadows beyond, where the water became opaque.

Small fish flickered past him like silver darts. Once ortwice he thought he saw something larger moving

Page | 547 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

ahead of him, but when he got nearer, he discoveredit to be nothing but a large, blackened log, or a denseclump of weed. There was no sign of any of the otherchampions, merpeople, Ron — nor, thankfully, thegiant squid.

Light green weed stretched ahead of him as far as hecould see, two feet deep, like a meadow of veryovergrown grass. Harry was staring unblinkinglyahead of him, trying to discern shapes through thegloom ... and then, without warning, somethinggrabbed hold of his ankle.

Harry twisted his body around and saw a grindylow, asmall, horned water demon, poking out of the weed,its long fingers clutched tightly around Harry’s leg, itspointed fangs bared — Harry stuck his webbed handquickly inside his robes and fumbled for his wand. Bythe time he had grasped it, two more grindylows hadrisen out of the weed, had seized handfuls of Harry’srobes, and were attempting to drag him down.

“Relashio\” Harry shouted, except that no sound cameout. ... A large bubble issued from his mouth, and hiswand, instead of sending sparks at the grindylows,pelted them with what seemed to be a jet of boilingwater, for where it struck them, angry red patchesappeared on their green skin. Harry pulled his ankleout of the grindylows grip and swam, as fast as hecould, occasionally sending more jets of hot waterover his shoulder at random; every now and then hefelt one of the grindylows snatch at his foot again,and he kicked out, hard; finally, he felt his footconnect with a horned skull, and looking back, sawthe dazed grindylow floating away, cross-eyed, whileits fellows shook their fists at Harry and sank backinto the weed.

Page | 548

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry slowed down a little, slipped his wand backinside his robes, and looked around, listening again.He turned full circle in the water, the silence pressingharder than ever against his eardrums. He knew hemust be even deeper in the lake now, but nothing wasmoving but the rippling weed.

“How are you getting on?”

Harry thought he was having a heart attack. Hewhipped around and saw Moaning Myrtle floatinghazily in front of him, gazing at him through herthick, pearly glasses.

“Myrtle!” Harry tried to shout — but once again,nothing came out of his mouth but a very largebubble. Moaning Myrtle actually giggled.

“You want to try over there!” she said, pointing. “Iwon’t come with you. ... I don’t like them much, theyalways chase me when I get too close. ...”

Harry gave her the thumbs-up to show his thanksand set off once more, careful to swim a bit higherover the weed to avoid any more grindylows thatmight be lurking there.

He swam on for what felt like at least twenty minutes.He was passing over vast expanses of black mud now,which swirled murkily as he disturbed the water.Then, at long last, he heard a snatch of hauntingmersong.

“An hour long you’ll have to look,

And to recover what we took ...”

Harry swam faster and soon saw a large rock emergeout of the muddy water ahead. It had paintings of

Page | 549 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

merpeople on it; they were carrying spears andchasing what looked like the giant squid. Harry swamon past the rock, following the mersong.

"... your time’s half gone, so tarry not

Lest what you seek stays here to rot. ...”

A cluster of crude stone dwellings stained with algaeloomed suddenly out of the gloom on all sides. Hereand there at the dark windows, Harry saw faces ...faces that bore no resemblance at all to the paintingof the mermaid in the prefects’ bathroom. ...

The merpeople had grayish skin and long, wild, darkgreen hair. Their eyes were yellow, as were theirbroken teeth, and they wore thick ropes of pebblesaround their necks. They leered at Harry as he swampast; one or two of them emerged from their caves towatch him better, their powerful, silver fish tailsbeating the water, spears clutched in their hands.

Harry sped on, staring around, and soon thedwellings became more numerous; there weregardens of weed around some of them, and he evensaw a pet grindylow tied to a stake outside one door.Merpeople were emerging on all sides now, watchinghim eagerly, pointing at his webbed hands and gills,talking behind their hands to one another. Harry spedaround a corner and a very strange sight met hiseyes.

A whole crowd of merpeople was floating in front ofthe houses that lined what looked like a mer-versionof a village square. A choir of merpeople was singingin the middle, calling the champions toward them,and behind them rose a crude sort of statue; agigantic merperson hewn from a boulder. Four peoplewere bound tightly to the tail of the stone merperson.Page | 550 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Ron was tied between Hermione and Cho Chang.There was also a girl who looked no older than eight,whose clouds of silvery hair made Harry feel sure thatshe was Fleur Delacour’s sister. All four of themappeared to be in a very deep sleep. Their heads werelolling onto their shoulders, and fine streams ofbubbles kept issuing from their mouths.

Harry sped toward the hostages, half expecting themerpeople to lower their spears and charge at him,but they did nothing. The ropes of weed tying thehostages to the statue were thick, slimy, and verystrong. For a fleeting second he thought of the knifeSirius had bought him for Christmas — locked in histrunk in the castle a quarter of a mile away, no use tohim whatsoever.

He looked around. Many of the merpeoplesurrounding them were carrying spears. He swamswiftly toward a seven-foot-tall merman with a longgreen beard and a choker of shark fangs and tried tomime a request to borrow the spear. The mermanlaughed and shook his head.

“We do not help,” he said in a harsh, croaky voice.

“Come ON\” Harry said fiercely (but only bubblesissued from his mouth), and he tried to pull the spearaway from the merman, but the merman yanked itback, still shaking his head and laughing.

Harry swirled around, staring about. Somethingsharp ... anything ...

There were rocks littering the lake bottom. He divedand snatched up a particularly jagged one andreturned to the statue. He began to hack at the ropesbinding Ron, and after several minutes’ hard work,they broke apart. Ron floated, unconscious, a fewPage | 551 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

inches above the lake bottom, drifting a little in theebb of the water.

Harry looked around. There was no sign of any of theother champions. What were they playing at? Whydidn’t they hurry up? He turned back to Hermione,raised the jagged rock, and began to hack at herbindings too —

At once, several pairs of strong gray hands seizedhim. Half a dozen mermen were pulling him awayfrom Hermione, shaking their green-haired heads,and laughing.

“You take your own hostage,” one of them said tohim. “Leave the others ...”

“No way!” said Harry furiously — but only two largebubbles came out.

“Your task is to retrieve your own friend ... leave theothers ...”

“She’s my friend too!” Harry yelled, gesturing towardHermione, an enormous silver bubble emergingsoundlessly from his lips. “And I don’t want them todie either!”

Cho’s head was on Hermione’s shoulder; the smallsilver-haired girl was ghostly green and pale. Harrystruggled to fight off the mermen, but they laughedharder than ever, holding him back. Harry lookedwildly around. Where were the other champions?Would he have time to take Ron to the surface andcome back down for Hermione and the others? Wouldhe be able to find them again? He looked down at hiswatch to see how much time was left — it hadstopped working.

Page | 552

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

But then the merpeople around him pointed excitedlyover his head. Harry looked up and saw Cedricswimming toward them. There was an enormousbubble around his head, which made his featureslook oddly wide and stretched.

“Got lost!” he mouthed, looking panic-stricken. “Fleurand Krum’re coming now!”

Feeling enormously relieved, Harry watched Cedricpull a knife out of his pocket and cut Cho free. Hepulled her upward and out of sight.

Harry looked around, waiting. Where were Fleur andKrum? Time was getting short, and according to thesong, the hostages would be lost after an hour. ...

The merpeople started screeching animatedly. Thoseholding Harry loosened their grip, staring behindthem. Harry turned and saw something monstrouscutting through the water toward them: a humanbody in swimming trunks with the head of a shark. ...It was Krum. He appeared to have transfiguredhimself — but badly.

The shark-man swam straight to Hermione and begansnapping and biting at her ropes; the trouble was thatKrum’s new teeth were positioned very awkwardly forbiting anything smaller than a dolphin, and Harrywas quite sure that if Krum wasn’t careful, he wasgoing to rip Hermione in half. Darting forward, Harryhit Krum hard on the shoulder and held up thejagged stone. Krum seized it and began to cutHermione free. Within seconds, he had done it; hegrabbed Hermione around the waist, and without abackward glance, began to rise rapidly with hertoward the surface.

Page | 553

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Now what? Harry thought desperately. If he could besure that Fleur was coming. ... But still no sign.

There was nothing to be done except ...

He snatched up the stone, which Krum had dropped,but the mermen now closed in around Ron and thelittle girl, shaking their heads at him. Harry pulledout his wand.

“Get out of the way!”

Only bubbles flew out of his mouth, but he had thedistinct impression that the mermen had understoodhim, because they suddenly stopped laughing. Theiryellowish eyes were fixed upon Harry’s wand, andthey looked scared. There might be a lot more of themthan there were of him, but Harry could tell, by thelooks on their faces, that they knew no more magicthan the giant squid did.

“You’ve got until three!” Harry shouted; a greatstream of bubbles burst from him, but he held upthree fingers to make sure they got the message. “One...” (he put down a finger) “two ...” (he put down asecond one) —

They scattered. Harry darted forward and began tohack at the ropes binding the small girl to the statue,and at last she was free. He seized the little girlaround the waist, grabbed the neck of Ron’s robes,and kicked off from the bottom.

It was very slow work. He could no longer use hiswebbed hands to propel himself forward; he workedhis flippers furiously, but Ron and Fleur’s sister werelike potato-filled sacks dragging him back down. ...

He fixed his eyes skyward, though he knew he muststill be very deep, the water above him was so dark.

Page | 554 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Merpeople were rising with him. He could see themswirling around him with ease, watching him strugglethrough the water. ... Would they pull him back downto the depths when the time was up? Did theyperhaps eat humans? Harry’s legs were seizing upwith the effort to keep swimming; his shoulders wereaching horribly with the effort of dragging Ron andthe girl. ...

He was drawing breath with extreme difficulty. Hecould feel pain on the sides of his neck again ... hewas becoming very aware of how wet the water was inhis mouth ... yet the darkness was definitely thinningnow ... he could see daylight above him. ...

He kicked hard with his flippers and discovered thatthey were nothing more than feet ... water wasflooding through his mouth into his lungs ... he wasstarting to feel dizzy, but he knew light and air wereonly ten feet above him ... he had to get there ... hehad to ...

Harry kicked his legs so hard and fast it felt asthough his muscles were screaming in protest; hisvery brain felt waterlogged, he couldn’t breathe, heneeded oxygen, he had to keep going, he could notstop —

And then he felt his head break the surface of thelake; wonderful, cold, clear air was making his wetface sting; he gulped it down, feeling as though hehad never breathed properly before, and, panting,pulled Ron and the little girl up with him. All aroundhim, wild, green-haired heads were emerging out ofthe water with him, but they were smiling at him.

The crowd in the stands was making a great deal ofnoise; shouting and screaming, they all seemed to beon their feet; Harry had the impression they thought

Page | 555 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

that Ron and the little girl might be dead, but theywere wrong ... both of them had opened their eyes;the girl looked scared and confused, but Ron merelyexpelled a great spout of water, blinked in the brightlight, turned to Harry, and said, “Wet, this, isn’t it?”Then he spotted Fleur’s sister. “What did you bringher for?”

“Fleur didn’t turn up, I couldn’t leave her,” Harrypanted.

“Harry, you prat,” said Ron, “you didn’t take that songthing seriously, did you? Dumbledore wouldn’t havelet any of us drown!”

“The song said —”

“It was only to make sure you got back inside the timelimit!” said Ron. “I hope you didn’t waste time downthere acting the hero!”

Harry felt both stupid and annoyed. It was all verywell for Ron; he’d been asleep, he hadn’t felt howeerie it was down in the lake, surrounded by spear-carrying merpeople who’d looked more than capableof murder.

“C’mon,” Harry said shortly, “help me with her, I don’tthink she can swim very well.”

They pulled Fleur’s sister through the water, backtoward the bank where the judges stood watching,twenty merpeople accompanying them like a guard ofhonor, singing their horrible screechy songs.

Harry could see Madam Pomfrey fussing overHermione, Krum, Cedric, and Cho, all of whom werewrapped in thick blankets. Dumbledore and LudoBagman stood beaming at Harry and Ron from the

Page | 556 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

bank as they swam nearer, but Percy, who lookedvery white and somehow much younger than usual,came splashing out to meet them. MeanwhileMadame Maxime was trying to restrain FleurDelacour, who was quite hysterical, fighting tooth andnail to return to the water.

“Gabrielle! Gabrielle\ Is she alive? Is she ’urt?”

“She’s fine!” Harry tried to tell her, but he was soexhausted he could hardly talk, let alone shout.

Percy seized Ron and was dragging him back to thebank (“Gerroff, Percy, I’m all right!”); Dumbledore andBagman were pulling Harry upright; Fleur had brokenfree of Madame Maxime and was hugging her sister.

“It was ze grindylows ... zey attacked me ... ohGabrielle, I thought ... I thought ...”

“Come here, you,” said Madam Pomfrey. She seizedHarry and pulled him over to Hermione and theothers, wrapped him so tightly in a blanket that hefelt as though he were in a straitjacket, and forced ameasure of very hot potion down his throat. Steamgushed out of his ears.

“Harry, well done!” Hermione cried. “You did it, youfound out how all by yourself!”

“Well —” said Harry. He would have told her aboutDobby, but he had just noticed Karkaroff watchinghim. He was the only judge who had not left the table;the only judge not showing signs of pleasure andrelief that Harry, Ron, and Fleur’s sister had got backsafely. “Yeah, that’s right,” said Harry, raising hisvoice slightly so that Karkaroff could hear him.

Page | 557

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You haff a water beetle in your hair, Herm-own-ninny,” said Krum. Harry had the impression thatKrum was drawing her attention back onto himself;perhaps to remind her that he had just rescued herfrom the lake, but Hermione brushed away the beetleimpatiently and said, “You’re well outside the timelimit, though, Harry. ... Did it take you ages to findus?”

“No ... I found you okay. ...”

Harry’s feeling of stupidity was growing. Now he wasout of the water, it seemed perfectly clear thatDumbledore’s safety precautions wouldn’t havepermitted the death of a hostage just because theirchampion hadn’t turned up. Why hadn’t he justgrabbed Ron and gone? He would have been firstback. ... Cedric and Krum hadn’t wasted timeworrying about anyone else; they hadn’t taken themersong seriously. ...

Dumbledore was crouching at the water’s edge, deepin conversation with what seemed to be the chiefmerperson, a particularly wild and ferocious-lookingfemale. He was making the same sort of screechynoises that the merpeople made when they wereabove water; clearly, Dumbledore could speakMermish. Finally he straightened up, turned to hisfellow judges, and said, “A conference before we givethe marks, I think.”

The judges went into a huddle. Madam Pomfrey hadgone to rescue Ron from Percy’s clutches; she led himover to Harry and the others, gave him a blanket andsome Pepperup Potion, then went to fetch Fleur andher sister. Fleur had many cuts on her face and armsand her robes were torn, but she didn’t seem to care,nor would she allow Madam Pomfrey to clean them.

Page | 558

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Look after Gabrielle,” she told her, and then sheturned to Harry. “You saved ’er,” she saidbreathlessly. “Even though she was not your ’ostage.”

“Yeah,” said Harry, who was now heartily wishinghe’d left all three girls tied to the statue.

Fleur bent down, kissed Harry twice on each cheek(he felt his face burn and wouldn’t have beensurprised if steam was coming out of his ears again),then said to Ron, “And you too — you ’elped —”

“Yeah,” said Ron, looking extremely hopeful, “yeah, abit —”

Fleur swooped down on him too and kissed him.Hermione looked simply furious, but just then, LudoBagman’s magically magnified voice boomed outbeside them, making them all jump, and causing thecrowd in the stands to go very quiet.

“Ladies and gentlemen, we have reached our decision.Merchieftainess Murcus has told us exactly whathappened at the bottom of the lake, and we havetherefore decided to award marks out of fifty for eachof the champions, as follows. ...

“Fleur Delacour, though she demonstrated excellentuse of the Bubble-Head Charm, was attacked bygrindylows as she approached her goal, and failed toretrieve her hostage. We award her twenty-fivepoints.”

Applause from the stands.

“I deserved zero,” said Fleur throatily, shaking hermagnificent head.

Page | 559

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Cedric Diggory, who also used the Bubble-HeadCharm, was first to return with his hostage, thoughhe returned one minute outside the time limit of anhour.” Enormous cheers from the Hufflepuffs in thecrowd; Harry saw Cho give Cedric a glowing look. “Wetherefore award him forty-seven points.”

Harry’s heart sank. If Cedric had been outside thetime limit, he most certainly had been.

“Viktor Krum used an incomplete form ofTransfiguration, which was nevertheless effective, andwas second to return with his hostage. We award himforty points.”

Karkaroff clapped particularly hard, looking verysuperior.

“Harry Potter used gillyweed to great effect,” Bagmancontinued. “He returned last, and well outside thetime limit of an hour. However, the Merchieftainessinforms us that Mr. Potter was first to reach thehostages, and that the delay in his return was due tohis determination to return all hostages to safety, notmerely his own.”

Ron and Hermione both gave Harry half-exasperated,half-commiserating looks.

“Most of the judges,” and here, Bagman gaveKarkaroff a very nasty look, “feel that this showsmoral fiber and merits full marks. However ... Mr.Potter’s score is forty-five points.”

Harry’s stomach leapt — he was now tying for firstplace with Cedric. Ron and Hermione, caught bysurprise, stared at Harry, then laughed and startedapplauding hard with the rest of the crowd.

Page | 560

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“There you go, Harry!” Ron shouted over the noise.“You weren’t being thick after all — you were showingmoral fiber!”

Fleur was clapping very hard too, but Krum didn’tlook happy at all. He attempted to engage Hermionein conversation again, but she was too busy cheeringHarry to listen.

“The third and final task will take place at dusk onthe twenty-fourth of June,” continued Bagman. “Thechampions will be notified of what is coming preciselyone month beforehand. Thank you all for yoursupport of the champions.”

It was over, Harry thought dazedly, as MadamPomfrey began herding the champions and hostagesback to the castle to get into dry clothes ... it wasover, he had got through ... he didn’t have to worryabout anything now until June the twenty-fourth. ...

Next time he was in Hogsmeade, Harry decided as hewalked back up the stone steps into the castle, hewas going to buy Dobby a pair of socks for every dayof the year.

Page | 561

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





PADFOOT RETURNS

One of the best things about the aftermath of thesecond task was that everybody was very keen to heardetails of what had happened down in the lake, whichmeant that Ron was getting to share Harry’s limelightfor once. Harry noticed that Ron’s version of eventschanged subtly with every retelling. At first, he gavewhat seemed to be the truth; it tallied withHermione’s story, anyway — Dumbledore had put allthe hostages into a bewitched sleep in ProfessorMcGonagall’s office, first assuring them that theywould be quite safe, and would awake when they wereback above the water. One week later, however, Ronwas telling a thrilling tale of kidnap in which hestruggled single-handedly against fifty heavily armedmerpeople who had to beat him into submissionbefore tying him up.

“But I had my wand hidden up my sleeve,” he assuredPadma Patil, who seemed to be a lot keener on Ronnow that he was getting so much attention and wasmaking a point of talking to him every time they

Page | 562

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

passed in the corridors. “I could’ve taken those mer-idiots any time I wanted.”

“What were you going to do, snore at them?” saidHermione waspishly. People had been teasing her somuch about being the thing that Viktor Krum wouldmost miss that she was in a rather tetchy mood.

Ron’s ears went red, and thereafter, he reverted to thebewitched sleep version of events.

As they entered March the weather became drier, butcruel winds skinned their hands and faces every timethey went out onto the grounds. There were delays inthe post because the owls kept being blown offcourse. The brown owl that Harry had sent to Siriuswith the dates of the Hogsmeade weekend turned upat breakfast on Friday morning with half its featherssticking up the wrong way; Harry had no sooner tornoff Sirius’s reply than it took flight, clearly afraid itwas going to be sent outside again.

Sirius’s letter was almost as short as the previousone.

Be at stile at end of road out of Hogsmeade (pastDervish and Banges) at two o’clock on Saturdayafternoon. Bring as much food as you can.

“He hasn’t come back to Hogsmeade?” said Ronincredulously.

“It looks like it, doesn’t it?” said Hermione.

“I can’t believe him,” said Harry tensely, “if he’scaught ...”

Page | 563

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Made it so far, though, hasn’t he?” said Ron. “Andit’s not like the place is swarming with dementorsanymore.”

Harry folded up the letter, thinking. If he was honestwith himself, he really wanted to see Sirius again. Hetherefore approached the final lesson of the afternoon— double Potions — feeling considerably morecheerful than he usually did when descending thesteps to the dungeons.

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle were standing in a huddleoutside the classroom door with Pansy Parkinson’sgang of Slytherin girls. All of them were looking atsomething Harry couldn’t see and sniggering heartily.Pansy’s pug-like face peered excitedly around Goyle’sbroad back as Harry, Ron, and Hermione approached.

“There they are, there they are!” she giggled, and theknot of Slytherins broke apart. Harry saw that Pansyhad a magazine in her hands — Witch Weekly. Themoving picture on the front showed a curly-hairedwitch who was smiling toothily and pointing at a largesponge cake with her wand.

“You might find something to interest you in there,Granger!” Pansy said loudly, and she threw themagazine at Hermione, who caught it, lookingstartled. At that moment, the dungeon door opened,and Snape beckoned them all inside.

Hermione, Harry, and Ron headed for a table at theback of the dungeon as usual. Once Snape hadturned his back on them to write up the ingredientsof today’s potion on the blackboard, Hermione hastilyrifled through the magazine under the desk. At last,in the center pages, Hermione found what they werelooking for. Harry and Ron leaned in closer. A colorphotograph of Harry headed a short piece entitled:Page | 564 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry Potter’s Secret Heartache

A boy like no other, perhaps — yet a boy suffering allthe usual pangs of adolescence, writes Rita Skeeter.Deprived of love since the tragic demise of his parents,fourteen-year-old Harry Potter thought he had foundsolace in his steady girlfriend at Hogwarts, Muggle-born Hermione Granger. Little did he know that hewould shortly be suffering yet another emotional blowin a life already littered with personal loss.

Miss Granger, a plain but ambitious girl, seems tohave a taste for famous wizards that Harry alonecannot satisfy. Since the arrival at Hogwarts of ViktorKrum, Bulgarian Seeker and hero of the last WorldQuidditch Cup, Miss Granger has been toying withboth boys’ affections. Krum, who is openly smittenwith the devious Miss Granger, has already invitedher to visit him in Bulgaria over the summer holidays,and insists that he has “never felt this way about anyother girl.”

However, it might not be Miss Granger’s doubtfulnatural charms that have captured these unfortunateboys’ interest.

“She’s really ugly,” says Pansy Parkinson, a prettyand vivacious fourth-year student, “but she’d be wellup to making a Love Potion, she’s quite brainy. Ithink that’s how she’s doing it.”

Love Potions are, of course, banned at Hogwarts, andno doubt Albus Dumbledore will want to investigatethese claims. In the meantime, Harry Potter’s well-wishers must hope that, next time, he bestows hisheart on a worthier candidate.

“I told you!” Ron hissed at Hermione as she stareddown at the article. “I told you not to annoy Rita

Page | 565 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Skeeter! She’s made you out to be some sort of— ofscarlet woman!”

Hermione stopped looking astonished and snortedwith laughter. “Scarlet woman?” she repeated,shaking with suppressed giggles as she lookedaround at Ron.

“It’s what my mum calls them,” Ron muttered, hisears going red.

“If that’s the best Rita can do, she’s losing her touch,”said Hermione, still giggling, as she threw WitchWeekly onto the empty chair beside her. “What a pileof old rubbish.”

She looked over at the Slytherins, who were allwatching her and Harry closely across the room to seeif they had been upset by the article. Hermione gavethem a sarcastic smile and a wave, and she, Harry,and Ron started unpacking the ingredients theywould need for their Wit-Sharpening Potion.

“There’s something funny, though,” said Hermioneten minutes later, holding her pestle suspended overa bowl of scarab beetles. “How could Rita Skeeterhave known ... ?”

“Known what?” said Ron quickly. “You haven’t beenmixing up Love Potions, have you?”

“Don’t be stupid,” Hermione snapped, starting topound up her beetles again. “No, it’s just ... how didshe know Viktor asked me to visit him over thesummer?”

Hermione blushed scarlet as she said this anddeterminedly avoided Ron’s eyes.

Page | 566

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What?” said Ron, dropping his pestle with a loudclunk.

“He asked me right after he’d pulled me out of thelake,” Hermione muttered. “After he’d got rid of hisshark’s head. Madam Pomfrey gave us both blanketsand then he sort of pulled me away from the judgesso they wouldn’t hear, and he said, if I wasn’t doinganything over the summer, would I like to —”

“And what did you say?” said Ron, who had picked uphis pestle and was grinding it on the desk, a good sixinches from his bowl, because he was looking atHermione.

“And he did say he’d never felt the same way aboutanyone else,” Hermione went on, going so red nowthat Harry could almost feel the heat coming fromher, “but how could Rita Skeeter have heard him?

She wasn’t there ... or was she? Maybe she has got anInvisibility Cloak; maybe she sneaked onto thegrounds to watch the second task. ...”

“And what did you say?” Ron repeated, pounding hispestle down so hard that it dented the desk.

“Well, I was too busy seeing whether you and Harrywere okay to —”

“Fascinating though your social life undoubtedly is,Miss Granger,” said an icy voice right behind them,and all three of them jumped, “I must ask you not todiscuss it in my class. Ten points from Gryffindor.”

Snape had glided over to their desk while they weretalking. The whole class was now looking around atthem; Malfoy took the opportunity to flash POTTERSTINKS across the dungeon at Harry.

Page | 567

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Ah ... reading magazines under the table as well?”Snape added, snatching up the copy of Witch Weekly.“A further ten points from Gryffindor ... oh but ofcourse ...” Snape’s black eyes glittered as they fell onRita Skeeter’s article. “Potter has to keep up with hispress cuttings. ...”

The dungeon rang with the Slytherins’ laughter, andan unpleasant smile curled Snape’s thin mouth. ToHarry’s fury, he began to read the article aloud.

“ ‘Harry Potter’s Secret Heartache ... dear, dear,

Potter, what’s ailing you now? ‘A boy like no other,perhaps ...’ ”

Harry could feel his face burning. Snape was pausingat the end of every sentence to allow the Slytherins ahearty laugh. The article sounded ten times worsewhen read by Snape. Even Hermione was blushingscarlet now.

“ ‘... Harry Potter’s well-wishers must hope that, nexttime, he bestows his heart upon a worthier candidate.’How very touching,” sneered Snape, rolling up themagazine to continued gales of laughter from theSlytherins. “Well, I think I had better separate thethree of you, so you can keep your minds on yourpotions rather than on your tangled love lives.Weasley, you stay here. Miss Granger, over there,beside Miss Parkinson. Potter — that table in front ofmy desk. Move. Now.”

Furious, Harry threw his ingredients and his bag intohis cauldron and dragged it up to the front of thedungeon to the empty table. Snape followed, sat downat his desk and watched Harry unload his cauldron.Determined not to look at Snape, Harry resumed themashing of his scarab beetles, imagining each one tohave Snape’s face.

Page | 568 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“All this press attention seems to have inflated youralready over-large head, Potter,” said Snape quietly,once the rest of the class had settled down again.

Harry didn’t answer. He knew Snape was trying toprovoke him; he had done this before. No doubt hewas hoping for an excuse to take a round fifty pointsfrom Gryffindor before the end of the class.

“You might be laboring under the delusion that theentire wizarding world is impressed with you,” Snapewent on, so quietly that no one else could hear him(Harry continued to pound his scarab beetles, eventhough he had already reduced them to a very finepowder), “but I don’t care how many times yourpicture appears in the papers. To me, Potter, you arenothing but a nasty little boy who considers rules tobe beneath him.”

Harry tipped the powdered beetles into his cauldronand started cutting up his ginger roots. His handswere shaking slightly out of anger, but he kept hiseyes down, as though he couldn’t hear what Snapewas saying to him.

“So I give you fair warning, Potter,” Snape continuedin a softer and more dangerous voice, “pint-sizedcelebrity or not — if I catch you breaking into myoffice one more time —”

“I haven’t been anywhere near your office!” said Harryangrily, forgetting his feigned deafness.

“Don’t lie to me,” Snape hissed, his fathomless blackeyes boring into Harry’s. “Boomslang skin. Gillyweed.Both come from my private stores, and I know whostole them.”

Page | 569

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry stared back at Snape, determined not to blinkor to look guilty. In truth, he hadn’t stolen either ofthese things from Snape. Hermione had taken theboomslang skin back in their second year — they hadneeded it for the Polyjuice Potion — and while Snapehad suspected Harry at the time, he had never beenable to prove it. Dobby, of course, had stolen thegillyweed.

“I don’t know what you’re talking about,” Harry liedcoldly.

“You were out of bed on the night my office wasbroken into!” Snape hissed. “I know it, Potter! Now,Mad-Eye Moody might have joined your fan club, butI will not tolerate your behavior! One more nighttimestroll into my office, Potter, and you will pay!”

“Right,” said Harry coolly, turning back to his gingerroots. “I’ll bear that in mind if I ever get the urge to goin there.”

Snape’s eyes flashed. He plunged a hand into theinside of his black robes. For one wild moment, Harrythought Snape was about to pull out his wand andcurse him — then he saw that Snape had drawn out asmall crystal bottle of a completely clear potion. Harrystared at it.

“Do you know what this is, Potter?” Snape said, hiseyes glittering dangerously again.

“No,” said Harry, with complete honesty this time.

“It is Veritaserum — a Truth Potion so powerful thatthree drops would have you spilling your innermostsecrets for this entire class to hear,” said Snapeviciously. “Now, the use of this potion is controlled byvery strict Ministry guidelines. But unless you watchPage | 570 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

your step, you might just find that my hand slips” —he shook the crystal bottle slightly — “right over yourevening pumpkin juice. And then, Potter ... then we’llfind out whether you’ve been in my office or not.”

Harry said nothing. He turned back to his gingerroots once more, picked up his knife, and startedslicing them again. He didn’t like the sound of thatTruth Potion at all, nor would he put it past Snape toslip him some. He repressed a shudder at the thoughtof what might come spilling out of his mouth if Snapedid it ... quite apart from landing a whole lot of peoplein trouble — Hermione and Dobby for a start — therewere all the other things he was concealing ... like thefact that he was in contact with Sirius ... and — hisinsides squirmed at the thought — how he felt aboutCho. ... He tipped his ginger roots into the cauldrontoo, and wondered whether he ought to take a leaf outof Moody’s book and start drinking only from aprivate hip flask.

There was a knock on the dungeon door.

“Enter,” said Snape in his usual voice.

The class looked around as the door opened.

Professor Karkaroff came in. Everyone watched himas he walked up toward Snape’s desk. He wastwisting his finger around his goatee and lookingagitated.

“We need to talk,” said Karkaroff abruptly when hehad reached Snape. He seemed so determined thatnobody should hear what he was saying that he wasbarely opening his lips; it was as though he were arather poor ventriloquist. Harry kept his eyes on hisginger roots, listening hard.

Page | 571

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll talk to you after my lesson, Karkaroff,” Snapemuttered, but Karkaroff interrupted him.

“I want to talk now, while you can’t slip off, Severus.You’ve been avoiding me.”

“After the lesson,” Snape snapped.

Under the pretext of holding up a measuring cup tosee if he’d poured out enough armadillo bile, Harrysneaked a sidelong glance at the pair of them.Karkaroff looked extremely worried, and Snape lookedangry.

Karkaroff hovered behind Snape’s desk for the rest ofthe double period. He seemed intent on preventingSnape from slipping away at the end of class. Keen tohear what Karkaroff wanted to say, Harry deliberatelyknocked over his bottle of armadillo bile with twominutes to go to the bell, which gave him an excuseto duck down behind his cauldron and mop up whilethe rest of the class moved noisily toward the door.

“What’s so urgent?” he heard Snape hiss at Karkaroff.

“This,” said Karkaroff, and Harry, peering around theedge of his cauldron, saw Karkaroff pull up the left-hand sleeve of his robe and show Snape something onhis inner forearm.

“Well?” said Karkaroff, still making every effort not tomove his lips. “Do you see? It’s never been this clear,never since —”

“Put it away!” snarled Snape, his black eyes sweepingthe classroom.

“But you must have noticed —” Karkaroff began in anagitated voice.

Page | 572 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“We can talk later, Karkaroff!” spat Snape. “Potter!What are you doing?”

“Clearing up my armadillo bile, Professor,” said Harryinnocently, straightening up and showing Snape thesodden rag he was holding.

Karkaroff turned on his heel and strode out of thedungeon. He looked both worried and angry. Notwanting to remain alone with an exceptionally angrySnape, Harry threw his books and ingredients backinto his bag and left at top speed to tell Ron andHermione what he had just witnessed.

They left the castle at noon the next day to find aweak silver sun shining down upon the grounds. Theweather was milder than it had been all year, and bythe time they arrived in Hogsmeade, all three of themhad taken off their cloaks and thrown them over theirshoulders. The food Sirius had told them to bring wasin Harry’s bag; they had sneaked a dozen chickenlegs, a loaf of bread, and a flask of pumpkin juicefrom the lunch table.

They went into Gladrags Wizardwear to buy a presentfor Dobby, where they had fun selecting the mostlurid socks they could find, including a pair patternedwith flashing gold and silver stars, and another thatscreamed loudly when they became too smelly. Then,at half past one, they made their way up the HighStreet, past Dervish and Banges, and out toward theedge of the village.

Harry had never been in this direction before. Thewinding lane was leading them out into the wildcountryside around Hogsmeade. The cottages werefewer here, and their gardens larger; they werewalking toward the foot of the mountain in whoseshadow Hogsmeade lay. Then they turned a cornerPage | 573 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

and saw a stile at the end of the lane. Waiting forthem, its front paws on the topmost bar, was a verylarge, shaggy black dog, which was carrying somenewspapers in its mouth and looking very familiar. ...

“Hello, Sirius,” said Harry when they had reachedhim.

The black dog sniffed Harry’s bag eagerly, wagged itstail once, then turned and began to trot away fromthem across the scrubby patch of ground that rose tomeet the rocky foot of the mountain. Harry, Ron, andHermione climbed over the stile and followed.

Sirius led them to the very foot of the mountain,where the ground was covered with boulders androcks. It was easy for him, with his four paws, butHarry, Ron, and Hermione were soon out of breath.They followed Sirius higher, up onto the mountainitself. For nearly half an hour they climbed a steep,winding, and stony path, following Sirius’s waggingtail, sweating in the sun, the shoulder straps ofHarry’s bag cutting into his shoulders.

Then, at last, Sirius slipped out of sight, and whenthey reached the place where he had vanished, theysaw a narrow fissure in the rock. They squeezed intoit and found themselves in a cool, dimly lit cave.Tethered at the end of it, one end of his rope around alarge rock, was Buckbeak the hippogriff. Half grayhorse, half giant eagle, Buckbeak’s fierce orange eyeflashed at the sight of them. All three of them bowedlow to him, and after regarding them imperiously for amoment, Buckbeak bent his scaly front knees andallowed Hermione to rush forward and stroke hisfeathery neck. Harry, however, was looking at theblack dog, which had just turned into his godfather.

Page | 574

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Sirius was wearing ragged gray robes; the same oneshe had been wearing when he had left Azkaban. Hisblack hair was longer than it had been when he hadappeared in the fire, and it was untidy and mattedonce more. He looked very thin.

“Chicken!” he said hoarsely after removing the oldDaily Prophets from his mouth and throwing themdown onto the cave floor.

Harry pulled open his bag and handed over thebundle of chicken legs and bread.

“Thanks,” said Sirius, opening it, grabbing adrumstick, sitting down on the cave floor, and tearingoff a large chunk with his teeth. “I’ve been living offrats mostly. Can’t steal too much food fromHogsmeade; I’d draw attention to myself.”

He grinned up at Harry, but Harry returned the grinonly reluctantly.

“What’re you doing here, Sirius?” he said.

“Fulfilling my duty as godfather,” said Sirius, gnawingon the chicken bone in a very doglike way. “Don’tworry about it, I’m pretending to be a lovable stray.”

He was still grinning, but seeing the anxiety inHarry’s face, said more seriously, “I want to be on thespot. Your last letter ... well, let’s just say things aregetting fishier. I’ve been stealing the paper every timesomeone throws one out, and by the looks of things,I’m not the only one who’s getting worried.”

He nodded at the yellowing Daily Prophets on the cavefloor, and Ron picked them up and unfolded them.Harry, however, continued to stare at Sirius.

Page | 575

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What if they catch you? What if you’re seen?”

“You three and Dumbledore are the only ones aroundhere who know I’m an Animagus,” said Sirius,shrugging, and continuing to devour the chicken leg.

Ron nudged Harry and passed him the DailyProphets. There were two: The first bore the headlineMystery Illness of Bartemius Crouch, the second,Ministry Witch Still Missing — Minister of Magic NowPersonally Involved.

Harry scanned the story about Crouch. Phrasesjumped out at him: hasn’t been seen in public sinceNovember ... house appears deserted ... St. Mungo’sHospital for Magical Maladies and Injuries declinecomment... Ministry refuses to confirm rumors ofcritical illness. ...

“They’re making it sound like he’s dying,” said Harryslowly. “But he can’t be that ill if he managed to getup here. ...”

“My brother’s Crouch’s personal assistant,” Roninformed Sirius. “He says Crouch is suffering fromoverwork.”

“Mind you, he did look ill, last time I saw him upclose,” said Harry slowly, still reading the story. “Thenight my name came out of the goblet. ...”

“Getting his comeuppance for sacking Winky, isn’the?” said Hermione, an edge to her voice. She wasstroking Buckbeak, who was crunching up Sirius’schicken bones. “I bet he wishes he hadn’t done it now— bet he feels the difference now she’s not there tolook after him.”

Page | 576

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Hermione’s obsessed with house-elfs,” Ron mutteredto Sirius, casting Hermione a dark look. Sirius,however, looked interested.

“Crouch sacked his house-elf?”

“Yeah, at the Quidditch World Cup,” said Harry, andhe launched into the story of the Dark Mark’sappearance, and Winky being found with Harry’swand clutched in her hand, and Mr. Crouch’s fury.When Harry had finished, Sirius was on his feet againand had started pacing up and down the cave.

“Let me get this straight,” he said after a while,brandishing a fresh chicken leg. “You first saw the elfin the Top Box. She was saving Crouch a seat, right?”

“Right,” said Harry, Ron, and Hermione together.

“But Crouch didn’t turn up for the match?”

“No,” said Harry. “I think he said he’d been too busy.”

Sirius paced all around the cave in silence. Then hesaid, “Harry, did you check your pockets for yourwand after you’d left the Top Box?”

“Erm ...” Harry thought hard. “No,” he said finally. “Ididn’t need to use it before we got in the forest. Andthen I put my hand in my pocket, and all that was inthere were my Omnioculars.” He stared at Sirius. “Areyou saying whoever conjured the Mark stole my wandin the Top Box?”

“It’s possible,” said Sirius.

“Winky didn’t steal that wand!” Hermione insisted.

Page | 577

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“The elf wasn’t the only one in that box,” said Sirius,his brow furrowed as he continued to pace. “Who elsewas sitting behind you?”

“Loads of people,” said Harry. “Some Bulgarianministers ... Cornelius Fudge ... the Malfoys ...”

“The Malfoys!” said Ron suddenly, so loudly that hisvoice echoed all around the cave, and Buckbeaktossed his head nervously. “I bet it was LuciusMalfoy!”

“Anyone else?” said Sirius.

“No one,” said Harry.

“Yes, there was, there was Ludo Bagman,” Hermionereminded him.

“Oh yeah ...”

“I don’t know anything about Bagman except that heused to be Beater for the Wimbourne Wasps,” saidSirius, still pacing. “What’s he like?”

“He’s okay,” said Harry. “He keeps offering to help mewith the Triwizard Tournament.”

“Does he, now?” said Sirius, frowning more deeply. “Iwonder why he’d do that?”

“Says he’s taken a liking to me,” said Harry.

“Hmm,” said Sirius, looking thoughtful.

“We saw him in the forest just before the Dark Markappeared,” Hermione told Sirius. “Remember?” shesaid to Harry and Ron.

Page | 578

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, but he didn’t stay in the forest, did he?” saidRon. “The moment we told him about the riot, hewent off to the campsite.”

“How d’you know?” Hermione shot back. “How d’youknow where he Disapparated to?”

“Come off it,” said Ron incredulously. “Are you sayingyou reckon Ludo Bagman conjured the Dark Mark?”

“It’s more likely he did it than Winky,” said Hermionestubbornly.

“Told you,” said Ron, looking meaningfully at Sirius,“told you she’s obsessed with house —”

But Sirius held up a hand to silence Ron.

“When the Dark Mark had been conjured, and the elfhad been discovered holding Harry’s wand, what didCrouch do?”

“Went to look in the bushes,” said Harry, “but therewasn’t anyone else there.”

“Of course,” Sirius muttered, pacing up and down, “ofcourse, he’d want to pin it on anyone but his own elf... and then he sacked her?”

“Yes,” said Hermione in a heated voice, “he sackedher, just because she hadn’t stayed in her tent and letherself get trampled —”

“Hermione, will you give it a rest with the elf!” saidRon.

Sirius shook his head and said, “She’s got themeasure of Crouch better than you have, Ron. If you

Page | 579

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

want to know what a man’s like, take a good look athow he treats his inferiors, not his equals.”

He ran a hand over his unshaven face, evidentlythinking hard.

“All these absences of Barty Crouch’s ... he goes tothe trouble of making sure his house-elf saves him aseat at the Quidditch World Cup, but doesn’t botherto turn up and watch. He works very hard to reinstatethe Triwizard Tournament, and then stops coming tothat too. ... It’s not like Crouch. If he’s ever taken aday off work because of illness before this, I’ll eatBuckbeak.”

“D’you know Crouch, then?” said Harry.

Sirius’s face darkened. He suddenly looked asmenacing as he had the night when Harry first methim, the night when Harry still believed Sirius to be amurderer.

“Oh I know Crouch all right,” he said quietly. “He wasthe one who gave the order for me to be sent toAzkaban — without a trial.”

“What?” said Ron and Hermione together.

“You’re kidding!” said Harry.

“No, I’m not,” said Sirius, taking another great bite ofchicken. “Crouch used to be Head of the Departmentof Magical Law Enforcement, didn’t you know?”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione shook their heads.

“He was tipped for the next Minister of Magic,” saidSirius. “He’s a great wizard, Barty Crouch, powerfullymagical — and power-hungry. Oh never a Voldemort

Page | 580 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

supporter,” he said, reading the look on Harry’s face.“No, Barty Crouch was always very outspoken againstthe Dark Side. But then a lot of people who wereagainst the Dark Side ... well, you wouldn’tunderstand ... you’re too young. ...”

“That’s what my dad said at the World Cup,” saidRon, with a trace of irritation in his voice. “Try us,why don’t you?”

A grin flashed across Sirius’s thin face.

“All right, I’ll try you. ...” He walked once up the cave,back again, and then said, “Imagine that Voldemort’spowerful now. You don’t know who his supportersare, you don’t know who’s working for him and whoisn’t; you know he can control people so that they doterrible things without being able to stop themselves.You’re scared for yourself, and your family, and yourfriends. Every week, news comes of more deaths,more disappearances, more torturing ... the Ministryof Magic’s in disarray, they don’t know what to do,they’re trying to keep everything hidden from theMuggles, but meanwhile, Muggles are dying too.

Terror everywhere ... panic ... confusion ... that’s howit used to be.

“Well, times like that bring out the best in somepeople and the worst in others. Crouch’s principlesmight’ve been good in the beginning — I wouldn’tknow. He rose quickly through the Ministry, and hestarted ordering very harsh measures againstVoldemort’s supporters. The Aurors were given newpowers — powers to kill rather than capture, forinstance. And I wasn’t the only one who was handedstraight to the dementors without trial. Crouch foughtviolence with violence, and authorized the use of theUnforgivable Curses against suspects. I would say hebecame as ruthless and cruel as many on the DarkPage | 581 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Side. He had his supporters, mind you — plenty ofpeople thought he was going about things the rightway, and there were a lot of witches and wizardsclamoring for him to take over as Minister of Magic.When Voldemort disappeared, it looked like only amatter of time until Crouch got the top job. But thensomething rather unfortunate happened. ...” Siriussmiled grimly. “Crouch’s own son was caught with agroup of Death Eaters who’d managed to talk theirway out of Azkaban. Apparently they were trying tofind Voldemort and return him to power.”

“Crouch’s son was caught?” gasped Hermione.

“Yep,” said Sirius, throwing his chicken bone toBuckbeak, flinging himself back down on the groundbeside the loaf of bread, and tearing it in half. “Nastylittle shock for old Barty, I’d imagine. Should havespent a bit more time at home with his family,shouldn’t he? Ought to have left the office early oncein a while ... gotten to know his own son.”

He began to wolf down large pieces of bread.

“ Was his son a Death Eater?” said Harry.

“No idea,” said Sirius, still stuffing down bread. “I wasin Azkaban myself when he was brought in. This ismostly stuff I’ve found out since I got out. The boywas definitely caught in the company of people I’d betmy life were Death Eaters — but he might have beenin the wrong place at the wrong time, just like thehouse-elf.”

“Did Crouch try and get his son off?” Hermionewhispered.

Sirius let out a laugh that was much more like abark.

Page | 582 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Crouch let his son off? I thought you had themeasure of him, Hermione! Anything that threatenedto tarnish his reputation had to go; he had dedicatedhis whole life to becoming Minister of Magic. You sawhim dismiss a devoted house-elf because sheassociated him with the Dark Mark again — doesn’tthat tell you what he’s like? Crouch’s fatherlyaffection stretched just far enough to give his son atrial, and by all accounts, it wasn’t much more thanan excuse for Crouch to show how much he hated theboy ... then he sent him straight to Azkaban.”

“He gave his own son to the dementors?” asked Harryquietly.

“That’s right,” said Sirius, and he didn’t look remotelyamused now. “I saw the dementors bringing him in,watched them through the bars in my cell door. Hecan’t have been more than nineteen. They took himinto a cell near mine. He was screaming for hismother by nightfall. He went quiet after a few days,though ... they all went quiet in the end ... exceptwhen they shrieked in their sleep. ...”

For a moment, the deadened look in Sirius’s eyesbecame more pronounced than ever, as thoughshutters had closed behind them.

“So he’s still in Azkaban?” Harry said.

“No,” said Sirius dully. “No, he’s not in there anymore.He died about a year after they brought him in.”

“He died?”

“He wasn’t the only one,” said Sirius bitterly. “Most gomad in there, and plenty stop eating in the end. Theylose the will to live. You could always tell when adeath was coming, because the dementors could

Page | 583 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

sense it, they got excited. That boy looked prettysickly when he arrived. Crouch being an importantMinistry member, he and his wife were allowed adeathbed visit. That was the last time I saw BartyCrouch, half carrying his wife past my cell. She diedherself, apparently, shortly afterward. Grief. Wastedaway just like the boy. Crouch never came for hisson’s body. The dementors buried him outside thefortress; I watched them do it.”

Sirius threw aside the bread he had just lifted to hismouth and instead picked up the flask of pumpkinjuice and drained it.

“So old Crouch lost it all, just when he thought hehad it made,” he continued, wiping his mouth withthe back of his hand. “One moment, a hero, poised tobecome Minister of Magic ... next, his son dead, hiswife dead, the family name dishonored, and, so I’veheard since I escaped, a big drop in popularity. Oncethe boy had died, people started feeling a bit moresympathetic toward the son and started asking how anice young lad from a good family had gone so badlyastray. The conclusion was that his father nevercared much for him. So Cornelius Fudge got the topjob, and Crouch was shunted sideways into theDepartment of International Magical Cooperation.”

There was a long silence. Harry was thinking of theway Crouch’s eyes had bulged as he’d looked down athis disobedient house-elf back in the wood at theQuidditch World Cup. This, then, must have beenwhy Crouch had overreacted to Winky being foundbeneath the Dark Mark. It had brought backmemories of his son, and the old scandal, and his fallfrom grace at the Ministry.

“Moody says Crouch is obsessed with catching Darkwizards,” Harry told Sirius.

Page | 584 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, I’ve heard it’s become a bit of a mania withhim,” said Sirius, nodding. “If you ask me, he stillthinks he can bring back the old popularity bycatching one more Death Eater.”

“And he sneaked up here to search Snape’s office!”said Ron triumphantly, looking at Hermione.

“Yes, and that doesn’t make sense at all,” said Sirius.

“Yeah, it does!” said Ron excitedly, but Sirius shookhis head.

“Listen, if Crouch wants to investigate Snape, whyhasn’t he been coming to judge the tournament? Itwould be an ideal excuse to make regular visits toHogwarts and keep an eye on him.”

“So you think Snape could be up to something, then?”asked Harry, but Hermione broke in.

“Look, I don’t care what you say, Dumbledore trustsSnape —”

“Oh give it a rest, Hermione,” said Ron impatiently. “Iknow Dumbledore’s brilliant and everything, but thatdoesn’t mean a really clever Dark wizard couldn’t foolhim —”

“Why did Snape save Harry’s life in the first year,then? Why didn’t he just let him die?”

“I dunno — maybe he thought Dumbledore wouldkick him out —”

“What d’you think, Sirius?” Harry said loudly, andRon and Hermione stopped bickering to listen.

Page | 585

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I think they’ve both got a point,” said Sirius, lookingthoughtfully at Ron and Hermione. “Ever since Ifound out Snape was teaching here, I’ve wonderedwhy Dumbledore hired him. Snape’s always beenfascinated by the Dark Arts, he was famous for it atschool. Slimy, oily, greasy-haired kid, he was,” Siriusadded, and Harry and Ron grinned at each other.“Snape knew more curses when he arrived at schoolthan half the kids in seventh year, and he was part ofa gang of Slytherins who nearly all turned out to beDeath Eaters.”

Sirius held up his fingers and began ticking offnames.

“Rosier and Wilkes — they were both killed by Aurorsthe year before Voldemort fell. The Lestranges —they’re a married couple — they’re in Azkaban. Avery

— from what I’ve heard he wormed his way out oftrouble by saying he’d been acting under the ImperiusCurse — he’s still at large. But as far as I know,

Snape was never even accused of being a Death Eater

— not that that means much. Plenty of them werenever caught. And Snape’s certainly clever andcunning enough to keep himself out of trouble.”

“Snape knows Karkaroff pretty well, but he wants tokeep that quiet,” said Ron.

“Yeah, you should’ve seen Snape’s face whenKarkaroff turned up in Potions yesterday!” said Harryquickly. “Karkaroff wanted to talk to Snape, he saysSnape’s been avoiding him. Karkaroff looked reallyworried. He showed Snape something on his arm, butI couldn’t see what it was.”

“He showed Snape something on his arm?” saidSirius, looking frankly bewildered. He ran his fingersdistractedly through his filthy hair, then shrugged

Page | 586 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

again. “Well, I’ve no idea what that’s about ... but ifKarkaroff’s genuinely worried, and he’s going toSnape for answers ...”

Sirius stared at the cave wall, then made a grimace offrustration.

“There’s still the fact that Dumbledore trusts Snape,and I know Dumbledore trusts where a lot of otherpeople wouldn’t, but I just can’t see him letting Snapeteach at Hogwarts if he’d ever worked for Voldemort.”

“Why are Moody and Crouch so keen to get intoSnape’s office then?” said Ron stubbornly.

“Well,” said Sirius slowly, “I wouldn’t put it past Mad-Eye to have searched every single teacher’s officewhen he got to Hogwarts. He takes his DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts seriously, Moody. I’m not surehe trusts anyone at all, and after the things he’s seen,it’s not surprising. I’ll say this for Moody, though, henever killed if he could help it. Always brought peoplein alive where possible. He was tough, but he neverdescended to the level of the Death Eaters. Crouch,though ... he’s a different matter ... is he really ill? Ifhe is, why did he make the effort to drag himself up toSnape’s office? And if he’s not ... what’s he up to?What was he doing at the World Cup that was soimportant he didn’t turn up in the Top Box? What’she been doing while he should have been judging thetournament?”

Sirius lapsed into silence, still staring at the cavewall. Buckbeak was ferreting around on the rockyfloor, looking for bones he might have overlooked.Finally, Sirius looked up at Ron.

Page | 587

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You say your brother’s Crouch’s personal assistant?Any chance you could ask him if he’s seen Crouchlately?”

“I can try,” said Ron doubtfully. “Better not make itsound like I reckon Crouch is up to anything dodgy,though. Percy loves Crouch.”

“And you might try and find out whether they’ve gotany leads on Bertha Jorkins while you’re at it,” saidSirius, gesturing to the second copy of the DailyProphet.

“Bagman told me they hadn’t,” said Harry.

“Yes, he’s quoted in the article in there,” said Sirius,nodding at the paper. “Blustering on about how badBertha’s memory is. Well, maybe she’s changed sinceI knew her, but the Bertha I knew wasn’t forgetful atall — quite the reverse. She was a bit dim, but shehad an excellent memory for gossip. It used to get herinto a lot of trouble; she never knew when to keep hermouth shut. I can see her being a bit of a liability atthe Ministry of Magic ... maybe that’s why Bagmandidn’t bother to look for her for so long. ...”

Sirius heaved an enormous sigh and rubbed hisshadowed eyes.

“What’s the time?”

Harry checked his watch, then remembered it hadn’tbeen working since it had spent over an hour in thelake.

“It’s half past three,” said Hermione.

“You’d better get back to school,” Sirius said, gettingto his feet. “Now listen ...” He looked particularly hard

Page | 588 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

at Harry. “I don’t want you lot sneaking out of schoolto see me, all right? Just send notes to me here. I stillwant to hear about anything odd. But you’re not to goleaving Hogwarts without permission; it would be anideal opportunity for someone to attack you.”

“No one’s tried to attack me so far, except a dragonand a couple of grindylows,” Harry said, but Siriusscowled at him.

“I don’t care ... I’ll breathe freely again when thistournament’s over, and that’s not until June. Anddon’t forget, if you’re talking about me amongyourselves, call me Snuffles, okay?”

He handed Harry the empty napkin and flask andwent to pat Buckbeak good-bye. “I’ll walk to the edgeof the village with you,” said Sirius, “see if I canscrounge another paper.”

He transformed into the great black dog before theyleft the cave, and they walked back down themountainside with him, across the boulder-strewnground, and back to the stile. Here he allowed each ofthem to pat him on the head, before turning andsetting off at a run around the outskirts of the village.Harry, Ron, and Hermione made their way back intoHogsmeade and up toward Hogwarts.

“Wonder if Percy knows all that stuff about Crouch?”Ron said as they walked up the drive to the castle.“But maybe he doesn’t care ... it’d probably just makehim admire Crouch even more. Yeah, Percy lovesrules. He’d just say Crouch was refusing to breakthem for his own son.”

“Percy would never throw any of his family to thedementors,” said Hermione severely.

Page | 589

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t know,” said Ron. “If he thought we werestanding in the way of his career ... Percy’s reallyambitious, you know. ...”

They walked up the stone steps into the entrancehall, where the delicious smells of dinner waftedtoward them from the Great Hall.

“Poor old Snuffles,” said Ron, breathing deeply. “Hemust really like you, Harry. ... Imagine having to liveoff rats.”

Page | 590

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE MADNESS OF MR. CROUCH

Harry, Ron, and Hermione went up to the Owleryafter breakfast on Sunday to send a letter to Percy,asking, as Sirius had suggested, whether he had seenMr. Crouch lately. They used Hedwig, because it hadbeen so long since she’d had a job. When they hadwatched her fly out of sight through the Owlerywindow, they proceeded down to the kitchen to giveDobby his new socks.

The house-elves gave them a very cheery welcome,bowing and curtsying and bustling around makingtea again. Dobby was ecstatic about his present.

“Harry Potter is too good to Dobby!” he squeaked,wiping large tears out of his enormous eyes.

“You saved my life with that gillyweed, Dobby, youreally did,” said Harry.

“No chance of more of those eclairs, is there?” saidRon, who was looking around at the beaming andbowing house-elves.

Page | 591 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You’ve just had breakfast!” said Hermione irritably,but a great silver platter of eclairs was alreadyzooming toward them, supported by four elves.

“We should get some stuff to send up to Snuffles,”Harry muttered.

“Good idea,” said Ron. “Give Pig something to do. Youcouldn’t give us a bit of extra food, could you?” hesaid to the surrounding elves, and they boweddelightedly and hurried off to get some more.

“Dobby, where’s Winky?” said Hermione, who waslooking around.

“Winky is over there by the fire, miss,” said Dobbyquietly, his ears drooping slightly.

“Oh dear,” said Hermione as she spotted Winky.

Harry looked over at the fireplace too. Winky wassitting on the same stool as last time, but she hadallowed herself to become so filthy that she was notimmediately distinguishable from the smoke-blackened brick behind her. Her clothes were raggedand unwashed. She was clutching a bottle ofbutterbeer and swaying slightly on her stool, staringinto the fire. As they watched her, she gave anenormous hiccup.

“Winky is getting through six bottles a day now,”Dobby whispered to Harry.

“Well, it’s not strong, that stuff,” Harry said.

But Dobby shook his head. “ Tis strong for a house-elf, sir,” he said.

Page | 592

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Winky hiccuped again. The elves who had brought theeclairs gave her disapproving looks as they returnedto work.

“Winky is pining, Harry Potter,” Dobby whisperedsadly. “Winky wants to go home. Winky still thinksMr. Crouch is her master, sir, and nothing Dobbysays will persuade her that Professor Dumbledore isher master now.”

“Hey, Winky,” said Harry, struck by a suddeninspiration, walking over to her, and bending down,“you don’t know what Mr. Crouch might be up to, doyou? Because he’s stopped turning up to judge theTriwizard Tournament.”

Winky’s eyes flickered. Her enormous pupils focusedon Harry. She swayed slightly again and then said, “M— Master is stopped — hie — coming?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, “we haven’t seen him since thefirst task. The Daily Prophet’s saying he’s ill.”

Winky swayed some more, staring blurrily at Harry.

“Master — hie — ill?”

Her bottom lip began to tremble.

“But we’re not sure if that’s true,” said Hermionequickly.

“Master is needing his — hie— Winky!” whimperedthe elf. “Master cannot — hie — manage — hie — allby himself. ...”

“Other people manage to do their own housework,you know, Winky,” Hermione said severely.

Page | 593

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Winky — hie — is not only — hie — doing houseworkfor Mr. Crouch!” Winky squeaked indignantly,swaying worse than ever and slopping butterbeerdown her already heavily stained blouse. “Master is —hie — trusting Winky with — hie — the mostimportant — hie — the most secret —”

“What?” said Harry.

But Winky shook her head very hard, spilling morebutterbeer down herself.

“Winky keeps — hie — her master’s secrets,” she saidmutinously, swaying very heavily now, frowning up atHarry with her eyes crossed. “You is — hie — nosing,you is.”

“Winky must not talk like that to Harry Potter!” saidDobby angrily. “Harry Potter is brave and noble andHarry Potter is not nosy!”

“He is nosing — hie — into my master’s — hie —private and secret — hie — Winky is a good house-elf— hie — Winky keeps her silence — hie — peopletrying to — hie — pry and poke — hie —”

Winky’s eyelids drooped and suddenly, withoutwarning, she slid off her stool into the hearth, snoringloudly. The empty bottle of butterbeer rolled awayacross the stone-flagged floor. Half a dozen house-elves came hurrying forward, looking disgusted. Oneof them picked up the bottle; the others coveredWinky with a large checked tablecloth and tucked theends in neatly, hiding her from view.

“We is sorry you had to see that, sirs and miss!”squeaked a nearby elf, shaking his head and lookingvery ashamed. “We is hoping you will not judge us allby Winky, sirs and miss!”

Page | 594 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“She’s unhappy!” said Hermione, exasperated. “Whydon’t you try and cheer her up instead of covering herup?”

“Begging your pardon, miss,” said the house-elf,bowing deeply again, “but house-elves has no right tobe unhappy when there is work to be done andmasters to be served.”

“Oh for heaven’s sake!” Hermione cried. “Listen to me,all of you! You’ve got just as much right as wizards tobe unhappy! You’ve got the right to wages andholidays and proper clothes, you don’t have to doeverything you’re told — look at Dobby!”

“Miss will please keep Dobby out of this,” Dobbymumbled, looking scared. The cheery smiles hadvanished from the faces of the house-elves around thekitchen. They were suddenly looking at Hermione asthough she were mad and dangerous.

“We has your extra food!” squeaked an elf at Harry’selbow, and he shoved a large ham, a dozen cakes, andsome fruit into Harry’s arms. “Good-bye!”

The house-elves crowded around Harry, Ron, andHermione and began shunting them out of thekitchen, many little hands pushing in the smalls oftheir backs.

“Thank you for the socks, Harry Potter!” Dobby calledmiserably from the hearth, where he was standingnext to the lumpy tablecloth that was Winky.

“You couldn’t keep your mouth shut, could you,Hermione?” said Ron angrily as the kitchen doorslammed shut behind them. “They won’t want usvisiting them now! We could’ve tried to get more stuffout of Winky about Crouch!”

Page | 595 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh as if you care about that!” scoffed Hermione. “Youonly like coming down here for the food!”

It was an irritable sort of day after that. Harry got sotired of Ron and Hermione sniping at each other overtheir homework in the common room that he tookSirius’s food up to the Owlery that evening on hisown.

Pigwidgeon was much too small to carry an entireham up to the mountain by himself, so Harry enlistedthe help of two school screech owls as well. Whenthey had set off into the dusk, looking extremely oddcarrying the large package between them, Harryleaned on the windowsill, looking out at the grounds,at the dark, rustling treetops of the Forbidden Forest,and the rippling sails of the Durmstrang ship. Aneagle owl flew through the coil of smoke rising fromHagrid’s chimney; it soared toward the castle, aroundthe Owlery, and out of sight. Looking down, Harrysaw Hagrid digging energetically in front of his cabin.Harry wondered what he was doing; it looked asthough he were making a new vegetable patch. As hewatched, Madame Maxime emerged from theBeauxbatons carriage and walked over to Hagrid. Sheappeared to be trying to engage him in conversation.Hagrid leaned upon his spade, but did not seem keento prolong their talk, because Madame Maximereturned to the carriage shortly afterward.

Unwilling to go back to Gryffindor Tower and listen toRon and Hermione snarling at each other, Harrywatched Hagrid digging until the darkness swallowedhim and the owls around Harry began to awake,swooshing past him into the night.

By breakfast the next day Ron’s and Hermione’s badmoods had burnt out, and to Harry’s relief, Ron’sdark predictions that the house-elves would send

Page | 596 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

substandard food up to the Gryffindor table becauseHermione had insulted them proved false; the bacon,eggs, and kippers were quite as good as usual.

When the post owls arrived, Hermione looked upeagerly; she seemed to be expecting something.

“Percy won’t’ve had time to answer yet,” said Ron. “Weonly sent Hedwig yesterday.”

“No, it’s not that,” said Hermione. “I’ve taken out asubscription to the Daily Prophet I’m getting sick offinding everything out from the Slytherins.”

“Good thinking!” said Harry, also looking up at theowls. “Hey, Hermione, I think you’re in luck —”

A gray owl was soaring down toward Hermione.

“It hasn’t got a newspaper, though,” she said, lookingdisappointed. “It’s —”

But to her bewilderment, the gray owl landed in frontof her plate, closely followed by four barn owls, abrown owl, and a tawny.

“How many subscriptions did you take out?” saidHarry, seizing Hermione’s goblet before it wasknocked over by the cluster of owls, all of whom werejostling close to her, trying to deliver their own letterfirst.

“What on earth — ?” Hermione said, taking the letterfrom the gray owl, opening it, and starting to read.

“Oh really!” she sputtered, going rather red.

“What’s up?” said Ron.

“It’s — oh how ridiculous —”

Page | 597 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

She thrust the letter at Harry, who saw that it wasnot handwritten, but composed from pasted lettersthat seemed to have been cut out of the Daily Prophet.

You are a WickEd giRL. HarRy PotTER desErves

BeTteR. GO back wherE you cAMe from mUGgle.

“They’re all like it!” said Hermione desperately,opening one letter after another. “ ‘Harry Potter can domuch better than the likes of you. ...’ ‘You deserve tobe boiled in frog spawn. ...’ Ouch!”

She had opened the last envelope, and yellowish-green liquid smelling strongly of petrol gushed overher hands, which began to erupt in large yellow boils.

“Undiluted bubotuber pus!” said Ron, picking up theenvelope gingerly and sniffing it.

“Ow!” said Hermione, tears starting in her eyes as shetried to rub the pus off her hands with a napkin, buther fingers were now so thickly covered in painfulsores that it looked as though she were wearing a pairof thick, knobbly gloves.

“You’d better get up to the hospital wing,” said Harryas the owls around Hermione took flight. “We’ll tellProfessor Sprout where you’ve gone. ...”

“I warned her!” said Ron as Hermione hurried out ofthe Great Hall, cradling her hands. “I warned her notto annoy Rita Skeeter! Look at this one ...” He readout one of the letters Hermione had left behind: “ ‘Iread in Witch Weekly about how you are playingHarry Potter false and that boy has had enoughhardship and I will be sending you a curse by next

Page | 598

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

post as soon as I can find a big enough envelope.’Blimey, she’d better watch out for herself.”

Hermione didn’t turn up for Herbology. As Harry andRon left the greenhouse for their Care of MagicalCreatures class, they saw Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyledescending the stone steps of the castle. PansyParkinson was whispering and giggling behind themwith her gang of Slytherin girls. Catching sight ofHarry, Pansy called, “Potter, have you split up withyour girlfriend? Why was she so upset at breakfast?”

Harry ignored her; he didn’t want to give her thesatisfaction of knowing how much trouble the WitchWeekly article had caused.

Hagrid, who had told them last lesson that they hadfinished with unicorns, was waiting for them outsidehis cabin with a fresh supply of open crates at hisfeet. Harry’s heart sank at the sight of the crates —surely not another skrewt hatching? — but when hegot near enough to see inside, he found himselflooking at a number of fluffy black creatures withlong snouts. Their front paws were curiously flat, likespades, and they were blinking up at the class,looking politely puzzled at all the attention.

“These’re nifflers,” said Hagrid, when the class hadgathered around. “Yeh find ’em down mines mostly.They like sparkly stuff. ... There yeh go, look.”

One of the nifflers had suddenly leapt up andattempted to bite Pansy Parkinson’s watch off herwrist. She shrieked and jumped backward.

“Useful little treasure detectors,” said Hagrid happily.“Thought we’d have some fun with ’em today. See overthere?” He pointed at the large patch of freshly turnedearth Harry had watched him digging from the Owlery

Page | 599 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

window. “I’ve buried some gold coins. I’ve got a prizefer whoever picks the niffler that digs up most. Jus’take off all yer valuables, an’ choose a niffler, an’ getready ter set ’em loose.”

Harry took off his watch, which he was only wearingout of habit, as it didn’t work anymore, and stuffed itinto his pocket. Then he picked up a niffler. It put itslong snout in Harry’s ear and sniffed enthusiastically.It was really quite cuddly.

“Hang on,” said Hagrid, looking down into the crate,“there’s a spare niffler here ... who’s missin’? Where’sHermione?”

“She had to go to the hospital wing,” said Ron.

“Well explain later,” Harry muttered; PansyParkinson was listening.

It was easily the most fun they had ever had in Careof Magical Creatures. The nifflers dived in and out ofthe patch of earth as though it were water, eachscurrying back to the student who had released it andspitting gold into their hands. Ron’s was particularlyefficient; it had soon filled his lap with coins.

“Can you buy these as pets, Hagrid?” he askedexcitedly as his niffler dived back into the soil,splattering his robes.

“Yer mum wouldn’ be happy, Ron,” said Hagrid,grinning. “They wreck houses, nifflers. I reckonthey’ve nearly got the lot, now,” he added, pacingaround the patch of earth while the nifflers continuedto dive. “I on’y buried a hundred coins. Oh therey’are, Hermione!”

Page | 600

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hermione was walking toward them across the lawn.Her hands were very heavily bandaged and she lookedmiserable. Pansy Parkinson was watching herbeadily.

“Well, let’s check how yeh’ve done!” said Hagrid.“Count yer coins! An’ there’s no point tryin’ ter stealany, Goyle,” he added, his beetle-black eyesnarrowed. “It’s leprechaun gold. Vanishes after a fewhours.”

Goyle emptied his pockets, looking extremely sulky. Itturned out that Ron’s niffler had been mostsuccessful, so Hagrid gave him an enormous slab ofHoneydukes chocolate for a prize. The bell rangacross the grounds for lunch; the rest of the class setoff back to the castle, but Harry, Ron, and Hermionestayed behind to help Hagrid put the nifflers back intheir boxes. Harry noticed Madame Maxime watchingthem out of her carriage window.

“What yeh done ter your hands, Hermione?” saidHagrid, looking concerned.

Hermione told him about the hate mail she hadreceived that morning, and the envelope full ofbubotuber pus.

“Aaah, don’ worry,” said Hagrid gently, looking downat her. “I got some o’ those letters an’ all, after RitaSkeeter wrote abou’ me mum. ‘Yeh’re a monster an’yeh should be put down.’ ‘Yer mother killed innocentpeople an’ if you had any decency you’d jump in alake. ’ ”

“No!” said Hermione, looking shocked.

“Yeah,” said Hagrid, heaving the niffler crates over byhis cabin wall. “They’re jus’ nutters, Hermione. Don’

Page | 601 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

open ’em if yeh get any more. Chuck ’em straigh’ inthe fire.”

“You missed a really good lesson,” Harry toldHermione as they headed back toward the castle.“They’re good, nifflers, aren’t they, Ron?”

Ron, however, was frowning at the chocolate Hagridhad given him. He looked thoroughly put out aboutsomething.

“What’s the matter?” said Harry. “Wrong flavor?”

“No,” said Ron shortly. “Why didn’t you tell me aboutthe gold?”

“What gold?” said Harry.

“The gold I gave you at the Quidditch World Cup,”said Ron. “The leprechaun gold I gave you for myOmnioculars. In the Top Box. Why didn’t you tell meit disappeared?”

Harry had to think for a moment before he realizedwhat Ron was talking about.

“Oh ...” he said, the memory coming back to him atlast. “I dunno ... I never noticed it had gone. I wasmore worried about my wand, wasn’t I?”

They climbed the steps into the entrance hall andwent into the Great Hall for lunch.

“Must be nice,” Ron said abruptly, when they had satdown and started serving themselves roast beef andYorkshire puddings. “To have so much money youdon’t notice if a pocketful of Galleons goes missing.”

Page | 602

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Listen, I had other stuff on my mind that night!” saidHarry impatiently. “We all did, remember?”

“I didn’t know leprechaun gold vanishes,” Ronmuttered. “I thought I was paying you back. Youshouldn’t’ve given me that Chudley Cannon hat forChristmas.”

“Forget it, all right?” said Harry.

Ron speared a roast potato on the end of his fork,glaring at it. Then he said, “I hate being poor.”

Harry and Hermione looked at each other. Neither ofthem really knew what to say.

“It’s rubbish,” said Ron, still glaring down at hispotato. “I don’t blame Fred and George for trying tomake some extra money. Wish I could. Wish I had aniffler.”

“Well, we know what to get you next Christmas,” saidHermione brightly. Then, when Ron continued to lookgloomy, she said, “Come on, Ron, it could be worse.

At least your fingers aren’t full of pus.” Hermione washaving a lot of difficulty managing her knife and fork,her fingers were so stiff and swollen. “I hate thatSkeeter woman!” she burst out savagely. “I’ll get herback for this if it’s the last thing I do!”

Hate mail continued to arrive for Hermione over thefollowing week, and although she followed Hagrid’sadvice and stopped opening it, several of her ill-wishers sent Howlers, which exploded at theGryffindor table and shrieked insults at her for thewhole Hall to hear. Even those people who didn’t readWitch Weekly knew all about the supposed Harry-Page | 603 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Krum-Hermione triangle now. Harry was getting sickof telling people that Hermione wasn’t his girlfriend.

“It’ll die down, though,” he told Hermione, “if we justignore it. ... People got bored with that stuff she wroteabout me last time —”

“I want to know how she’s listening into privateconversations when she’s supposed to be bannedfrom the grounds!” said Hermione angrily.

Hermione hung back in their next Defense Againstthe Dark Arts lesson to ask Professor Moodysomething. The rest of the class was very eager toleave; Moody had given them such a rigorous test ofhex-deflection that many of them were nursing smallinjuries. Harry had such a bad case of Twitchy Ears,he had to hold his hands clamped over them as hewalked away from the class.

“Well, Rita’s definitely not using an Invisibility Cloak!”Hermione panted five minutes later, catching up withHarry and Ron in the entrance hall and pullingHarry’s hand away from one of his wiggling ears sothat he could hear her. “Moody says he didn’t see heranywhere near the judges’ table at the second task, oranywhere near the lake!”

“Hermione, is there any point in telling you to dropthis?” said Ron.

“No!” said Hermione stubbornly. “I want to know howshe heard me talking to Viktor! And how she foundout about Hagrid’s mum!”

“Maybe she had you bugged,” said Harry.

“Bugged?” said Ron blankly. “What ... put fleas on heror something?”

Page | 604 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry started explaining about hidden microphonesand recording equipment. Ron was fascinated, butHermione interrupted them.

“Aren’t you two ever going to read Hogwarts, AHistory?”

“What’s the point?” said Ron. “You know it by heart,we can just ask you.”

“All those substitutes for magic Muggles use —electricity, computers, and radar, and all those things— they all go haywire around Hogwarts, there’s toomuch magic in the air. No, Rita’s using magic toeavesdrop, she must be. ... If I could just find outwhat it is ... ooh, if it’s illegal, I’ll have her ...”

“Haven’t we got enough to worry about?” Ron askedher. “Do we have to start a vendetta against RitaSkeeter as well?”

“I’m not asking you to help!” Hermione snapped. “I’lldo it on my own!”

She marched back up the marble staircase without abackward glance. Harry was quite sure she was goingto the library.

“What’s the betting she comes back with a box of /Hate Rita Skeeter badges?” said Ron.

Hermione, however, did not ask Harry and Ron tohelp her pursue vengeance against Rita Skeeter, forwhich they were both grateful, because their workloadwas mounting ever higher in the days before theEaster holidays. Harry frankly marveled at the factthat Hermione could research magical methods ofeavesdropping as well as everything else they had todo. He was working flat-out just to get through allPage | 605 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

their homework, though he made a point of sendingregular food packages up to the cave in the mountainfor Sirius; after last summer, Harry had not forgottenwhat it felt like to be continually hungry. He enclosednotes to Sirius, telling him that nothing out of theordinary had happened, and that they were stillwaiting for an answer from Percy.

Hedwig didn’t return until the end of the Easterholidays. Percy’s letter was enclosed in a package ofEaster eggs that Mrs. Weasley had sent. Both Harry’sand Ron’s were the size of dragon eggs and full ofhomemade toffee. Hermione’s, however, was smallerthan a chicken egg. Her face fell when she saw it.

“Your mum doesn’t read Witch Weekly, by anychance, does she, Ron?” she asked quietly.

“Yeah,” said Ron, whose mouth was full of toffee.

“Gets it for the recipes.”

Hermione looked sadly at her tiny egg.

“Don’t you want to see what Percy’s written?” Harryasked her hastily.

Percy’s letter was short and irritated.

As I am constantly telling the Daily Prophet, Mr.

Crouch is taking a well-deserved break. He is sendingin regular owls with instructions. No, I haven’t actuallyseen him, but I think I can be trusted to know my ownsuperior’s handwriting. I have quite enough to do atthe moment without trying to quash these ridiculousrumors. Please don’t bother me again unless it’ssomething important. Happy Easter.

The start of the summer term would normally havemeant that Harry was training hard for the last

Page | 606 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Quidditch match of the season. This year, however, itwas the third and final task in the TriwizardTournament for which he needed to prepare, but hestill didn’t know what he would have to do. Finally, inthe last week of May, Professor McGonagall held himback in Transfiguration.

“You are to go down to the Quidditch field tonight atnine o’clock, Potter,” she told him. “Mr. Bagman willbe there to tell the champions about the third task.”

So at half past eight that night, Harry left Ron andHermione in Gryffindor Tower and went downstairs.As he crossed the entrance hall, Cedric came up fromthe Hufflepuff common room.

“What d’you reckon it’s going to be?” he asked Harryas they went together down the stone steps, out intothe cloudy night. “Fleur keeps going on aboutunderground tunnels; she reckons we’ve got to findtreasure.”

“That wouldn’t be too bad,” said Harry, thinking thathe would simply ask Hagrid for a niffler to do the jobfor him.

They walked down the dark lawn to the Quidditchstadium, turned through a gap in the stands, andwalked out onto the field.

“What’ve they done to it?” Cedric said indignantly,stopping dead.

The Quidditch field was no longer smooth and flat. Itlooked as though somebody had been building long,low walls all over it that twisted and crisscrossed inevery direction.

Page | 607

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“They’re hedges!” said Harry, bending to examine thenearest one.

“Hello there!” called a cheery voice.

Ludo Bagman was standing in the middle of the fieldwith Krum and Fleur. Harry and Cedric made theirway toward them, climbing over the hedges. Fleurbeamed at Harry as he came nearer. Her attitudetoward him had changed completely since he hadsaved her sister from the lake.

“Well, what d’you think?” said Bagman happily asHarry and Cedric climbed over the last hedge.“Growing nicely, aren’t they? Give them a month andHagrid’ll have them twenty feet high. Don’t worry,” headded, grinning, spotting the less-than-happyexpressions on Harry’s and Cedric’s faces, “you’ll haveyour Quidditch field back to normal once the task isover! Now, I imagine you can guess what we’remaking here?”

No one spoke for a moment. Then —

“Maze,” grunted Krum.

“That’s right!” said Bagman. “A maze. The third task’sreally very straightforward. The Triwizard Cup will beplaced in the center of the maze. The first championto touch it will receive full marks.”

“We seemply ’ave to get through the maze?” saidFleur.

“There will be obstacles,” said Bagman happily,bouncing on the balls of his feet. “Hagrid is providinga number of creatures ... then there will be spells thatmust be broken ... all that sort of thing, you know.Now, the champions who are leading on points willPage | 608 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

get a head start into the maze.” Bagman grinned atHarry and Cedric. “Then Mr. Krum will enter ... thenMiss Delacour. But you 11 all be in with a fightingchance, depending how well you get past theobstacles. Should be fun, eh?”

Harry, who knew only too well the kind of creaturesthat Hagrid was likely to provide for an event like this,thought it was unlikely to be any fun at all. However,he nodded politely like the other champions.

“Very well ... if you haven’t got any questions, we’ll goback up to the castle, shall we, it’s a bit chilly. ...”

Bagman hurried alongside Harry as they began towend their way out of the growing maze. Harry hadthe feeling that Bagman was going to start offering tohelp him again, but just then, Krum tapped Harry onthe shoulder.

“Could I haff a vord?”

“Yeah, all right,” said Harry, slightly surprised.

“Vill you valk vith me?”

“Okay,” said Harry curiously.

Bagman looked slightly perturbed.

“I’ll wait for you, Harry, shall I?”

“No, it’s okay, Mr. Bagman,” said Harry, suppressinga smile, “I think I can find the castle on my own,thanks.”

Harry and Krum left the stadium together, but Krumdid not set a course for the Durmstrang ship. Instead,he walked toward the forest.

Page | 609 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“What’re we going this way for?” said Harry as theypassed Hagrid’s cabin and the illuminatedBeauxbatons carriage.

“Don’t vant to be overheard,” said Krum shortly.

When at last they had reached a quiet stretch ofground a short way from the Beauxbatons horses’paddock, Krum stopped in the shade of the trees andturned to face Harry.

“I vant to know,” he said, glowering, “vot there isbetween you and Hermy-own-ninny.”

Harry, who from Krum’s secretive manner hadexpected something much more serious than this,stared up at Krum in amazement.

“Nothing,” he said. But Krum glowered at him, andHarry, somehow struck anew by how tall Krum was,elaborated. “We’re friends. She’s not my girlfriend andshe never has been. It’s just that Skeeter womanmaking things up.”

“Hermy-own-ninny talks about you very often,” saidKrum, looking suspiciously at Harry.

“Yeah,” said Harry, “because we’re friends.”

He couldn’t quite believe he was having thisconversation with Viktor Krum, the famousInternational Quidditch player. It was as though theeighteen-year-old Krum thought he, Harry, was anequal — a real rival —

“You haff never ... you haff not ...”

“No,” said Harry very firmly.

Page | 610

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Krum looked slightly happier. He stared at Harry for afew seconds, then said, “You fly very veil. I vosvotching at the first task.”

“Thanks,” said Harry, grinning broadly and suddenlyfeeling much taller himself. “I saw you at theQuidditch World Cup. The Wronski Feint, you really

But something moved behind Krum in the trees, andHarry, who had some experience of the sort of thingthat lurked in the forest, instinctively grabbed Krum’sarm and pulled him around.

“Vot is it?”

Harry shook his head, staring at the place where he’dseen movement. He slipped his hand inside his robes,reaching for his wand.

Suddenly a man staggered out from behind a tall oak.For a moment, Harry didn’t recognize him ... then herealized it was Mr. Crouch.

He looked as though he had been traveling for days.The knees of his robes were ripped and bloody, hisface scratched; he was unshaven and gray withexhaustion. His neat hair and mustache were both inneed of a wash and a trim. His strange appearance,however, was nothing to the way he was behaving.Muttering and gesticulating, Mr. Crouch appeared tobe talking to someone that he alone could see. Hereminded Harry vividly of an old tramp he had seenonce when out shopping with the Dursleys. That mantoo had been conversing wildly with thin air; AuntPetunia had seized Dudley’s hand and pulled himacross the road to avoid him; Uncle Vernon had thentreated the family to a long rant about what he wouldlike to do with beggars and vagrants.

Page | 611 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

“Vosn’t he a judge?” said Krum, staring at Mr.

Crouch. “Isn’t he vith your Ministry?”

Harry nodded, hesitated for a moment, then walkedslowly toward Mr. Crouch, who did not look at him,but continued to talk to a nearby tree.

"... and when you’ve done that, Weatherby, send anowl to Dumbledore confirming the number ofDurmstrang students who will be attending thetournament, Karkaroff has just sent word there willbe twelve. ...”

“Mr. Crouch?” said Harry cautiously.

"... and then send another owl to Madame Maxime,because she might want to up the number ofstudents she’s bringing, now Karkaroff’s made it around dozen ... do that, Weatherby, will you? Willyou? Will...”

Mr. Crouch’s eyes were bulging. He stood staring atthe tree, muttering soundlessly at it. Then hestaggered sideways and fell to his knees.

“Mr. Crouch?” Harry said loudly. “Are you all right?”

Crouch’s eyes were rolling in his head. Harry lookedaround at Krum, who had followed him into the trees,and was looking down at Crouch in alarm.

“Vot is wrong with him?”

“No idea,” Harry muttered. “Listen, you’d better goand get someone —”

“Dumbledore!” gasped Mr. Crouch. He reached outand seized a handful of Harry’s robes, dragging him

Page | 612

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

closer, though his eyes were staring over Harry’shead. “I need ... see ... Dumbledore. ...”

“Okay,” said Harry, “if you get up, Mr. Crouch, we cango up to the —”

“I’ve done ... stupid ... thing ...” Mr. Crouch breathed.He looked utterly mad. His eyes were rolling andbulging, and a trickle of spittle was sliding down hischin. Every word he spoke seemed to cost him aterrible effort. “Must ... tell ... Dumbledore ...”

“Get up, Mr. Crouch,” said Harry loudly and clearly.“Get up, I’ll take you to Dumbledore!”

Mr. Crouch’s eyes rolled forward onto Harry.

“Who ... you?” he whispered.

“I’m a student at the school,” said Harry, lookingaround at Krum for some help, but Krum washanging back, looking extremely nervous.

“You’re not ... his?” whispered Crouch, his mouthsagging.

“No,” said Harry, without the faintest idea whatCrouch was talking about.

“Dumbledore’s?”

“That’s right,” said Harry.

Crouch was pulling him closer; Harry tried to loosenCrouch’s grip on his robes, but it was too powerful.

“Warn ... Dumbledore ...”

Page | 613

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll get Dumbledore if you let go of me,” said Harry.“Just let go, Mr. Crouch, and I’ll get him. ...”

“Thank you, Weatherby, and when you have donethat, I would like a cup of tea. My wife and son will bearriving shortly, we are attending a concert tonightwith Mr. and Mrs. Fudge.”

Crouch was now talking fluently to a tree again, andseemed completely unaware that Harry was there,which surprised Harry so much he didn’t notice thatCrouch had released him.

“Yes, my son has recently gained twelve O.W.L.s,most satisfactory, yes, thank you, yes, very proudindeed. Now, if you could bring me that memo fromthe Andorran Minister of Magic, I think I will havetime to draft a response. ...”

“You stay here with him!” Harry said to Krum. “I’ll getDumbledore, I’ll be quicker, I know where his office is

“He is mad,” said Krum doubtfully, staring down atCrouch, who was still gabbling to the tree, apparentlyconvinced it was Percy.

“Just stay with him,” said Harry, starting to get up,but his movement seemed to trigger another abruptchange in Mr. Crouch, who seized him hard aroundthe knees and pulled Harry back to the ground.

“Don’t ... leave ... me!” he whispered, his eyes bulgingagain. “I ... escaped ... must warn ... must tell ... seeDumbledore ... my fault ... all my fault ... Bertha ...dead ... all my fault ... my son ... my fault ... tellDumbledore ... Harry Potter ... the Dark Lord ...stronger ... Harry Potter ...”

Page | 614

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I’ll get Dumbledore if you let me go, Mr. Crouch!”said Harry. He looked furiously around at Krum.

“Help me, will you?”

Looking extremely apprehensive, Krum movedforward and squatted down next to Mr. Crouch.

“Just keep him here,” said Harry, pulling himself freeof Mr. Crouch. “I’ll be back with Dumbledore.”

“Hurry, von’t you?” Krum called after him as Harrysprinted away from the forest and up through thedark grounds. They were deserted; Bagman, Cedric,and Fleur had disappeared. Harry tore up the stonesteps, through the oak front doors, and off up themarble staircase, toward the second floor.

Five minutes later he was hurtling toward a stonegargoyle standing halfway along an empty corridor.

“Sher — sherbet lemon!” he panted at it.

This was the password to the hidden staircase toDumbledore’s office — or at least, it had been twoyears ago. The password had evidently changed,however, for the stone gargoyle did not spring to lifeand jump aside, but stood frozen, glaring at Harrymalevolently.

“Move!” Harry shouted at it. “C’mon!”

But nothing at Hogwarts had ever moved just becausehe shouted at it; he knew it was no good. He lookedup and down the dark corridor. Perhaps Dumbledorewas in the staffroom? He started running as fast ashe could toward the staircase —

“POTTER!”

Page | 615

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry skidded to a halt and looked around. Snapehad just emerged from the hidden staircase behindthe stone gargoyle. The wall was sliding shut behindhim even as he beckoned Harry back toward him.

“What are you doing here, Potter?”

“I need to see Professor Dumbledore!” said Harry,running back up the corridor and skidding to astandstill in front of Snape instead. “It’s Mr. Crouch... he’s just turned up ... he’s in the forest ... he’sasking —”

“What is this rubbish?” said Snape, his black eyesglittering. “What are you talking about?”

“Mr. Crouch!” Harry shouted. “From the Ministry!

He’s ill or something — he’s in the forest, he wants tosee Dumbledore! Just give me the password up to —”

“The headmaster is busy, Potter,” said Snape, his thinmouth curling into an unpleasant smile.

“I’ve got to tell Dumbledore!” Harry yelled.

“Didn’t you hear me, Potter?”

Harry could tell Snape was thoroughly enjoyinghimself, denying Harry the thing he wanted when hewas so panicky.

“Look,” said Harry angrily, “Crouch isn’t right — he’s— he’s out of his mind — he says he wants to warn —

The stone wall behind Snape slid open. Dumbledorewas standing there, wearing long green robes and amildly curious expression. “Is there a problem?” hesaid, looking between Harry and Snape.

Page | 616 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Professor!” Harry said, sidestepping Snape beforeSnape could speak, “Mr. Crouch is here — he’s downin the forest, he wants to speak to you!”

Harry expected Dumbledore to ask questions, but tohis relief, Dumbledore did nothing of the sort.

“Lead the way,” he said promptly, and he swept offalong the corridor behind Harry, leaving Snapestanding next to the gargoyle and looking twice asugly.

“What did Mr. Crouch say, Harry?” said Dumbledoreas they walked swiftly down the marble staircase.

“Said he wants to warn you ... said he’s donesomething terrible ... he mentioned his son ... andBertha Jorkins ... and — and Voldemort ... somethingabout Voldemort getting stronger. ...”

“Indeed,” said Dumbledore, and he quickened hispace as they hurried out into the pitch-darkness.

“He’s not acting normally,” Harry said, hurrying alongbeside Dumbledore. “He doesn’t seem to know wherehe is. He keeps talking like he thinks Percy Weasley’sthere, and then he changes, and says he needs to seeyou. ... I left him with Viktor Krum.”

“You did?” said Dumbledore sharply, and he began totake longer strides still, so that Harry was running tokeep up. “Do you know if anybody else saw Mr.Crouch?”

“No,” said Harry. “Krum and I were talking, Mr.Bagman had just finished telling us about the thirdtask, we stayed behind, and then we saw Mr. Crouchcoming out of the forest —”

Page | 617

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Where are they?” said Dumbledore as theBeauxbatons carriage emerged from the darkness.

“Over here,” said Harry, moving in front ofDumbledore, leading the way through the trees. Hecouldn’t hear Crouch’s voice anymore, but he knewwhere he was going; it hadn’t been much past theBeauxbatons carriage ... somewhere around here. ...

“Viktor?” Harry shouted.

No one answered.

“They were here,” Harry said to Dumbledore. “Theywere definitely somewhere around here. ...”

“Lumos,” Dumbledore said, lighting his wand andholding it up.

Its narrow beam traveled from black trunk to blacktrunk, illuminating the ground. And then it fell upona pair of feet.

Harry and Dumbledore hurried forward. Krum wassprawled on the forest floor. He seemed to beunconscious. There was no sign at all of Mr. Crouch.Dumbledore bent over Krum and gently lifted one ofhis eyelids.

“Stunned,” he said softly. His half-moon glassesglittered in the wandlight as he peered around at thesurrounding trees.

“Should I go and get someone?” said Harry. “MadamPomfrey?”

“No,” said Dumbledore swiftly. “Stay here.”

Page | 618

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He raised his wand into the air and pointed it in thedirection of Hagrid’s cabin. Harry saw somethingsilvery dart out of it and streak away through thetrees like a ghostly bird. Then Dumbledore bent overKrum again, pointed his wand at him, and muttered,“Renneruate.”

Krum opened his eyes. He looked dazed. When he sawDumbledore, he tried to sit up, but Dumbledore put ahand on his shoulder and made him lie still.

“He attacked me!” Krum muttered, putting a hand upto his head. “The old madman attacked me! I voslooking around to see vare Potter had gone and heattacked from behind!”

“Lie still for a moment,” Dumbledore said.

The sound of thunderous footfalls reached them, andHagrid came panting into sight with Fang at hisheels. He was carrying his crossbow.

“Professor Dumbledore!” he said, his eyes widening.“Harry — what the — ?”

“Hagrid, I need you to fetch Professor Karkaroff,” saidDumbledore. “His student has been attacked. Whenyou’ve done that, kindly alert Professor Moody —”

“No need, Dumbledore,” said a wheezy growl. “I’mhere.”

Moody was limping toward them, leaning on his staff,his wand lit.

“Damn leg,” he said furiously. “Would’ve been herequicker ... what’s happened? Snape said somethingabout Crouch —”

Page | 619

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Crouch?” said Hagrid blankly.

“Karkaroff, please, Hagrid!” said Dumbledore sharply.

“Oh yeah ... right y’are, Professor ...” said Hagrid, andhe turned and disappeared into the dark trees, Fangtrotting after him.

“I don’t know where Barty Crouch is,” Dumbledoretold Moody, “but it is essential that we find him.”

“I’m onto it,” growled Moody, and he pulled out hiswand and limped off into the forest.

Neither Dumbledore nor Harry spoke again until theyheard the unmistakable sounds of Hagrid and Fangreturning. Karkaroff was hurrying along behind them.He was wearing his sleek silver furs, and he lookedpale and agitated.

“What is this?” he cried when he saw Krum on theground and Dumbledore and Harry beside him.“What’s going on?”

“I vos attacked!” said Krum, sitting up now andrubbing his head. “Mr. Crouch or votever his name —

“Crouch attacked you? Crouch attacked you? TheTriwizard judge?”

“Igor,” Dumbledore began, but Karkaroff had drawnhimself up, clutching his furs around him, lookinglivid.

“Treachery!” he bellowed, pointing at Dumbledore. “Itis a plot! You and your Ministry of Magic have luredme here under false pretenses, Dumbledore! This isnot an equal competition! First you sneak Potter into

Page | 620 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the tournament, though he is underage! Now one ofyour Ministry friends attempts to put my championout of action! I smell double-dealing and corruption inthis whole affair, and you, Dumbledore, you, withyour talk of closer international wizarding links, ofrebuilding old ties, of forgetting old differences —here’s what I think of you!”

Karkaroff spat onto the ground at Dumbledore’s feet.In one swift movement, Hagrid seized the front ofKarkaroff’s furs, lifted him into the air, and slammedhim against a nearby tree.

“Apologize!” Hagrid snarled as Karkaroff gasped forbreath, Hagrid’s massive fist at his throat, his feetdangling in midair.

“Hagrid, no\” Dumbledore shouted, his eyes flashing.

Hagrid removed the hand pinning Karkaroff to thetree, and Karkaroff slid all the way down the trunkand slumped in a huddle at its roots; a few twigs andleaves showered down upon his head.

“Kindly escort Harry back up to the castle, Hagrid,”said Dumbledore sharply.

Breathing heavily, Hagrid gave Karkaroff a gloweringlook.

“Maybe I’d better stay here, Headmaster. ...”

“You will take Harry back to school, Hagrid,”Dumbledore repeated firmly. “Take him right up toGryffindor Tower. And Harry — I want you to staythere. Anything you might want to do — any owls youmight want to send — they can wait until morning, doyou understand me?”

Page | 621

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Er — yes,” said Harry, staring at him. How hadDumbledore known that, at that very moment, he hadbeen thinking about sending Pigwidgeon straight toSirius, to tell him what had happened?

“Ill leave Fang with yeh, Headmaster,” Hagrid said,staring menacingly at Karkaroff, who was stillsprawled at the foot of the tree, tangled in furs andtree roots. “Stay, Fang. C’mon, Harry.”

They marched in silence past the Beauxbatonscarriage and up toward the castle.

“How dare he,” Hagrid growled as they strode past thelake. “How dare he accuse Dumbledore. LikeDumbledore’d do anythin’ like that. Like Dumbledorewanted you in the tournament in the firs’ place.Worried! I dunno when I seen Dumbledore moreworried than he’s bin lately. An’ you!” Hagridsuddenly said angrily to Harry, who looked up at him,taken aback. “What were yeh doin’, wanderin’ off withruddy Krum? He’s from Durmstrang, Harry! Couldajinxed yeh right there, couldn’ he? Hasn’ Moodytaught yeh nothin’? ’Magine lettin’ him lure yeh off onyer own —”

“Krum’s all right!” said Harry as they climbed thesteps into the entrance hall. “He wasn’t trying to jinxme, he just wanted to talk about Hermione —”

“I’ll be havin’ a few words with her, an’ all,” saidHagrid grimly, stomping up the stairs. “The less youlot ’ave ter do with these foreigners, the happier yeh’llbe. Yeh can’ trust any of ’em.”

“You were getting on all right with Madame Maxime,”Harry said, annoyed.

Page | 622

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Don’you talk ter me abou’ her!” said Hagrid, and helooked quite frightening for a moment. “I’ve got hernumber now! Tryin’ ter get back in me good books,tryin’ ter get me ter tell her what’s cornin’ in the thirdtask. Ha! You can’ trust any of ’em!”

Hagrid was in such a bad mood, Harry was quite gladto say good-bye to him in front of the Fat Lady. Heclambered through the portrait hole into the commonroom and hurried straight for the corner where Ronand Hermione were sitting, to tell them what hadhappened.

Page | 623

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

z?



THE DREAM

“It comes down to this,” said Hermione, rubbing herforehead. “Either Mr. Crouch attacked Viktor, orsomebody else attacked both of them when Viktorwasn’t looking.”

“It must’ve been Crouch,” said Ron at once. “That’swhy he was gone when Harry and Dumbledore gotthere. He’d done a runner.”

“I don’t think so,” said Harry, shaking his head. “Heseemed really weak — I don’t reckon he was up toDisapparating or anything.”

“You can’t Disapparate on the Hogwarts grounds,haven’t I told you enough times?” said Hermione.

“Okay ... how’s this for a theory,” said Ron excitedly.“Krum attacked Crouch — no, wait for it — and thenStunned himself!”

“And Mr. Crouch evaporated, did he?” said Hermionecoldly.

Page | 624

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh yeah ...”

It was daybreak. Harry, Ron, and Hermione had creptout of their dormitories very early and hurried up tothe Owlery together to send a note to Sirius. Now theywere standing looking out at the misty grounds. Allthree of them were puffy-eyed and pale because theyhad been talking late into the night about Mr.

Crouch.

“Just go through it again, Harry,” said Hermione.“What did Mr. Crouch actually say?”

“I’ve told you, he wasn’t making much sense,” saidHarry. “He said he wanted to warn Dumbledore aboutsomething. He definitely mentioned Bertha Jorkins,and he seemed to think she was dead. He kept sayingstuff was his fault. ... He mentioned his son.”

“Well, that was his fault,” said Hermione testily.

“He was out of his mind,” said Harry. “Half the timehe seemed to think his wife and son were still alive,and he kept talking to Percy about work and givinghim instructions.”

“And ... remind me what he said about You-Know-Who?” said Ron tentatively.

“I’ve told you,” Harry repeated dully. “He said he’sgetting stronger.”

There was a pause. Then Ron said in a falselyconfident voice, “But he was out of his mind, like yousaid, so half of it was probably just raving. ...”

“He was sanest when he was trying to talk aboutVoldemort,” said Harry, and Ron winced at the soundof the name. “He was having real trouble stringing

Page | 625 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

two words together, but that was when he seemed toknow where he was, and know what he wanted to do.He just kept saying he had to see Dumbledore.”

Harry turned away from the window and stared upinto the rafters. The many perches were half-empty;every now and then, another owl would swoop inthrough one of the windows, returning from its night’shunting with a mouse in its beak.

“If Snape hadn’t held me up,” Harry said bitterly, “wemight’ve got there in time. The headmaster is busy,Potter ... what’s this rubbish, Potter?’ Why couldn’t hehave just got out of the way?”

“Maybe he didn’t want you to get there!” said Ronquickly. “Maybe — hang on — how fast d’you reckonhe could’ve gotten down to the forest? D’you reckonhe could’ve beaten you and Dumbledore there?”

“Not unless he can turn himself into a bat orsomething,” said Harry.

“Wouldn’t put it past him,” Ron muttered.

“We need to see Professor Moody,” said Hermione.

“We need to find out whether he found Mr. Crouch.”

“If he had the Marauder’s Map on him, it would’vebeen easy,” said Harry.

“Unless Crouch was already outside the grounds,”said Ron, “because it only shows up to theboundaries, doesn’t —”

“Shh!” said Hermione suddenly.

Page | 626

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Somebody was climbing the steps up to the Owlery.Harry could hear two voices arguing, coming closerand closer.

“— that’s blackmail, that is, we could get into a lot oftrouble for that —”

“— we’ve tried being polite; it’s time to play dirty, likehim. He wouldn’t like the Ministry of Magic knowingwhat he did —”

“I’m telling you, if you put that in writing, it’sblackmail!”

“Yeah, and you won’t be complaining if we get a nicefat payoff, will you?”

The Owlery door banged open. Fred and George cameover the threshold, then froze at the sight of Harry,Ron, and Hermione.

“What’re you doing here?” Ron and Fred said at thesame time.

“Sending a letter,” said Harry and George in unison.“What, at this time?” said Hermione and Fred.

Fred grinned.

“Fine — we won’t ask you what you’re doing, if youdon’t ask us,” he said.

He was holding a sealed envelope in his hands. Harryglanced at it, but Fred, whether accidentally or onpurpose, shifted his hand so that the name on it wascovered.

Page | 627

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Well, don’t let us hold you up,” Fred said, making amock bow and pointing at the door.

Ron didn’t move. “Who’re you blackmailing?” he said.

The grin vanished from Fred’s face. Harry saw Georgehalf glance at Fred, before smiling at Ron.

“Don’t be stupid, I was only joking,” he said easily.

“Didn’t sound like that,” said Ron.

Fred and George looked at each other. Then Fred saidabruptly, “I’ve told you before, Ron, keep your noseout if you like it the shape it is. Can’t see why youwould, but —”

“It’s my business if you’re blackmailing someone,”said Ron. “George’s right, you could end up in serioustrouble for that.”

“Told you, I was joking,” said George. He walked overto Fred, pulled the letter out of his hands, and beganattaching it to the leg of the nearest barn owl. “You’restarting to sound a bit like our dear older brother,you are, Ron. Carry on like this and you’ll be made aprefect.”

“No, I won’t!” said Ron hotly.

George carried the barn owl over to the window and ittook off. George turned around and grinned at Ron.

“Well, stop telling people what to do then. See youlater.”

He and Fred left the Owlery. Harry, Ron, andHermione stared at one another.

Page | 628

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You don’t think they know something about all this,do you?” Hermione whispered. “About Crouch andeverything?”

“No,” said Harry. “If it was something that serious,they’d tell someone. They’d tell Dumbledore.”

Ron, however, was looking uncomfortable.

“What’s the matter?” Hermione asked him.

“Well ...” said Ron slowly, “I dunno if they would.They’re ... they’re obsessed with making money lately,

I noticed it when I was hanging around with them —when — you know —”

“We weren’t talking.” Harry finished the sentence forhim. “Yeah, but blackmail ...”

“It’s this joke shop idea they’ve got,” said Ron. “Ithought they were only saying it to annoy Mum, butthey really mean it, they want to start one. They’veonly got a year left at Hogwarts, they keep going onabout how it’s time to think about their future, andDad can’t help them, and they need gold to getstarted.”

Hermione was looking uncomfortable now.

“Yes, but ... they wouldn’t do anything against the lawto get gold.”

“Wouldn’t they?” said Ron, looking skeptical. “I dunno... they don’t exactly mind breaking rules, do they?”

“Yes, but this is the law,” said Hermione, lookingscared. “This isn’t some silly school rule. ... They’ll geta lot more than detention for blackmail! Ron ... maybeyou’d better tell Percy. ...”

Page | 629 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Are you mad?” said Ron. “Tell Percy? He’d probablydo a Crouch and turn them in.” He stared at thewindow through which Fred and Georges owl haddeparted, then said, “Come on, let’s get somebreakfast.”

“D’you think it’s too early to go and see ProfessorMoody?” Hermione said as they went down the spiralstaircase.

“Yes,” said Harry. “He’d probably blast us through thedoor if we wake him at the crack of dawn; he’ll thinkwe’re trying to attack him while he’s asleep. Let’s giveit till break.”

History of Magic had rarely gone so slowly. Harry keptchecking Ron’s watch, having finally discarded hisown, but Ron’s was moving so slowly he could havesworn it had stopped working too. All three of themwere so tired they could happily have put their headsdown on the desks and slept; even Hermione wasn’ttaking her usual notes, but was sitting with her headon her hand, gazing at Professor Binns with her eyesout of focus.

When the bell finally rang, they hurried out into thecorridors toward the Dark Arts classroom and foundProfessor Moody leaving it. He looked as tired as theyfelt. The eyelid of his normal eye was drooping, givinghis face an even more lopsided appearance thanusual.

“Professor Moody?” Harry called as they made theirway toward him through the crowd.

“Hello, Potter,” growled Moody. His magical eyefollowed a couple of passing first years, who sped up,looking nervous; it rolled into the back of Moody’s

Page | 630

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

head and watched them around the corner before hespoke again.

“Come in here.”

He stood back to let them into his empty classroom,limped in after them, and closed the door.

“Did you find him?” Harry asked without preamble.“Mr. Crouch?”

“No,” said Moody. He moved over to his desk, satdown, stretched out his wooden leg with a slightgroan, and pulled out his hip flask.

“Did you use the map?” Harry said.

“Of course,” said Moody, taking a swig from his flask.“Took a leaf out of your book, Potter. Summoned itfrom my office into the forest. He wasn’t anywhere onthere.”

“So he did Disapparate?” said Ron.

“You can’t Disapparate on the grounds, Ron\” saidHermione. “There are other ways he could havedisappeared, aren’t there, Professor?”

Moody’s magical eye quivered as it rested onHermione. “You’re another one who might think abouta career as an Auror,” he told her. “Mind works theright way, Granger.”

Hermione flushed pink with pleasure.

“Well, he wasn’t invisible,” said Harry. “The mapshows invisible people. He must’ve left the grounds,then.”

Page | 631 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“But under his own steam?” said Hermione eagerly,

“or because someone made him?”

“Yeah, someone could’ve — could’ve pulled him onto abroom and flown off with him, couldn’t they?” saidRon quickly, looking hopefully at Moody as if he toowanted to be told he had the makings of an Auror.

“We can’t rule out kidnap,” growled Moody.

“So,” said Ron, “d’you reckon he’s somewhere inHogsmeade?”

“Could be anywhere,” said Moody, shaking his head.“Only thing we know for sure is that he’s not here.”

He yawned widely, so that his scars stretched, andhis lopsided mouth revealed a number of missingteeth. Then he said, “Now, Dumbledore’s told me youthree fancy yourselves as investigators, but there’snothing you can do for Crouch. The Ministry’ll belooking for him now, Dumbledore’s notified them.Potter, you just keep your mind on the third task.”

“What?” said Harry. “Oh yeah ...”

He hadn’t given the maze a single thought since he’dleft it with Krum the previous night.

“Should be right up your street, this one,” saidMoody, looking up at Harry and scratching hisscarred and stubbly chin. “From what Dumbledore’ssaid, you’ve managed to get through stuff like thisplenty of times. Broke your way through a series ofobstacles guarding the Sorcerer’s Stone in your firstyear, didn’t you?”

“We helped,” Ron said quickly. “Me and Hermionehelped.”

Page | 632 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Moody grinned.

“Well, help him practice for this one, and I’ll be verysurprised if he doesn’t win,” said Moody. “In themeantime ... constant vigilance, Potter. Constantvigilance.” He took another long draw from his hipflask, and his magical eye swiveled onto the window.The topmost sail of the Durmstrang ship was visiblethrough it.

“You two,” counseled Moody, his normal eye on Ronand Hermione, “you stick close to Potter, all right? I’mkeeping an eye on things, but all the same ... you cannever have too many eyes out.”

•k k k

Sirius sent their owl back the very next morning. Itfluttered down beside Harry at the same moment thata tawny owl landed in front of Hermione, clutching acopy of the Daily Prophet in its beak. She took thenewspaper, scanned the first few pages, said, “Ha!

She hasn’t got wind of Crouch!” then joined Ron andHarry in reading what Sirius had to say on themysterious events of the night before last.

Harry — what do you think you are playing at,walking off into the forest with Viktor Krum? I wantyou to swear, by return owl, that you are not going togo walking with anyone else at night. There issomebody highly dangerous at Hogwarts. It is clear tome that they wanted to stop Crouch from seeingDumbledore and you were probably feet away fromthem in the dark. You could have been killed.

Your name didn’t get into the Goblet of Fire byaccident. If someone’s trying to attack you, they’re on

Page | 633 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

their last chance. Stay close to Ron and Hermione, donot leave Gryffindor Tower after hours, and armyourself for the third task. Practice Stunning andDisarming. A few hexes wouldn’t go amiss either.There’s nothing you can do about Crouch. Keep yourhead down and look after yourself. I’m waiting for yourletter giving me your word you won’t stray out-of-bounds again.

Sirius

“Who’s he, to lecture me about being out-of-bounds?”said Harry in mild indignation as he folded up Sirius’sletter and put it inside his robes. “After all the stuff hedid at school!”

“He’s worried about you!” said Hermione sharply.

“Just like Moody and Hagrid! So listen to them!”

“No one’s tried to attack me all year,” said Harry. “Noone’s done anything to me at all —”

“Except put your name in the Goblet of Fire,” saidHermione. “And they must’ve done that for a reason,Harry. Snuffles is right. Maybe they’ve been bidingtheir time. Maybe this is the task they’re going to getyou.”

“Look,” said Harry impatiently, “let’s say Sirius isright, and someone Stunned Krum to kidnap Crouch.Well, they would’ve been in the trees near us,wouldn’t they? But they waited till I was out of theway until they acted, didn’t they? So it doesn’t looklike I’m their target, does it?”

“They couldn’t have made it look like an accident ifthey’d murdered you in the forest!” said Hermione.“But if you die during a task —”

Page | 634

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“They didn’t care about attacking Krum, did they?”said Harry. “Why didn’t they just polish me off at thesame time? They could’ve made it look like Krum andI had a duel or something.”

“Harry, I don’t understand it either,” said Hermionedesperately. “I just know there are a lot of odd thingsgoing on, and I don’t like it. ... Moody’s right — Siriusis right — you’ve got to get in training for the thirdtask, straight away. And you make sure you writeback to Sirius and promise him you’re not going to gosneaking off alone again.”

The Hogwarts grounds never looked more invitingthan when Harry had to stay indoors. For the nextfew days he spent all of his free time either in thelibrary with Hermione and Ron, looking up hexes, orelse in empty classrooms, which they sneaked into topractice. Harry was concentrating on the StunningSpell, which he had never used before. The troublewas that practicing it involved certain sacrifices onRon’s and Hermione’s part.

“Can’t we kidnap Mrs. Norris?” Ron suggested onMonday lunchtime as he lay flat on his back in themiddle of their Charms classroom, having just beenStunned and reawoken by Harry for the fifth time in arow. “Let’s Stun her for a bit. Or you could useDobby, Harry, I bet he’d do anything to help you. I’mnot complaining or anything” — he got gingerly to hisfeet, rubbing his backside — “but I’m aching all over.

“Well, you keep missing the cushions, don’t you!” saidHermione impatiently, rearranging the pile ofcushions they had used for the Banishing Spell,which Flitwick had left in a cabinet. “Just try and fallbackward!”

Page | 635

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Once you’re Stunned, you can’t aim too well,Hermione!” said Ron angrily. “Why don’t you take aturn?”

“Well, I think Harry’s got it now, anyway,” saidHermione hastily. “And we don’t have to worry aboutDisarming, because he’s been able to do that for ages.... I think we ought to start on some of these hexesthis evening.”

She looked down the list they had made in thelibrary.

“I like the look of this one,” she said, “thisImpediment Curse. Should slow down anything that’strying to attack you, Harry. We’ll start with that one.”

The bell rang. They hastily shoved the cushions backinto Flitwick’s cupboard and slipped out of theclassroom.

“See you at dinner!” said Hermione, and she set off forArithmancy, while Harry and Ron headed towardNorth Tower, and Divination. Broad strips of dazzlinggold sunlight fell across the corridor from the highwindows. The sky outside was so brightly blue itlooked as though it had been enameled.

“It’s going to be boiling in Trelawney’s room, she neverputs out that fire,” said Ron as they started up thestaircase toward the silver ladder and the trapdoor.

He was quite right. The dimly lit room wasswelteringly hot. The fumes from the perfumed firewere heavier than ever. Harry’s head swam as hemade his way over to one of the curtained windows.While Professor Trelawney was looking the other way,disentangling her shawl from a lamp, he opened it aninch or so and settled back in his chintz armchair, soPage | 636 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

that a soft breeze played across his face. It wasextremely comfortable.

“My dears,” said Professor Trelawney, sitting down inher winged armchair in front of the class and peeringaround at them all with her strangely enlarged eyes,“we have almost finished our work on planetarydivination. Today, however, will be an excellentopportunity to examine the effects of Mars, for he isplaced most interestingly at the present time. If youwill all look this way, I will dim the lights. ...”

She waved her wand and the lamps went out. The firewas the only source of light now. Professor Trelawneybent down and lifted, from under her chair, aminiature model of the solar system, contained withina glass dome. It was a beautiful thing; each of themoons glimmered in place around the nine planetsand the fiery sun, all of them hanging in thin airbeneath the glass. Harry watched lazily as ProfessorTrelawney began to point out the fascinating angleMars was making to Neptune. The heavily perfumedfumes washed over him, and the breeze from thewindow played across his face. He could hear aninsect humming gently somewhere behind thecurtain. His eyelids began to droop. ...

He was riding on the back of an eagle owl, soaringthrough the clear blue sky toward an old, ivy-coveredhouse set high on a hillside. Lower and lower theyflew, the wind blowing pleasantly in Harry’s face, untilthey reached a dark and broken window in the upperstory of the house and entered. Now they were flyingalong a gloomy passageway, to a room at the very end... through the door they went, into a dark roomwhose windows were boarded up. ...

Harry had left the owl’s back ... he was watching,now, as it fluttered across the room, into a chair with

Page | 637 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

its back to him. ... There were two dark shapes on thefloor beside the chair ... both of them were stirring. ...

One was a huge snake ... the other was a man ... ashort, balding man, a man with watery eyes and apointed nose ... he was wheezing and sobbing on thehearth rug. ...

“You are in luck, Wormtail,” said a cold, high-pitchedvoice from the depths of the chair in which the owlhad landed. “You are very fortunate indeed. Yourblunder has not ruined everything. He is dead.”

“My Lord!” gasped the man on the floor. “My Lord, Iam ... 1 am so pleased ... and so sorry. ...”

“Nagini,” said the cold voice, “you are out of luck. 1will not be feeding Wormtail to you, after all ... butnever mind, never mind ... there is still Harry Potter.

The snake hissed. Harry could see its tonguefluttering.

“Now, Wormtail,” said the cold voice, “perhaps onemore little reminder why I will not tolerate anotherblunder from you. ...”

“My Lord ... no ... I beg you ...”

The tip of a wand emerged from around the back ofthe chair, ft was pointing at Wormtail.

“Crucio\” said the cold voice.

Wormtail screamed, screamed as though every nervein his body were on fire, the screaming filled Harry’sears as the scar on his forehead seared with pain; he

Page | 638

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

was yelling too. ... Voldemort would hear him, wouldknow he was there. ...

“Harry! Harry\”

Harry opened his eyes. He was lying on the floor ofProfessor Trelawney’s room with his hands over hisface. His scar was still burning so badly that his eyeswere watering. The pain had been real. The wholeclass was standing around him, and Ron waskneeling next to him, looking terrified.

“You all right?” he said.

“Of course he isn’t!” said Professor Trelawney, lookingthoroughly excited. Her great eyes loomed over Harry,gazing at him. “What was it, Potter? A premonition?An apparition? What did you see?”

“Nothing,” Harry lied. He sat up. He could feel himselfshaking. He couldn’t stop himself from lookingaround, into the shadows behind him; Voldemort’svoice had sounded so close. ...

“You were clutching your scar!” said ProfessorTrelawney. “You were rolling on the floor, clutchingyour scar! Come now, Potter, I have experience inthese matters!”

Harry looked up at her.

“I need to go to the hospital wing, I think,” he said.“Bad headache.”

“My dear, you were undoubtedly stimulated by theextraordinary clairvoyant vibrations of my room!” saidProfessor Trelawney “If you leave now, you may losethe opportunity to see further than you have ever —”

Page | 639 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t want to see anything except a headache cure,”said Harry.

He stood up. The class backed away. They all lookedunnerved.

“See you later,” Harry muttered to Ron, and he pickedup his bag and headed for the trapdoor, ignoringProfessor Trelawney, who was wearing an expressionof great frustration, as though she had just beendenied a real treat.

When Harry reached the bottom of her stepladder,however, he did not set off for the hospital wing. Hehad no intention whatsoever of going there. Siriushad told him what to do if his scar hurt him again,and Harry was going to follow his advice: He wasgoing straight to Dumbledore’s office. He marcheddown the corridors, thinking about what he had seenin the dream ... it had been as vivid as the one thathad awoken him on Privet Drive. ... He ran over thedetails in his mind, trying to make sure he couldremember them. ... He had heard Voldemort accusingWormtail of making a blunder ... but the owl hadbrought good news, the blunder had been repaired,somebody was dead ... so Wormtail was not going tobe fed to the snake ... he, Harry, was going to be fedto it instead. ...

Harry had walked right past the stone gargoyleguarding the entrance to Dumbledore’s office withoutnoticing. He blinked, looked around, realized what hehad done, and retraced his steps, stopping in front ofit. Then he remembered that he didn’t know thepassword.

“Sherbet lemon?” he tried tentatively.

The gargoyle did not move.

Page | 640 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Okay,” said Harry, staring at it, “Pear Drop. Er —Licorice Wand. Fizzing Whizbee. Drooble’s BestBlowing Gum. Bertie Bott’s Every Flavor Beans ... ohno, he doesn’t like them, does he? ... oh just open,can’t you?” he said angrily. “I really need to see him,it’s urgent!”

The gargoyle remained immovable.

Harry kicked it, achieving nothing but an excruciatingpain in his big toe.

“Chocolate Frog!” he yelled angrily, standing on oneleg. “Sugar Quill! Cockroach Cluster!”

The gargoyle sprang to life and jumped aside. Harryblinked.

“Cockroach Cluster?” he said, amazed. “I was onlyjoking. ...”

He hurried through the gap in the walls and steppedonto the foot of a spiral stone staircase, which movedslowly upward as the doors closed behind him, takinghim up to a polished oak door with a brass doorknocker.

He could hear voices from inside the office. Hestepped off the moving staircase and hesitated,listening.

“Dumbledore, I’m afraid I don’t see the connection,don’t see it at all!” It was the voice of the Minister ofMagic, Cornelius Fudge. “Ludo says Bertha’s perfectlycapable of getting herself lost. I agree we would haveexpected to have found her by now, but all the same,we’ve no evidence of foul play, Dumbledore, none atall. As for her disappearance being linked with BartyCrouch’s!”

Page | 641 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“And what do you thinks happened to Barty Crouch,Minister?” said Moody’s growling voice.

“I see two possibilities, Alastor,” said Fudge. “EitherCrouch has finally cracked — more than likely, I’msure you’ll agree, given his personal history — lost hismind, and gone wandering off somewhere —”

“He wandered extremely quickly, if that is the case,Cornelius,” said Dumbledore calmly.

“Or else — well ...” Fudge sounded embarrassed.

“Well, I’ll reserve judgment until after I’ve seen theplace where he was found, but you say it was justpast the Beauxbatons carriage? Dumbledore, youknow what that woman is?”

“I consider her to be a very able headmistress — andan excellent dancer,” said Dumbledore quietly.

“Dumbledore, come!” said Fudge angrily. “Don’t youthink you might be prejudiced in her favor because ofHagrid? They don’t all turn out harmless — if, indeed,you can call Hagrid harmless, with that monsterfixation he’s got —”

“I no more suspect Madame Maxime than Hagrid,”said Dumbledore, just as calmly. “I think it possiblethat it is you who are prejudiced, Cornelius.”

“Can we wrap up this discussion?” growled Moody.

“Yes, yes, let’s go down to the grounds, then,” saidFudge impatiently.

“No, it’s not that,” said Moody, “it’s just that Potterwants a word with you, Dumbledore. He’s just outsidethe door.”

Page | 642

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE PENSIEVE

The door of the office opened.

“Hello, Potter,” said Moody. “Come in, then.”

Harry walked inside. He had been insideDumbledore’s office once before; it was a verybeautiful, circular room, lined with pictures ofprevious headmasters and headmistresses ofHogwarts, all of whom were fast asleep, their chestsrising and falling gently.

Cornelius Fudge was standing beside Dumbledore’sdesk, wearing his usual pinstriped cloak and holdinghis lime-green bowler hat.

“Harry!” said Fudge jovially, moving forward. “How areyou?”

“Fine,” Harry lied.

Page | 643

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“We were just talking about the night when Mr.Crouch turned up on the grounds,” said Fudge. “Itwas you who found him, was it not?”

“Yes,” said Harry. Then, feeling it was pointless topretend that he hadn’t overheard what they had beensaying, he added, “I didn’t see Madame Maximeanywhere, though, and she’d have a job hiding,wouldn’t she?”

Dumbledore smiled at Harry behind Fudge’s back, hiseyes twinkling.

“Yes, well,” said Fudge, looking embarrassed, “we’reabout to go for a short walk on the grounds, Harry, ifyou’ll excuse us ... perhaps if you just go back to yourclass —”

“I wanted to talk to you, Professor,” Harry saidquickly, looking at Dumbledore, who gave him a swift,searching look.

“Wait here for me, Harry,” he said. “Our examinationof the grounds will not take long.”

They trooped out in silence past him and closed thedoor. After a minute or so, Harry heard the clunks ofMoody’s wooden leg growing fainter in the corridorbelow. He looked around.

“Hello, Fawkes,” he said.

Fawkes, Professor Dumbledore’s phoenix, wasstanding on his golden perch beside the door. Thesize of a swan, with magnificent scarlet-and-goldplumage, he swished his long tail and blinkedbenignly at Harry.

Page | 644

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry sat down in a chair in front of Dumbledore’sdesk. For several minutes, he sat and watched the oldheadmasters and headmistresses snoozing in theirframes, thinking about what he had just heard, andrunning his fingers over his scar. It had stoppedhurting now.

He felt much calmer, somehow, now that he was inDumbledore’s office, knowing he would shortly betelling him about the dream. Harry looked up at thewalls behind the desk. The patched and raggedSorting Hat was standing on a shelf. A glass case nextto it held a magnificent silver sword with large rubiesset into the hilt, which Harry recognized as the one hehimself had pulled out of the Sorting Hat in hissecond year. The sword had once belonged to GodricGryffindor, founder of Harry’s House. He was gazingat it, remembering how it had come to his aid whenhe had thought all hope was lost, when he noticed apatch of silvery light, dancing and shimmering on theglass case. He looked around for the source of thelight and saw a sliver of silver-white shining brightlyfrom within a black cabinet behind him, whose doorhad not been closed properly. Harry hesitated,glanced at Fawkes, then got up, walked across theoffice, and pulled open the cabinet door.

A shallow stone basin lay there, with odd carvingsaround the edge: runes and symbols that Harry didnot recognize. The silvery light was coming from thebasin’s contents, which were like nothing Harry hadever seen before. He could not tell whether thesubstance was liquid or gas. It was a bright, whitishsilver, and it was moving ceaselessly; the surface of itbecame ruffled like water beneath wind, and then,like clouds, separated and swirled smoothly. It lookedlike light made liquid — or like wind made solid —Harry couldn’t make up his mind.

Page | 645

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He wanted to touch it, to find out what it felt like, butnearly four years’ experience of the magical world toldhim that sticking his hand into a bowl full of someunknown substance was a very stupid thing to do. Hetherefore pulled his wand out of the inside of hisrobes, cast a nervous look around the office, lookedback at the contents of the basin, and prodded them.

The surface of the silvery stuff inside the basin beganto swirl very fast.

Harry bent closer, his head right inside the cabinet.The silvery substance had become transparent; itlooked like glass. He looked down into it, expecting tosee the stone bottom of the basin — and saw insteadan enormous room below the surface of themysterious substance, a room into which he seemedto be looking through a circular window in the ceiling.

The room was dimly lit; he thought it might even beunderground, for there were no windows, merelytorches in brackets such as the ones that illuminatedthe walls of Hogwarts. Lowering his face so that hisnose was a mere inch away from the glassysubstance, Harry saw that rows and rows of witchesand wizards were seated around every wall on whatseemed to be benches rising in levels. An empty chairstood in the very center of the room. There wassomething about the chair that gave Harry anominous feeling. Chains encircled the arms of it, asthough its occupants were usually tied to it.

Where was this place? It surely wasn’t Hogwarts; hehad never seen a room like that here in the castle.Moreover, the crowd in the mysterious room at thebottom of the basin was comprised of adults, andHarry knew there were not nearly that many teachersat Hogwarts. They seemed, he thought, to be waitingfor something; even though he could only see the topsPage | 646 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

of their hats, all of their faces seemed to be pointingin one direction, and none of them were talking to oneanother.

The basin being circular, and the room he wasobserving square, Harry could not make out what wasgoing on in the corners of it. He leaned even closer,tilting his head, trying to see ...

The tip of his nose touched the strange substanceinto which he was staring.

Dumbledore’s office gave an almighty lurch — Harrywas thrown forward and pitched headfirst into thesubstance inside the basin —

But his head did not hit the stone bottom. He wasfalling through something icy-cold and black; it waslike being sucked into a dark whirlpool —

And suddenly, Harry found himself sitting on a benchat the end of the room inside the basin, a benchraised high above the others. He looked up at thehigh stone ceiling, expecting to see the circularwindow through which he had just been staring, butthere was nothing there but dark, solid stone.

Breathing hard and fast, Harry looked around him.Not one of the witches and wizards in the room (andthere were at least two hundred of them) was lookingat him. Not one of them seemed to have noticed that afourteen-year-old boy had just dropped from theceiling into their midst. Harry turned to the wizardnext to him on the bench and uttered a loud cry ofsurprise that reverberated around the silent room.

He was sitting right next to Albus Dumbledore.

Page | 647

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Professor!” Harry said in a kind of strangled whisper.“I’m sorry — I didn’t mean to — I was just looking atthat basin in your cabinet — I — where are we?”

But Dumbledore didn’t move or speak. He ignoredHarry completely. Like every other wizard on thebenches, he was staring into the far corner of theroom, where there was a door.

Harry gazed, nonplussed, at Dumbledore, thenaround at the silently watchful crowd, then back atDumbledore. And then it dawned on him. ...

Once before, Harry had found himself somewhere thatnobody could see or hear him. That time, he hadfallen through a page in an enchanted diary, rightinto somebody else’s memory ... and unless he wasvery much mistaken, something of the sort hadhappened again. ...

Harry raised his right hand, hesitated, and thenwaved it energetically in front of Dumbledore’s face.Dumbledore did not blink, look around at Harry, orindeed move at all. And that, in Harry’s opinion,settled the matter. Dumbledore wouldn’t ignore himlike that. He was inside a memory, and this was notthe present-day Dumbledore. Yet it couldn’t be thatlong ago ... the Dumbledore sitting next to him nowwas silver-haired, just like the present-dayDumbledore. But what was this place? What were allthese wizards waiting for?

Harry looked around more carefully. The room, as hehad suspected when observing it from above, wasalmost certainly underground — more of a dungeonthan a room, he thought. There was a bleak andforbidding air about the place; there were no pictureson the walls, no decorations at all; just these serriedrows of benches, rising in levels all around the room,Page | 648 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

all positioned so that they had a clear view of thatchair with the chains on its arms.

Before Harry could reach any conclusions about theplace in which they were, he heard footsteps. Thedoor in the corner of the dungeon opened and threepeople entered — or at least one man, flanked by twodementors.

Harry’s insides went cold. The dementors — tall,hooded creatures whose faces were concealed — weregliding slowly toward the chair in the center of theroom, each grasping one of the man’s arms with theirdead and rotten-looking hands. The man betweenthem looked as though he was about to faint, andHarry couldn’t blame him ... he knew the dementorscould not touch him inside a memory, but heremembered their power only too well. The watchingcrowd recoiled slightly as the dementors placed theman in the chained chair and glided back out of theroom. The door swung shut behind them.

Harry looked down at the man now sitting in thechair and saw that it was Karkaroff.

Unlike Dumbledore, Karkaroff looked much younger;his hair and goatee were black. He was not dressed insleek furs, but in thin and ragged robes. He wasshaking. Even as Harry watched, the chains on thearms of the chair glowed suddenly gold and snakedtheir way up Karkaroff’s arms, binding him there.

“Igor Karkaroff,” said a curt voice to Harry’s left.

Harry looked around and saw Mr. Crouch standingup in the middle of the bench beside him. Crouch’shair was dark, his face was much less lined, helooked fit and alert. “You have been brought fromAzkaban to present evidence to the Ministry of Magic.

Page | 649

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

You have given us to understand that you haveimportant information for us.”

Karkaroff straightened himself as best he could,tightly bound to the chair.

“I have, sir,” he said, and although his voice was veryscared, Harry could still hear the familiar unctuousnote in it. “I wish to be of use to the Ministry. I wishto help. I — I know that the Ministry is trying to — toround up the last of the Dark Lord’s supporters. I ameager to assist in any way I can. ...”

There was a murmur around the benches. Some ofthe wizards and witches were surveying Karkaroffwith interest, others with pronounced mistrust. ThenHarry heard, quite distinctly, from Dumbledore’sother side, a familiar, growling voice saying, “Filth.”

Harry leaned forward so that he could see pastDumbledore. Mad-Eye Moody was sitting there —except that there was a very noticeable difference inhis appearance. He did not have his magical eye, buttwo normal ones. Both were looking down uponKarkaroff, and both were narrowed in intense dislike.

“Crouch is going to let him out,” Moody breathedquietly to Dumbledore. “He’s done a deal with him.Took me six months to track him down, and Crouchis going to let him go if he’s got enough new names.Let’s hear his information, I say, and throw himstraight back to the dementors.”

Dumbledore made a small noise of dissent throughhis long, crooked nose.

“Ah, I was forgetting ... you don’t like the dementors,do you, Albus?” said Moody with a sardonic smile.

Page | 650

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Dumbledore calmly, “I’m afraid I don’t. Ihave long felt the Ministry is wrong to ally itself withsuch creatures.”

“But for filth like this ...” Moody said softly.

“You say you have names for us, Karkaroff,” said Mr.Crouch. “Let us hear them, please.”

“You must understand,” said Karkaroff hurriedly,

“that He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named operated always inthe greatest secrecy. ... He preferred that we — Imean to say, his supporters — and I regret now, verydeeply, that I ever counted myself among them —”

“Get on with it,” sneered Moody.

“— we never knew the names of every one of ourfellows — He alone knew exactly who we all were —”

“Which was a wise move, wasn’t it, as it preventedsomeone like you, Karkaroff, from turning all of themin,” muttered Moody.

“Yet you say you have some names for us?” said Mr.Crouch.

“I — I do,” said Karkaroff breathlessly. “And thesewere important supporters, mark you. People I sawwith my own eyes doing his bidding. I give thisinformation as a sign that I fully and totally renouncehim, and am filled with a remorse so deep I canbarely —”

“These names are?” said Mr. Crouch sharply.Karkaroff drew a deep breath.

Page | 651

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“There was Antonin Dolohov,” he said. “I — I saw himtorture countless Muggles and — and non-supportersof the Dark Lord.”

“And helped him do it,” murmured Moody.

“We have already apprehended Dolohov,” saidCrouch. “He was caught shortly after yourself.”

“Indeed?” said Karkaroff, his eyes widening. “I — I amdelighted to hear it!”

But he didn’t look it. Harry could tell that this newshad come as a real blow to him. One of his nameswas worthless.

“Any others?” said Crouch coldly.

“Why, yes ... there was Rosier,” said Karkaroffhurriedly. “Evan Rosier.”

“Rosier is dead,” said Crouch. “He was caught shortlyafter you were too. He preferred to fight rather thancome quietly and was killed in the struggle.”

“Took a bit of me with him, though,” whisperedMoody to Harry’s right. Harry looked around at himonce more, and saw him indicating the large chunkout of his nose to Dumbledore.

“No — no more than Rosier deserved!” said Karkaroff,a real note of panic in his voice now. Harry could seethat he was starting to worry that none of hisinformation would be of any use to the Ministry.Karkaroff’s eyes darted toward the door in the corner,behind which the dementors undoubtedly still stood,waiting.

“Any more?” said Crouch.

Page | 652 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yes!” said Karkaroff. “There was Travers — he helpedmurder the McKinnons! Mulciber — he specialized inthe Imperius Curse, forced countless people to dohorrific things! Rookwood, who was a spy, and passedHe-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named useful information frominside the Ministry itself!”

Harry could tell that, this time, Karkaroff had struckgold. The watching crowd was all murmuringtogether.

“Rookwood?” said Mr. Crouch, nodding to a witchsitting in front of him, who began scribbling upon herpiece of parchment. “Augustus Rookwood of theDepartment of Mysteries?”

“The very same,” said Karkaroff eagerly. “I believe heused a network of well-placed wizards, both inside theMinistry and out, to collect information —”

“But Travers and Mulciber we have,” said Mr. Crouch.“Very well, Karkaroff, if that is all, you will bereturned to Azkaban while we decide —”

“Not yet!” cried Karkaroff, looking quite desperate.“Wait, I have more!”

Harry could see him sweating in the torchlight, hiswhite skin contrasting strongly with the black of hishair and beard.

“Snape!” he shouted. “Severus Snape!”

“Snape has been cleared by this council,” said Crouchdisdainfully. “He has been vouched for by AlbusDumbledore.”

Page | 653

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No!” shouted Karkaroff, straining at the chains thatbound him to the chair. “I assure you! Severus Snapeis a Death Eater!”

Dumbledore had gotten to his feet.

“I have given evidence already on this matter,” he saidcalmly. “Severus Snape was indeed a Death Eater.However, he rejoined our side before Lord Voldemort’sdownfall and turned spy for us, at great personal risk.He is now no more a Death Eater than I am.”

Harry turned to look at Mad-Eye Moody. He waswearing a look of deep skepticism behindDumbledore’s back.

“Very well, Karkaroff,” Crouch said coldly, “you havebeen of assistance. I shall review your case. You willreturn to Azkaban in the meantime. ...”

Mr. Crouch’s voice faded. Harry looked around; thedungeon was dissolving as though it were made ofsmoke; everything was fading; he could see only hisown body — all else was swirling darkness. ...

And then, the dungeon returned. Harry was sitting ina different seat, still on the highest bench, but now tothe left side of Mr. Crouch. The atmosphere seemedquite different: relaxed, even cheerful. The witchesand wizards all around the walls were talking to oneanother, almost as though they were at some sort ofsporting event. Harry noticed a witch halfway up therows of benches opposite. She had short blonde hair,was wearing magenta robes, and was sucking the endof an acid-green quill. It was, unmistakably, ayounger Rita Skeeter. Harry looked around;Dumbledore was sitting beside him again, wearingdifferent robes. Mr. Crouch looked more tired and

Page | 654

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

somehow fiercer, gaunter. ... Harry understood. It wasa different memory, a different day ... a different trial.

The door in the corner opened, and Ludo Bagmanwalked into the room.

This was not, however, a Ludo Bagman gone to seed,but a Ludo Bagman who was clearly at the height ofhis Quidditch-playing fitness. His nose wasn’t brokennow; he was tall and lean and muscular. Bagmanlooked nervous as he sat down in the chained chair,but it did not bind him there as it had boundKarkaroff, and Bagman, perhaps taking heart fromthis, glanced around at the watching crowd, waved ata couple of them, and managed a small smile.

“Ludo Bagman, you have been brought here in frontof the Council of Magical Law to answer chargesrelating to the activities of the Death Eaters,” said Mr.Crouch. “We have heard the evidence against you,and are about to reach our verdict. Do you haveanything to add to your testimony before wepronounce judgment?”

Harry couldn’t believe his ears. Ludo Bagman, aDeath Eater?

“Only,” said Bagman, smiling awkwardly, “well — Iknow I’ve been a bit of an idiot —”

One or two wizards and witches in the surroundingseats smiled indulgently. Mr. Crouch did not appearto share their feelings. He was staring down at LudoBagman with an expression of the utmost severityand dislike.

“You never spoke a truer word, boy,” someonemuttered dryly to Dumbledore behind Harry. Helooked around and saw Moody sitting there again. “If I

Page | 655 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

didn’t know he’d always been dim, I’d have said someof those Bludgers had permanently affected his brain.

“Ludovic Bagman, you were caught passinginformation to Lord Voldemort’s supporters,” said Mr.Crouch. “For this, I suggest a term of imprisonmentin Azkaban lasting no less than —”

But there was an angry outcry from the surroundingbenches. Several of the witches and wizards aroundthe walls stood up, shaking their heads, and eventheir fists, at Mr. Crouch.

“But I’ve told you, I had no idea!” Bagman calledearnestly over the crowd’s babble, his round blue eyeswidening. “None at all! Old Rookwood was a friend ofmy dad’s ... never crossed my mind he was in withYou-Know-Who! I thought I was collecting informationfor our side! And Rookwood kept talking about gettingme a job in the Ministry later on ... once myQuidditch days are over, you know ... I mean, I can’tkeep getting hit by Bludgers for the rest of my life,can I?”

There were titters from the crowd.

“It will be put to the vote,” said Mr. Crouch coldly. Heturned to the right-hand side of the dungeon. “Thejury will please raise their hands ... those in favor ofimprisonment ...”

Harry looked toward the right-hand side of thedungeon. Not one person raised their hand. Many ofthe witches and wizards around the walls began toclap. One of the witches on the jury stood up.

“Yes?” barked Crouch.

Page | 656

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“We’d just like to congratulate Mr. Bagman on hissplendid performance for England in the Quidditchmatch against Turkey last Saturday,” the witch saidbreathlessly.

Mr. Crouch looked furious. The dungeon was ringingwith applause now. Bagman got to his feet andbowed, beaming.

“Despicable,” Mr. Crouch spat at Dumbledore, sittingdown as Bagman walked out of the dungeon.“Rookwood get him a job indeed. ... The day LudoBagman joins us will be a sad day indeed for theMinistry. ...”

And the dungeon dissolved again. When it hadreturned, Harry looked around. He and Dumbledorewere still sitting beside Mr. Crouch, but theatmosphere could not have been more different. Therewas total silence, broken only by the dry sobs of afrail, wispy-looking witch in the seat next to Mr.Crouch. She was clutching a handkerchief to hermouth with trembling hands. Harry looked up atCrouch and saw that he looked gaunter and grayerthan ever before. A nerve was twitching in his temple.

“Bring them in,” he said, and his voice echoedthrough the silent dungeon.

The door in the corner opened yet again. Sixdementors entered this time, flanking a group of fourpeople. Harry saw the people in the crowd turn tolook up at Mr. Crouch. A few of them whispered toone another.

The dementors placed each of the four people in thefour chairs with chained arms that now stood on thedungeon floor. There was a thickset man who staredblankly up at Crouch; a thinner and more nervous-

Page | 657 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

looking man, whose eyes were darting around thecrowd; a woman with thick, shining dark hair andheavily hooded eyes, who was sitting in the chainedchair as though it were a throne; and a boy in his lateteens, who looked nothing short of petrified. He wasshivering, his straw-colored hair all over his face, hisfreckled skin milk-white. The wispy little witch besideCrouch began to rock backward and forward in herseat, whimpering into her handkerchief.

Crouch stood up. He looked down upon the four infront of him, and there was pure hatred in his face.

“You have been brought here before the Council ofMagical Law,” he said clearly, “so that we may passjudgment on you, for a crime so heinous —”

“Father,” said the boy with the straw-colored hair.“Father ... please ...”

“— that we have rarely heard the like of it within thiscourt,” said Crouch, speaking more loudly, drowningout his son’s voice. “We have heard the evidenceagainst you. The four of you stand accused ofcapturing an Auror — Frank Longbottom — andsubjecting him to the Cruciatus Curse, believing himto have knowledge of the present whereabouts of yourexiled master, He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named —”

“Father, I didn’t!” shrieked the boy in chains below. “Ididn’t, I swear it, Father, don’t send me back to thedementors —”

“You are further accused,” bellowed Mr. Crouch, “ofusing the Cruciatus Curse on Frank Longbottom’swife, when he would not give you information. Youplanned to restore He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named topower, and to resume the lives of violence you

Page | 658

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

presumably led while he was strong. I now ask thejury —”

“Mother!” screamed the boy below, and the wispy littlewitch beside Crouch began to sob, rocking backwardand forward. “Mother, stop him, Mother, I didn’t do it,it wasn’t me!”

“I now ask the jury,” shouted Mr. Crouch, “to raisetheir hands if they believe, as I do, that these crimesdeserve a life sentence in Azkaban!”

In unison, the witches and wizards along the right-hand side of the dungeon raised their hands. Thecrowd around the walls began to clap as it had forBagman, their faces full of savage triumph. The boybegan to scream.

“No! Mother, no! I didn’t do it, I didn’t do it, I didn’tknow! Don’t send me there, don’t let him!”

The dementors were gliding back into the room. Theboys’ three companions rose quietly from their seats;the woman with the heavy-lidded eyes looked up atCrouch and called, “The Dark Lord will rise again,Crouch! Throw us into Azkaban; we will wait! He willrise again and will come for us, he will reward usbeyond any of his other supporters! We alone werefaithful! We alone tried to find him!”

But the boy was trying to fight off the dementors,even though Harry could see their cold, drainingpower starting to affect him. The crowd was jeering,some of them on their feet, as the woman swept out ofthe dungeon, and the boy continued to struggle.

“I’m your son!” he screamed up at Crouch. “I’m yourson!”

Page | 659

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You are no son of mine!” bellowed Mr. Crouch, hiseyes bulging suddenly. “I have no son!”

The wispy witch beside him gave a great gasp andslumped in her seat. She had fainted. Crouchappeared not to have noticed.

“Take them away!” Crouch roared at the dementors,spit flying from his mouth. “Take them away, andmay they rot there!”

“Father! Father, I wasn’t involved! No! No! Father,please!”

“I think, Harry, it is time to return to my office,” saida quiet voice in Harry’s ear.

Harry started. He looked around. Then he looked onhis other side.

There was an Albus Dumbledore sitting on his right,watching Crouch’s son being dragged away by thedementors — and there was an Albus Dumbledore onhis left, looking right at him.

“Come,” said the Dumbledore on his left, and he puthis hand under Harry’s elbow. Harry felt himselfrising into the air; the dungeon dissolved around him;for a moment, all was blackness, and then he felt asthough he had done a slow-motion somersault,suddenly landing flat on his feet, in what seemed likethe dazzling light of Dumbledore’s sunlit office. Thestone basin was shimmering in the cabinet in front ofhim, and Albus Dumbledore was standing besidehim.

“Professor,” Harry gasped, “I know I shouldn’t’ve — Ididn’t mean — the cabinet door was sort of open and

Page | 660

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I quite understand,” said Dumbledore. He lifted thebasin, carried it over to his desk, placed it upon thepolished top, and sat down in the chair behind it. Hemotioned for Harry to sit down opposite him.

Harry did so, staring at the stone basin. The contentshad returned to their original, silvery-white state,swirling and rippling beneath his gaze.

“What is it?” Harry asked shakily.

“This? It is called a Pensieve,” said Dumbledore. “Isometimes find, and I am sure you know the feeling,that I simply have too many thoughts and memoriescrammed into my mind.”

“Er,” said Harry, who couldn’t truthfully say that hehad ever felt anything of the sort.

“At these times,” said Dumbledore, indicating thestone basin, “I use the Pensieve. One simply siphonsthe excess thoughts from one’s mind, pours them intothe basin, and examines them at one’s leisure. Itbecomes easier to spot patterns and links, youunderstand, when they are in this form.”

“You mean ... that stuff’s your thoughts?” Harry said,staring at the swirling white substance in the basin.

“Certainly,” said Dumbledore. “Let me show you.”

Dumbledore drew his wand out of the inside of hisrobes and placed the tip into his own silvery hair,near his temple. When he took the wand away, hairseemed to be clinging to it — but then Harry saw thatit was in fact a glistening strand of the same strangesilvery-white substance that filled the Pensieve.Dumbledore added this fresh thought to the basin,and Harry, astonished, saw his own face swimmingPage | 661 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

around the surface of the bowl. Dumbledore placedhis long hands on either side of the Pensieve andswirled it, rather as a gold prospector would pan forfragments of gold ... and Harry saw his own facechange smoothly into Snape’s, who opened his mouthand spoke to the ceiling, his voice echoing slightly.

“It’s coming back ... Karkaroff’s too ... stronger andclearer than ever ...”

“A connection I could have made without assistance,”Dumbledore sighed, “but never mind.” He peered overthe top of his half-moon spectacles at Harry, who wasgaping at Snape’s face, which was continuing to swirlaround the bowl. “I was using the Pensieve when Mr.Fudge arrived for our meeting and put it away ratherhastily. Undoubtedly I did not fasten the cabinet doorproperly. Naturally, it would have attracted yourattention.”

“I’m sorry,” Harry mumbled.

Dumbledore shook his head. “Curiosity is not a sin,”he said. “But we should exercise caution with ourcuriosity ... yes, indeed ...”

Frowning slightly, he prodded the thoughts within thebasin with the tip of his wand. Instantly, a figure roseout of it, a plump, scowling girl of about sixteen, whobegan to revolve slowly, with her feet still in the basin.She took no notice whatsoever of Harry or ProfessorDumbledore. When she spoke, her voice echoed asSnape’s had done, as though it were coming from thedepths of the stone basin. “He put a hex on me,Professor Dumbledore, and I was only teasing him,sir. I only said I’d seen him kissing Florence behindthe greenhouses last Thursday. ...”

Page | 662

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“But why, Bertha,” said Dumbledore sadly, looking upat the now silently revolving girl, “why did you have tofollow him in the first place?”

“Bertha?” Harry whispered, looking up at her. “Is that— was that Bertha Jorkins?”

“Yes,” said Dumbledore, prodding the thoughts in thebasin again; Bertha sank back into them, and theybecame silvery and opaque once more. “That wasBertha as I remember her at school.”

The silvery light from the Pensieve illuminatedDumbledore’s face, and it struck Harry suddenly howvery old he was looking. He knew, of course, thatDumbledore was getting on in years, but somehow henever really thought of Dumbledore as an old man.

“So, Harry,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Before you gotlost in my thoughts, you wanted to tell mesomething.”

“Yes,” said Harry. “Professor — I was in Divinationjust now, and — er — I fell asleep.”

He hesitated here, wondering if a reprimand wascoming, but Dumbledore merely said, “Quiteunderstandable. Continue.”

“Well, I had a dream,” said Harry. “A dream aboutLord Voldemort. He was torturing Wormtail ... youknow who Wormtail —”

“I do know,” said Dumbledore promptly. “Pleasecontinue.”

“Voldemort got a letter from an owl. He saidsomething like, Wormtail’s blunder had beenrepaired. He said someone was dead. Then he said,

Page | 663 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Wormtail wouldn’t be fed to the snake — there was asnake beside his chair. He said — he said he’d befeeding me to it, instead. Then he did the CruciatusCurse on Wormtail — and my scar hurt,” Harry said.“It woke me up, it hurt so badly.”

Dumbledore merely looked at him.

“Er — that’s all,” said Harry.

“I see,” said Dumbledore quietly. “I see. Now, has yourscar hurt at any other time this year, excepting thetime it woke you up over the summer?”

“No, I — how did you know it woke me up over thesummer?” said Harry, astonished.

“You are not Sirius’s only correspondent,” saidDumbledore. “I have also been in contact with himever since he left Hogwarts last year. It was I whosuggested the mountainside cave as the safest placefor him to stay.”

Dumbledore got up and began walking up and downbehind his desk. Every now and then, he placed hiswand tip to his temple, removed another shiningsilver thought, and added it to the Pensieve. Thethoughts inside began to swirl so fast that Harrycouldn’t make out anything clearly: It was merely ablur of color.

“Professor?” he said quietly, after a couple of minutes.

Dumbledore stopped pacing and looked at Harry.

“My apologies,” he said quietly. He sat back down athis desk.

“D’you — d’you know why my scar’s hurting me?”

Page | 664 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore looked very intently at Harry for amoment, and then said, “I have a theory, no morethan that. ... It is my belief that your scar hurts bothwhen Lord Voldemort is near you, and when he isfeeling a particularly strong surge of hatred.”

“But ... why?”

“Because you and he are connected by the curse thatfailed,” said Dumbledore. “That is no ordinary scar.”

“So you think ... that dream ... did it really happen?”

“It is possible,” said Dumbledore. “I would say —probable. Harry — did you see Voldemort?”

“No,” said Harry. “Just the back of his chair. But —there wouldn’t have been anything to see, wouldthere? I mean, he hasn’t got a body, has he? But ...but then how could he have held the wand?” Harrysaid slowly.

“How indeed?” muttered Dumbledore. “How indeed

Neither Dumbledore nor Harry spoke for a while.Dumbledore was gazing across the room, and, everynow and then, placing his wand tip to his temple andadding another shining silver thought to the seethingmass within the Pensieve.

“Professor,” Harry said at last, “do you think he’sgetting stronger?”

“Voldemort?” said Dumbledore, looking at Harry overthe Pensieve. It was the characteristic, piercing lookDumbledore had given him on other occasions, andalways made Harry feel as though Dumbledore wereseeing right through him in a way that even Moody’sPage | 665 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

magical eye could not. “Once again, Harry, I can onlygive you my suspicions.”

Dumbledore sighed again, and he looked older, andwearier, than ever.

“The years of Voldemort’s ascent to power,” he said,“were marked with disappearances. Bertha Jorkinshas vanished without a trace in the place whereVoldemort was certainly known to be last. Mr. Crouchtoo has disappeared ... within these very grounds.

And there was a third disappearance, one which theMinistry, I regret to say, do not consider of anyimportance, for it concerns a Muggle. His name wasFrank Bryce, he lived in the village where Voldemort’sfather grew up, and he has not been seen since lastAugust. You see, I read the Muggle newspapers,unlike most of my Ministry friends.”

Dumbledore looked very seriously at Harry.

“These disappearances seem to me to be linked. TheMinistry disagrees — as you may have heard, whilewaiting outside my office.”

Harry nodded. Silence fell between them again,Dumbledore extracting thoughts every now and then.Harry felt as though he ought to go, but his curiosityheld him in his chair.

“Professor?” he said again.

“Yes, Harry?” said Dumbledore.

“Er ... could I ask you about ... that court thing I wasin ... in the Pensieve?”

Page | 666

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You could,” said Dumbledore heavily. “I attended itmany times, but some trials come back to me moreclearly than others ... particularly now. ...”

“You know — you know the trial you found me in?

The one with Crouch’s son? Well ... were they talkingabout Neville’s parents?”

Dumbledore gave Harry a very sharp look. “HasNeville never told you why he has been brought up byhis grandmother?” he said.

Harry shook his head, wondering, as he did so, howhe could have failed to ask Neville this, in almost fouryears of knowing him.

“Yes, they were talking about Neville’s parents,” saidDumbledore. “His father, Frank, was an Auror justlike Professor Moody. He and his wife were torturedfor information about Voldemort’s whereabouts afterhe lost his powers, as you heard.”

“So they’re dead?” said Harry quietly.

“No,” said Dumbledore, his voice full of a bitternessHarry had never heard there before. “They are insane.They are both in St. Mungo’s Hospital for MagicalMaladies and Injuries. I believe Neville visits them,with his grandmother, during the holidays. They donot recognize him.”

Harry sat there, horror-struck. He had never known... never, in four years, bothered to find out ...

“The Longbottoms were very popular,” saidDumbledore. “The attacks on them came afterVoldemort’s fall from power, just when everyonethought they were safe. Those attacks caused a waveof fury such as I have never known. The Ministry wasPage | 667 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

under great pressure to catch those who had done it.Unfortunately, the Longbottoms’ evidence was —given their condition — none too reliable.”

“Then Mr. Crouch’s son might not have beeninvolved?” said Harry slowly.

Dumbledore shook his head.

“As to that, I have no idea.”

Harry sat in silence once more, watching the contentsof the Pensieve swirl. There were two more questionshe was burning to ask ... but they concerned the guiltof living people. ...

“Er,” he said, “Mr. Bagman ...”

"... has never been accused of any Dark activitysince,” said Dumbledore calmly.

“Right,” said Harry hastily, staring at the contents ofthe Pensieve again, which were swirling more slowlynow that Dumbledore had stopped adding thoughts.“And ... er ...”

But the Pensieve seemed to be asking his question forhim. Snape’s face was swimming on the surfaceagain. Dumbledore glanced down into it, and then upat Harry.

“No more has Professor Snape,” he said.

Harry looked into Dumbledore’s light blue eyes, andthe thing he really wanted to know spilled out of hismouth before he could stop it.

“What made you think he’d really stopped supportingVoldemort, Professor?”

Page | 668 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore held Harry’s gaze for a few seconds, andthen said, “That, Harry, is a matter between ProfessorSnape and myself.”

Harry knew that the interview was over; Dumbledoredid not look angry, yet there was a finality in his tonethat told Harry it was time to go. He stood up, and sodid Dumbledore.

“Harry,” he said as Harry reached the door. “Please donot speak about Neville’s parents to anybody else. Hehas the right to let people know, when he is ready.”

“Yes, Professor,” said Harry, turning to go.

“And —”

Harry looked back. Dumbledore was standing overthe Pensieve, his face lit from beneath by its silveryspots of light, looking older than ever. He stared atHarry for a moment, and then said, “Good luck withthe third task.”

Page | 669

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE THIRD TASK

“Dumbledore reckons You-Know-Who’s gettingstronger again as well?” Ron whispered.

Everything Harry had seen in the Pensieve, nearlyeverything Dumbledore had told and shown himafterward, he had now shared with Ron andHermione — and, of course, with Sirius, to whomHarry had sent an owl the moment he had leftDumbledore’s office. Harry, Ron, and Hermione satup late in the common room once again that night,talking it all over until Harry’s mind was reeling, untilhe understood what Dumbledore had meant about ahead becoming so full of thoughts that it would havebeen a relief to siphon them off.

Ron stared into the common room fire. Harry thoughthe saw Ron shiver slightly, even though the eveningwas warm.

“And he trusts Snape?” Ron said. “He really trustsSnape, even though he knows he was a Death Eater?”

Page | 670

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Harry.

Hermione had not spoken for ten minutes. She wassitting with her forehead in her hands, staring at herknees. Harry thought she too looked as though shecould have done with a Pensieve.

“Rita Skeeter,” she muttered finally.

“How can you be worrying about her now?” said Ron,in utter disbelief.

“I’m not worrying about her,” Hermione said to herknees. “I’m just thinking ... remember what she saidto me in the Three Broomsticks? ‘I know things aboutLudo Bagman that would make your hair curl.’ Thisis what she meant, isn’t it? She reported his trial, sheknew he’d passed information to the Death Eaters.And Winky too, remember ... ‘Ludo Bagman’s a badwizard.’ Mr. Crouch would have been furious he gotoff, he would have talked about it at home.”

“Yeah, but Bagman didn’t pass information onpurpose, did he?”

Hermione shrugged.

“And Fudge reckons Madame Maxime attackedCrouch?” Ron said, turning back to Harry.

“Yeah,” said Harry, “but he’s only saying that becauseCrouch disappeared near the Beauxbatons carriage.”

“We never thought of her, did we?” said Ron slowly.“Mind you, she’s definitely got giant blood, and shedoesn’t want to admit it —”

“Of course she doesn’t,” said Hermione sharply,looking up. “Look what happened to Hagrid when Rita

Page | 671 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

found out about his mother. Look at Fudge, jumpingto conclusions about her, just because she’s partgiant. Who needs that sort of prejudice? I’d probablysay I had big bones if I knew that’s what I’d get fortelling the truth.”

Hermione looked at her watch. “We haven’t done anypracticing!” she said, looking shocked. “We were goingto do the Impediment Curse! We’ll have to really getdown to it tomorrow! Come on, Harry, you need to getsome sleep.”

Harry and Ron went slowly upstairs to theirdormitory. As Harry pulled on his pajamas, he lookedover at Neville’s bed. True to his word to Dumbledore,he had not told Ron and Hermione about Neville’sparents. As Harry took off his glasses and climbedinto his four-poster, he imagined how it must feel tohave parents still living but unable to recognize you.He often got sympathy from strangers for being anorphan, but as he listened to Neville’s snores, hethought that Neville deserved it more than he did.Lying in the darkness, Harry felt a rush of anger andhate toward the people who had tortured Mr. andMrs. Longbottom. ... He remembered the jeers of thecrowd as Crouch’s son and his companions had beendragged from the court by the dementors. ... Heunderstood how they had felt. ... Then heremembered the milk-white face of the screaming boyand realized with a jolt that he had died a year later.

It was Voldemort, Harry thought, staring up at thecanopy of his bed in the darkness, it all came back toVoldemort. ... He was the one who had torn thesefamilies apart, who had ruined all these lives. ...

Ron and Hermione were supposed to be studying fortheir exams, which would finish on the day of the

Page | 672 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

third task, but they were putting most of their effortsinto helping Harry prepare.

“Don’t worry about it,” Hermione said shortly whenHarry pointed this out to them and said he didn’tmind practicing on his own for a while, “at least we’llget top marks in Defense Against the Dark Arts. We’dnever have found out about all these hexes in class.”

“Good training for when we’re all Aurors,” said Ronexcitedly, attempting the Impediment Curse on awasp that had buzzed into the room and making itstop dead in midair.

The mood in the castle as they entered June becameexcited and tense again. Everyone was lookingforward to the third task, which would take place aweek before the end of term. Harry was practicinghexes at every available moment. He felt moreconfident about this task than either of the others.Difficult and dangerous though it would undoubtedlybe, Moody was right: Harry had managed to find hisway past monstrous creatures and enchantedbarriers before now, and this time he had somenotice, some chance to prepare himself for what layahead.

Tired of walking in on Harry, Hermione, and Ron allover the school, Professor McGonagall had given thempermission to use the empty Transfigurationclassroom at lunchtimes. Harry had soon masteredthe Impediment Curse, a spell to slow down andobstruct attackers; the Reductor Curse, which wouldenable him to blast solid objects out of his way; andthe Four-Point Spell, a useful discovery of Hermione’sthat would make his wand point due north, thereforeenabling him to check whether he was going in theright direction within the maze. He was still havingtrouble with the Shield Charm, though. This wasPage | 673 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

supposed to cast a temporary, invisible wall aroundhimself that deflected minor curses; Hermionemanaged to shatter it with a well-placed Jelly-LegsJinx, and Harry wobbled around the room for tenminutes afterward before she had looked up thecounter-jinx.

“You’re still doing really well, though,” Hermione saidencouragingly, looking down her list and crossing offthose spells they had already learned. “Some of theseare bound to come in handy.”

“Come and look at this,” said Ron, who was standingby the window. He was staring down onto thegrounds. “What’s Malfoy doing?”

Harry and Hermione went to see. Malfoy, Crabbe, andGoyle were standing in the shadow of a tree below.Crabbe and Goyle seemed to be keeping a lookout;both were smirking. Malfoy was holding his hand upto his mouth and speaking into it.

“He looks like he’s using a walkie-talkie,” said Harrycuriously.

“He can’t be,” said Hermione, “I’ve told you, thosesorts of things don’t work around Hogwarts. Come on,Harry,” she added briskly, turning away from thewindow and moving back into the middle of the room,“let’s try that Shield Charm again.”

Sirius was sending daily owls now. Like Hermione, heseemed to want to concentrate on getting Harrythrough the last task before they concernedthemselves with anything else. He reminded Harry inevery letter that whatever might be going on outside

Page | 674

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the walls of Hogwarts was not Harry’s responsibility,nor was it within his power to influence it.

If Voldemort is really getting stronger again, he wrote,my priority is to ensure your safety. He cannot hope tolay hands on you while you are under Dumbledore’sprotection, but all the same, take no risks: Concentrateon getting through that maze safely, and then we canturn our attention to other matters.

Harry’s nerves mounted as June the twenty-fourthdrew closer, but they were not as bad as those he hadfelt before the first and second tasks. For one thing,he was confident that, this time, he had doneeverything in his power to prepare for the task. Foranother, this was the final hurdle, and however wellor badly he did, the tournament would at last be over,which would be an enormous relief.

Breakfast was a very noisy affair at the Gryffindortable on the morning of the third task. The post owlsappeared, bringing Harry a good-luck card fromSirius. It was only a piece of parchment, folded overand bearing a muddy paw print on its front, butHarry appreciated it all the same. A screech owlarrived for Hermione, carrying her morning copy ofthe Daily Prophet as usual. She unfolded the paper,glanced at the front page, and spat out a mouthful ofpumpkin juice all over it.

“What?” said Harry and Ron together, staring at her.

“Nothing,” said Hermione quickly, trying to shove thepaper out of sight, but Ron grabbed it. He stared atthe headline and said, “No way. Not today. That oldcow.”

“What?” said Harry. “Rita Skeeter again?”

Page | 675 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Ron, and just like Hermione, he attemptedto push the paper out of sight.

“It’s about me, isn’t it?” said Harry.

“No,” said Ron, in an entirely unconvincing tone.

But before Harry could demand to see the paper,Draco Malfoy shouted across the Great Hall from theSlytherin table.

“Hey, Potter! Potteri How’s your head? You feeling allright? Sure you’re not going to go berserk on us?”

Malfoy was holding a copy of the Daily Prophet too.Slytherins up and down the table were sniggering,twisting in their seats to see Harry’s reaction.

“Let me see it,” Harry said to Ron. “Give it here.”

Very reluctantly, Ron handed over the newspaper.Harry turned it over and found himself staring at hisown picture, beneath the banner headline:

HARRY POTTER

“DISTURBED AND DANGEROUS”

The boy who defeated He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named isunstable and possibly dangerous, writes Rita Skeeter,Special Correspondent. Alarming evidence hasrecently come to light about Harry Potter’s strangebehavior, which casts doubts upon his suitability tocompete in a demanding competition like the TriwizardTournament, or even to attend Hogwarts School.

Potter, the Daily Prophet can exclusively reveal,regularly collapses at school, and is often heard tocomplain of pain in the scar on his forehead (relic of the

Page | 676 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

curse with which You-Know-Who attempted to kill him).On Monday last, midway through a Divination lesson,your Daily Prophet reporter witnessed Potter stormingfrom the class, claiming that his scar was hurting toobadly to continue studying.

It is possible, say top experts at St. Mungo’s Hospitalfor Magical Maladies and Injuries, that Potter’s brainwas affected by the attack inflicted upon him by You-Know-Who, and that his insistence that the scar isstill hurting is an expression of his deep-seatedconfusion.

“He might even be pretending,” said one specialist.“This could be a plea for attention.”

The Daily Prophet, however, has unearthed worryingfacts about Harry Potter thatAlbus Dumbledore,Headmaster of Hogwarts, has carefully concealed fromthe wizarding public.

“Potter can speak Parseltongue, ” reveals Draco Malfoy,a Hogwarts fourth year. “There were a lot of attackson students a couple of years ago, and most peoplethought Potter was behind them after they saw himlose his temper at a dueling club and set a snake onanother boy. It was all hushed up, though. But he’smade friends with werewolves and giants too. Wethink he’d do anything for a bit of power.”

Parseltongue, the ability to converse with snakes, haslong been considered a Dark Art. Indeed, the mostfamous Parselmouth of our times is none other thanYou-Know-Who himself. A member of the Dark ForceDefense League, who wished to remain unnamed,stated that he would regard any wizard who couldspeak Parseltongue “as worthy of investigation.Personally, I would be highly suspicious of anybodywho could converse with snakes, as serpents arePage | 677 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

often used in the worst kinds of Dark Magic, and arehistorically associated with evildoers.” Similarly,“anyone who seeks out the company of such viciouscreatures as werewolves and giants would appear tohave a fondness for violence.”

Albus Dumbledore should surely consider whether aboy such as this should be allowed to compete in theTriwizard Tournament. Some fear that Potter mightresort to the Dark Arts in his desperation to win thetournament, the third task of which takes place thisevening.

“Gone off me a bit, hasn’t she?” said Harry lightly,folding up the paper.

Over at the Slytherin table, Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goylewere laughing at him, tapping their heads with theirfingers, pulling grotesquely mad faces, and wagglingtheir tongues like snakes.

“How did she know your scar hurt in Divination?”

Ron said. “There’s no way she was there, there’s noway she could’ve heard —”

“The window was open,” said Harry. “I opened it tobreathe.”

“You were at the top of North Tower!” Hermione said.“Your voice couldn’t have carried all the way down tothe grounds!”

“Well, you’re the one who’s supposed to beresearching magical methods of bugging!” said Harry.“You tell me how she did it!”

“I’ve been trying!” said Hermione. “But I ... but ...”

Page | 678

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

An odd, dreamy expression suddenly came overHermione’s face. She slowly raised a hand and ranher fingers through her hair.

“Are you all right?” said Ron, frowning at her.

“Yes,” said Hermione breathlessly. She ran her fingersthrough her hair again, and then held her hand up toher mouth, as though speaking into an invisiblewalkie-talkie. Harry and Ron stared at each other.

“I’ve had an idea,” Hermione said, gazing into space.

“I think I know ... because then no one would be ableto see ... even Moody ... and she’d have been able toget onto the window ledge ... but she’s not allowed ...she’s definitely not allowed ... I think we’ve got her!Just give me two seconds in the library —just tomake sure!”

With that, Hermione seized her school bag anddashed out of the Great Hall.

“Oi!” Ron called after her. “We’ve got our History ofMagic exam in ten minutes! Blimey,” he said, turningback to Harry, “she must really hate that Skeeterwoman to risk missing the start of an exam. What’reyou going to do in Binns’s class — read again?”

Exempt from the end-of-term tests as a Triwizardchampion, Harry had been sitting in the back of everyexam class so far, looking up fresh hexes for the thirdtask.

“S’pose so,” Harry said to Ron; but just then,

Professor McGonagall came walking alongside theGryffindor table toward him.

“Potter, the champions are congregating in thechamber off the Hall after breakfast,” she said.

Page | 679 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“But the task’s not till tonight!” said Harry,accidentally spilling scrambled eggs down his front,afraid he had mistaken the time.

“I’m aware of that, Potter,” she said. “The champions’families are invited to watch the final task, you know.This is simply a chance for you to greet them.”

She moved away. Harry gaped after her.

“She doesn’t expect the Dursleys to turn up, doesshe?” he asked Ron blankly.

“Dunno,” said Ron. “Harry, I’d better hurry, I’m goingto be late for Binns. See you later.”

Harry finished his breakfast in the emptying GreatHall. He saw Fleur Delacour get up from theRavenclaw table and join Cedric as he crossed to theside chamber and entered. Krum slouched off to jointhem shortly afterward. Harry stayed where he was.

He really didn’t want to go into the chamber. He hadno family — no family who would turn up to see himrisk his life, anyway. But just as he was getting up,thinking that he might as well go up to the libraryand do a spot more hex research, the door of the sidechamber opened, and Cedric stuck his head out.

“Harry, come on, they’re waiting for you!”

Utterly perplexed, Harry got up. The Dursleyscouldn’t possibly be here, could they? He walkedacross the Hall and opened the door into thechamber.

Cedric and his parents were just inside the door.Viktor Krum was over in a corner, conversing with hisdark-haired mother and father in rapid Bulgarian. Hehad inherited his father’s hooked nose. On the other

Page | 680 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

side of the room, Fleur was jabbering away in Frenchto her mother. Fleur’s little sister, Gabrielle, washolding her mother’s hand. She waved at Harry, whowaved back, grinning. Then he saw Mrs. Weasley andBill standing in front of the fireplace, beaming at him.

“Surprise!” Mrs. Weasley said excitedly as he smiledbroadly and walked over to them. “Thought we’d comeand watch you, Harry!” She bent down and kissedhim on the cheek.

“You all right?” said Bill, grinning at Harry andshaking his hand. “Charlie wanted to come, but hecouldn’t get time off. He said you were incredibleagainst the Horntail.”

Fleur Delacour, Harry noticed, was eyeing Bill withgreat interest over her mother’s shoulder. Harry couldtell she had no objection whatsoever to long hair orearrings with fangs on them.

“This is really nice of you,” Harry muttered to Mrs.Weasley. “I thought for a moment — the Dursleys —”

“Hmm,” said Mrs. Weasley, pursing her lips. She hadalways refrained from criticizing the Dursleys in frontof Harry, but her eyes flashed every time they werementioned.

“It’s great being back here,” said Bill, looking aroundthe chamber (Violet, the Fat Lady’s friend, winked athim from her frame). “Haven’t seen this place for fiveyears. Is that picture of the mad knight still around?Sir Cadogan?”

“Oh yeah,” said Harry, who had met Sir Cadogan theprevious year.

“And the Fat Lady?” said Bill.

Page | 681 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“She was here in my time,” said Mrs. Weasley. “Shegave me such a telling off one night when I got backto the dormitory at four in the morning —”

“What were you doing out of your dormitory at four inthe morning?” said Bill, surveying his mother withamazement.

Mrs. Weasley grinned, her eyes twinkling.

“Your father and I had been for a nighttime stroll,”she said. “He got caught by Apollyon Pringle — hewas the caretaker in those days — your father’s stillgot the marks.”

“Fancy giving us a tour, Harry?” said Bill.

“Yeah, okay,” said Harry, and they made their wayback toward the door into the Great Hall. As theypassed Amos Diggory, he looked around.

“There you are, are you?” he said, looking Harry upand down. “Bet you’re not feeling quite as full ofyourself now Cedric’s caught you up on points, areyou?”

“What?” said Harry.

“Ignore him,” said Cedric in a low voice to Harry,frowning after his father. “He’s been angry ever sinceRita Skeeter’s article about the Triwizard Tournament— you know, when she made out you were the onlyHogwarts champion.”

“Didn’t bother to correct her, though, did he?” saidAmos Diggory, loudly enough for Harry to hear as hestarted to walk out of the door with Mrs. Weasley andBill. “Still ... you’ll show him, Ced. Beaten him oncebefore, haven’t you?”

Page | 682 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Rita Skeeter goes out of her way to cause trouble,Amos!” Mrs. Weasley said angrily. “I would havethought you’d know that, working at the Ministry!”

Mr. Diggory looked as though he was going to saysomething angry, but his wife laid a hand on his arm,and he merely shrugged and turned away.

Harry had a very enjoyable morning walking over thesunny grounds with Bill and Mrs. Weasley, showingthem the Beauxbatons carriage and the Durmstrangship. Mrs. Weasley was intrigued by the WhompingWillow, which had been planted after she had leftschool, and reminisced at length about thegamekeeper before Hagrid, a man called Ogg.

“How’s Percy?” Harry asked as they walked aroundthe greenhouses.

“Not good,” said Bill.

“He’s very upset,” said Mrs. Weasley, lowering hervoice and glancing around. “The Ministry wants tokeep Mr. Crouch’s disappearance quiet, but Percy’sbeen hauled in for questioning about the instructionsMr. Crouch has been sending in. They seem to thinkthere’s a chance they weren’t genuinely written byhim. Percy’s been under a lot of strain. They’re notletting him fill in for Mr. Crouch as the fifth judgetonight. Cornelius Fudge is going to be doing it.”

They returned to the castle for lunch.

“Mum — Bill!” said Ron, looking stunned, as hejoined the Gryffindor table. “What’re you doing here?”

“Come to watch Harry in the last task!” said Mrs.Weasley brightly. “I must say, it makes a lovelychange, not having to cook. How was your exam?”

Page | 683 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Oh ... okay,” said Ron. “Couldn’t remember all thegoblin rebels’ names, so I invented a few. It’s allright,” he said, helping himself to a Cornish pasty,while Mrs. Weasley looked stern, “they’re all calledstuff like Bodrod the Bearded and Urg the Unclean; itwasn’t hard.”

Fred, George, and Ginny came to sit next to them too,and Harry was having such a good time he felt almostas though he were back at the Burrow; he hadforgotten to worry about that evening’s task, and notuntil Hermione turned up, halfway through lunch,did he remember that she had had a brainwave aboutRita Skeeter.

“Are you going to tell us — ?”

Hermione shook her head warningly and glanced atMrs. Weasley.

“Hello, Hermione,” said Mrs. Weasley, much morestiffly than usual.

“Hello,” said Hermione, her smile faltering at the coldexpression on Mrs. Weasley’s face.

Harry looked between them, then said, “Mrs. Weasley,you didn’t believe that rubbish Rita Skeeter wrote inWitch Weekly, did you? Because Hermione’s not mygirlfriend.”

“Oh!” said Mrs. Weasley. “No — of course I didn’t!”

But she became considerably warmer towardHermione after that.

Harry, Bill, and Mrs. Weasley whiled away theafternoon with a long walk around the castle, andthen returned to the Great Hall for the evening feast.

Page | 684 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Ludo Bagman and Cornelius Fudge had joined thestaff table now. Bagman looked quite cheerful, butCornelius Fudge, who was sitting next to MadameMaxime, looked stern and was not talking. MadameMaxime was concentrating on her plate, and Harrythought her eyes looked red. Hagrid kept glancingalong the table at her.

There were more courses than usual, but Harry, whowas starting to feel really nervous now, didn’t eatmuch. As the enchanted ceiling overhead began tofade from blue to a dusky purple, Dumbledore rose tohis feet at the staff table, and silence fell.

“Ladies and gentlemen, in five minutes’ time, I will beasking you to make your way down to the Quidditchfield for the third and final task of the TriwizardTournament. Will the champions please follow Mr.Bagman down to the stadium now.”

Harry got up. The Gryffindors all along the table wereapplauding him; the Weasleys and Hermione allwished him good luck, and he headed off out of theGreat Hall with Cedric, Fleur, and Viktor.

“Feeling all right, Harry?” Bagman asked as they wentdown the stone steps onto the grounds. “Confident?”

“I’m okay,” said Harry. It was sort of true; he wasnervous, but he kept running over all the hexes andspells he had been practicing in his mind as theywalked, and the knowledge that he could rememberthem all made him feel better.

They walked onto the Quidditch field, which was nowcompletely unrecognizable. A twenty-foot-high hedgeran all the way around the edge of it. There was a gapright in front of them: the entrance to the vast maze.The passage beyond it looked dark and creepy.

Page | 685 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Five minutes later, the stands had begun to fill; theair was full of excited voices and the rumbling of feetas the hundreds of students filed into their seats. Thesky was a deep, clear blue now, and the first starswere starting to appear. Hagrid, Professor Moody,Professor McGonagall, and Professor Flitwick camewalking into the stadium and approached Bagmanand the champions. They were wearing large, red,luminous stars on their hats, all except Hagrid, whohad his on the back of his moleskin vest.

“We are going to be patrolling the outside of themaze,” said Professor McGonagall to the champions.“If you get into difficulty, and wish to be rescued,send red sparks into the air, and one of us will comeand get you, do you understand?”

The champions nodded.

“Off you go, then!” said Bagman brightly to the fourpatrollers.

“Good luck, Harry,” Hagrid whispered, and the four ofthem walked away in different directions, to stationthemselves around the maze. Bagman now pointedhis wand at his throat, muttered, “Sonorus,” and hismagically magnified voice echoed into the stands.

“Ladies and gentlemen, the third and final task of theTriwizard Tournament is about to begin! Let meremind you how the points currently stand! Tied infirst place, with eighty-five points each — Mr. CedricDiggory and Mr. Harry Potter, both of HogwartsSchool!” The cheers and applause sent birds from theForbidden Forest fluttering into the darkening sky.

“In second place, with eighty points — Mr. ViktorKrum, of Durmstrang Institute!” More applause. “Andin third place — Miss Fleur Delacour, of BeauxbatonsAcademy!”

Page | 686 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry could just make out Mrs. Weasley, Bill, Ron,and Hermione applauding Fleur politely, halfway upthe stands. He waved up at them, and they wavedback, beaming at him.

“So ... on my whistle, Harry and Cedric!” saidBagman. “Three — two — one —”

He gave a short blast on his whistle, and Harry andCedric hurried forward into the maze.

The towering hedges cast black shadows across thepath, and, whether because they were so tall andthick or because they had been enchanted, the soundof the surrounding crowd was silenced the momentthey entered the maze. Harry felt almost as though hewere underwater again. He pulled out his wand,muttered, “Lumos,” and heard Cedric do the samejust behind him.

After about fifty yards, they reached a fork. Theylooked at each other.

“See you,” Harry said, and he took the left one, whileCedric took the right.

Harry heard Bagman’s whistle for the second time.Krum had entered the maze. Harry sped up. Hischosen path seemed completely deserted. He turnedright, and hurried on, holding his wand high over hishead, trying to see as far ahead as possible. Still,there was nothing in sight.

Bagman’s whistle blew in the distance for the thirdtime. All of the champions were now inside.

Harry kept looking behind him. The old feeling thathe was being watched was upon him. The maze was

Page | 687

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

growing darker with every passing minute as the skyoverhead deepened to navy. He reached a second fork.

“Point Me,” he whispered to his wand, holding it flat inhis palm.

The wand spun around once and pointed toward hisright, into solid hedge. That way was north, and heknew that he needed to go northwest for the center ofthe maze. The best he could do was to take the leftfork and go right again as soon as possible.

The path ahead was empty too, and when Harryreached a right turn and took it, he again found hisway unblocked. Harry didn’t know why, but the lackof obstacles was unnerving him. Surely he shouldhave met something by now? It felt as though themaze were luring him into a false sense of security.Then he heard movement right behind him. He heldout his wand, ready to attack, but its beam fell onlyupon Cedric, who had just hurried out of a path onthe right-hand side. Cedric looked severely shaken.The sleeve of his robe was smoking.

“Hagrid’s Blast-Ended Skrewts!” he hissed. “They’reenormous — I only just got away!”

He shook his head and dived out of sight, alonganother path. Keen to put plenty of distance betweenhimself and the skrewts, Harry hurried off again.Then, as he turned a corner, he saw ... a dementorgliding toward him. Twelve feet tall, its face hidden byits hood, its rotting, scabbed hands outstretched, itadvanced, sensing its way blindly toward him. Harrycould hear its rattling breath; he felt clammy coldnessstealing over him, but knew what he had to do. ...

He summoned the happiest thought he could,concentrated with all his might on the thought of

Page | 688 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

getting out of the maze and celebrating with Ron andHermione, raised his wand, and cried, “ExpectoPatronum).”

A silver stag erupted from the end of Harry’s wandand galloped toward the dementor, which fell backand tripped over the hem of its robes. ... Harry hadnever seen a dementor stumble.

“Hang on!” he shouted, advancing in the wake of hissilver Patronus. “You’re a boggart! Riddikulusl”

There was a loud crack, and the shape-shifterexploded in a wisp of smoke. The silver stag fadedfrom sight. Harry wished it could have stayed, hecould have used some company ... but he moved on,quickly and quietly as possible, listening hard, hiswand held high once more.

Left ... right ... left again ... Twice he found himselffacing dead ends. He did the Four-Point Spell againand found that he was going too far east. He turnedback, took a right turn, and saw an odd golden mistfloating ahead of him.

Harry approached it cautiously, pointing the wand’sbeam at it. This looked like some kind ofenchantment. He wondered whether he might be ableto blast it out of the way.

“Reductol” he said.

The spell shot straight through the mist, leaving itintact. He supposed he should have known better; theReductor Curse was for solid objects. What wouldhappen if he walked through the mist? Was it worthchancing it, or should he double back?

Page | 689

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He was still hesitating when a scream shattered thesilence.

“Fleur?” Harry yelled.

There was silence. He stared all around him. Whathad happened to her? Her scream seemed to havecome from somewhere ahead. He took a deep breathand ran through the enchanted mist.

The world turned upside down. Harry was hangingfrom the ground, with his hair on end, his glassesdangling off his nose, threatening to fall into thebottomless sky. He clutched them to the end of hisnose and hung there, terrified. It felt as though hisfeet were glued to the grass, which had now becomethe ceiling. Below him the dark, star-spangledheavens stretched endlessly. He felt as though if hetried to move one of his feet, he would fall away fromthe earth completely.

Think, he told himself, as all the blood rushed to hishead, think ...

But not one of the spells he had practiced had beendesigned to combat a sudden reversal of ground andsky. Did he dare move his foot? He could hear theblood pounding in his ears. He had two choices — tryand move, or send up red sparks, and get rescuedand disqualified from the task.

He shut his eyes, so he wouldn’t be able to see theview of endless space below him, and pulled his rightfoot as hard as he could away from the grassy ceiling.

Immediately, the world righted itself. Harry fellforward onto his knees onto the wonderfully solidground. He felt temporarily limp with shock. He tooka deep, steadying breath, then got up again and

Page | 690 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

hurried forward, looking back over his shoulder as heran away from the golden mist, which twinkledinnocently at him in the moonlight.

He paused at a junction of two paths and lookedaround for some sign of Fleur. He was sure it hadbeen she who had screamed. What had she met? Wasshe all right? There was no sign of red sparks — didthat mean she had got herself out of trouble, or wasshe in such trouble that she couldn’t reach herwand? Harry took the right fork with a feeling ofincreasing unease ... but at the same time, hecouldn’t help thinking, One champion down ...

The cup was somewhere close by, and it sounded asthough Fleur was no longer in the running. He’d gotthis far, hadn’t he? What if he actually managed towin? Fleetingly, and for the first time since he’d foundhimself champion, he saw again that image ofhimself, raising the Triwizard Cup in front of the restof the school. ...

He met nothing for ten minutes, but kept runninginto dead ends. Twice he took the same wrongturning. Finally, he found a new route and started tojog along it, his wandlight waving, making his shadowflicker and distort on the hedge walls. Then herounded another corner and found himself facing aBlast-Ended Skrewt.

Cedric was right — it was enormous. Ten feet long, itlooked more like a giant scorpion than anything. Itslong sting was curled over its back. Its thick armorglinted in the light from Harry’s wand, which hepointed at it.

“Stupefy'.”

Page | 691

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The spell hit the skrewt’s armor and rebounded;

Harry ducked just in time, but could smell burninghair; it had singed the top of his head. The skrewtissued a blast of fire from its end and flew forwardtoward him.

“Impedimental” Harry yelled. The spell hit the skrewt’sarmor again and ricocheted off; Harry staggered backa few paces and fell over. aIMPEDIMENTA\”

The skrewt was inches from him when it froze — hehad managed to hit it on its fleshy, shell-lessunderside. Panting, Harry pushed himself away fromit and ran, hard, in the opposite direction — theImpediment Curse was not permanent; the skrewtwould be regaining the use of its legs at any moment.

He took a left path and hit a dead end, a right, andhit another; forcing himself to stop, heart hammering,he performed the Four-Point Spell again,backtracked, and chose a path that would take himnorthwest.

He had been hurrying along the new path for a fewminutes, when he heard something in the pathrunning parallel to his own that made him stop dead.

“What are you doing?” yelled Cedric’s voice. “What thehell d’you think you’re doing?”

And then Harry heard Krum’s voice.

“Crucio\”

The air was suddenly full of Cedric’s yells. Horrified,Harry began sprinting up his path, trying to find away into Cedric’s. When none appeared, he tried theReductor Curse again. It wasn’t very effective, but itburned a small hole in the hedge through whichPage | 692 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry forced his leg, kicking at the thick bramblesand branches until they broke and made an opening;he struggled through it, tearing his robes, and lookingto his right, saw Cedric jerking and twitching on theground, Krum standing over him.

Harry pulled himself up and pointed his wand atKrum just as Krum looked up. Krum turned andbegan to run.

“Stupefy]” Harry yelled.

The spell hit Krum in the back; he stopped dead inhis tracks, fell forward, and lay motionless, facedownin the grass. Harry dashed over to Cedric, who hadstopped twitching and was lying there panting, hishands over his face.

“Are you all right?” Harry said roughly, grabbingCedric’s arm.

“Yeah,” panted Cedric. “Yeah ... I don’t believe it ... hecrept up behind me. ... I heard him, I turned around,and he had his wand on me. ...”

Cedric got up. He was still shaking. He and Harrylooked down at Krum.

“I can’t believe this ... I thought he was all right,”Harry said, staring at Krum.

“So did I,” said Cedric.

“Did you hear Fleur scream earlier?” said Harry.

“Yeah,” said Cedric. “You don’t think Krum got hertoo?”

“I don’t know,” said Harry slowly.

Page | 693 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Should we leave him here?” Cedric muttered.

“No,” said Harry. “I reckon we should send up redsparks. Someone’ll come and collect him ... otherwisehe’ll probably be eaten by a skrewt.”

“He’d deserve it,” Cedric muttered, but all the same,he raised his wand and shot a shower of red sparksinto the air, which hovered high above Krum, markingthe spot where he lay.

Harry and Cedric stood there in the darkness for amoment, looking around them. Then Cedric said,

“Well ... I s’pose we’d better go on . ...”

“What?” said Harry. “Oh ... yeah ... right ...”

It was an odd moment. He and Cedric had beenbriefly united against Krum — now the fact that theywere opponents came back to Harry. The two of themproceeded up the dark path without speaking, thenHarry turned left, and Cedric right. Cedric’s footstepssoon died away.

Harry moved on, continuing to use the Four-PointSpell, making sure he was moving in the rightdirection. It was between him and Cedric now. Hisdesire to reach the cup first was now burningstronger than ever, but he could hardly believe whathe’d just seen Krum do. The use of an UnforgivableCurse on a fellow human being meant a life term inAzkaban, that was what Moody had told them. Krumsurely couldn’t have wanted the Triwizard Cup thatbadly. ... Harry sped up.

Every so often he hit more dead ends, but theincreasing darkness made him feel sure he wasgetting near the heart of the maze. Then, as he strodedown a long, straight path, he saw movement once

Page | 694 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

again, and his beam of wandlight hit an extraordinarycreature, one which he had only seen in picture form,in his Monster Book of Monsters.

It was a sphinx. It had the body of an over-large lion:great clawed paws and a long yellowish tail ending ina brown tuft. Its head, however, was that of a woman.She turned her long, almond-shaped eyes upon Harryas he approached. He raised his wand, hesitating.

She was not crouching as if to spring, but pacingfrom side to side of the path, blocking his progress.Then she spoke, in a deep, hoarse voice.

“You are very near your goal. The quickest way is pastme.”

“So ... so will you move, please?” said Harry, knowingwhat the answer was going to be.

“No,” she said, continuing to pace. “Not unless youcan answer my riddle. Answer on your first guess — Ilet you pass. Answer wrongly — I attack. Remainsilent — I will let you walk away from me unscathed.”

Harry’s stomach slipped several notches. It wasHermione who was good at this sort of thing, not him.He weighed his chances. If the riddle was too hard, hecould keep silent, get away from the sphinxunharmed, and try and find an alternative route tothe center.

“Okay,” he said. “Can I hear the riddle?”

The sphinx sat down upon her hind legs, in the verymiddle of the path, and recited:

“First think of the person who lives in disguise,

Who deals in secrets and tells naught but lies.

Page | 695 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Next, tell me what’s always the last thing to mend,

The middle of middle and end of the end?

And finally give me the sound often heardDuring the search for a hard-to-find word.

Now string them together, and answer me this,

Which creature would you be unwilling to kiss?”

Harry gaped at her.

“Could I have it again ... more slowly?” he askedtentatively.

She blinked at him, smiled, and repeated the poem.

“All the clues add up to a creature I wouldn’t want tokiss?” Harry asked.

She merely smiled her mysterious smile. Harry tookthat for a “yes.” Harry cast his mind around. Therewere plenty of animals he wouldn’t want to kiss; hisimmediate thought was a Blast-Ended Skrewt, butsomething told him that wasn’t the answer. He’d haveto try and work out the clues. ...

“A person in disguise,” Harry muttered, staring at her,“who lies ... er ... that’d be a — an imposter. No,that’s not my guess! A — a spy? I’ll come back to that... could you give me the next clue again, please?”

She repeated the next lines of the poem.

“ The last thing to mend,’ ” Harry repeated. “Er ... noidea ... ‘middle of middle’ ... could I have the last bitagain?”

Page | 696 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

She gave him the last four lines.

“ The sound often heard during the search for a hard-to-find word,’ ” said Harry. “Er ... that’d be ... er ...hang on — ‘er’! Er’s a sound!”

The sphinx smiled at him.

“Spy ... er ... spy ... er ...” said Harry, pacing up anddown. “A creature I wouldn’t want to kiss ... a spiderl”

The sphinx smiled more broadly. She got up,stretched her front legs, and then moved aside forhim to pass.

“Thanks!” said Harry, and, amazed at his ownbrilliance, he dashed forward.

He had to be close now, he had to be. ... His wandwas telling him he was bang on course; as long as hedidn’t meet anything too horrible, he might have achance. ...

Harry broke into a run. He had a choice of paths upahead. “Point Mel” he whispered again to his wand,and it spun around and pointed him to the right-hand one. He dashed up this one and saw lightahead.

The Triwizard Cup was gleaming on a plinth ahundred yards away. Suddenly a dark figure hurtledout onto the path in front of him.

Cedric was going to get there first. Cedric wassprinting as fast as he could toward the cup, andHarry knew he would never catch up, Cedric wasmuch taller, had much longer legs —

Page | 697

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Then Harry saw something immense over a hedge tohis left, moving quickly along a path that intersectedwith his own; it was moving so fast Cedric was aboutto run into it, and Cedric, his eyes on the cup, hadnot seen it —

“Cedric!” Harry bellowed. “On your left!”

Cedric looked around just in time to hurl himself pastthe thing and avoid colliding with it, but in his haste,he tripped. Harry saw Cedric’s wand fly out of hishand as a gigantic spider stepped into the path andbegan to bear down upon Cedric.

“Stupefy'.” Harry yelled; the spell hit the spider’sgigantic, hairy black body, but for all the good it did,he might as well have thrown a stone at it; the spiderjerked, scuttled around, and ran at Harry instead.

“Stupefy! Impedimenta! Stupefy!”

But it was no use — the spider was either so large, orso magical, that the spells were doing no more thanaggravating it. Harry had one horrifying glimpse ofeight shining black eyes and razor-sharp pincersbefore it was upon him.

He was lifted into the air in its front legs; strugglingmadly, he tried to kick it; his leg connected with thepincers and next moment he was in excruciatingpain. He could hear Cedric yelling “Stupefy'.” too, buthis spell had no more effect than Harry’s — Harryraised his wand as the spider opened its pincers oncemore and shouted “Expelliarmus'.”

It worked — the Disarming Spell made the spiderdrop him, but that meant that Harry fell twelve feetonto his already injured leg, which crumpled beneathhim. Without pausing to think, he aimed high at the

Page | 698 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

spider’s underbelly, as he had done with the skrewt,and shouted “Stupefyl” just as Cedric yelled the samething.

The two spells combined did what one alone had not:The spider keeled over sideways, flattening a nearbyhedge, and strewing the path with a tangle of hairylegs.

“Harry!” he heard Cedric shouting. “You all right? Didit fall on you?”

“No,” Harry called back, panting. He looked down athis leg. It was bleeding freely. He could see some sortof thick, gluey secretion from the spider’s pincers onhis torn robes. He tried to get up, but his leg wasshaking badly and did not want to support his weight.He leaned against the hedge, gasping for breath, andlooked around.

Cedric was standing feet from the Triwizard Cup,which was gleaming behind him.

“Take it, then,” Harry panted to Cedric. “Go on, takeit. You’re there.”

But Cedric didn’t move. He merely stood there,looking at Harry. Then he turned to stare at the cup.Harry saw the longing expression on his face in itsgolden light. Cedric looked around at Harry again,who was now holding onto the hedge to supporthimself. Cedric took a deep breath.

“You take it. You should win. That’s twice you’vesaved my neck in here.”

“That’s not how it’s supposed to work,” Harry said. Hefelt angry; his leg was very painful, he was aching allover from trying to throw off the spider, and after all

Page | 699 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

his efforts, Cedric had beaten him to it, just as he’dbeaten Harry to ask Cho to the ball. “The one whoreaches the cup first gets the points. That’s you. I’mtelling you, I’m not going to win any races on this leg.”

Cedric took a few paces nearer to the Stunned spider,away from the cup, shaking his head.

“No,” he said.

“Stop being noble,” said Harry irritably. “Just take it,then we can get out of here.”

Cedric watched Harry steadying himself, holding tightto the hedge.

“You told me about the dragons,” Cedric said. “Iwould’ve gone down in the first task if you hadn’t toldme what was coming.”

“I had help on that too,” Harry snapped, trying to mopup his bloody leg with his robes. “You helped me withthe egg — we’re square.”

“I had help on the egg in the first place,” said Cedric.

“We’re still square,” said Harry, testing his leggingerly; it shook violently as he put weight on it; hehad sprained his ankle when the spider had droppedhim.

“You should’ve got more points on the second task,”said Cedric mulishly. “You stayed behind to get all thehostages. I should’ve done that.”

“I was the only one who was thick enough to take thatsong seriously!” said Harry bitterly. “Just take thecup!”

Page | 700

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Cedric.

He stepped over the spider’s tangled legs to joinHarry, who stared at him. Cedric was serious. He waswalking away from the sort of glory Hufflepuff Househadn’t had in centuries.

“Go on,” Cedric said. He looked as though this wascosting him every ounce of resolution he had, but hisface was set, his arms were folded, he seemeddecided.

Harry looked from Cedric to the cup. For one shiningmoment, he saw himself emerging from the maze,holding it. He saw himself holding the Triwizard Cupaloft, heard the roar of the crowd, saw Cho’s faceshining with admiration, more clearly than he hadever seen it before ... and then the picture faded, andhe found himself staring at Cedric’s shadowy,stubborn face.

“Both of us,” Harry said.

“What?”

“Well take it at the same time. It’s still a Hogwartsvictory. We’ll tie for it.”

Cedric stared at Harry. He unfolded his arms.

“You — you sure?”

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Yeah ... we’ve helped each otherout, haven’t we? We both got here. Let’s just take ittogether.”

For a moment, Cedric looked as though he couldn’tbelieve his ears; then his face split in a grin.

Page | 701 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

“You’re on,” he said. “Come here.”

He grabbed Harry’s arm below the shoulder andhelped Harry limp toward the plinth where the cupstood. When they had reached it, they both held ahand out over one of the cup’s gleaming handles.

“On three, right?” said Harry. “One — two — three —”

He and Cedric both grasped a handle.

Instantly, Harry felt a jerk somewhere behind hisnavel. His feet had left the ground. He could notunclench the hand holding the Triwizard Cup; it waspulling him onward in a howl of wind and swirlingcolor, Cedric at his side.

Page | 702

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





FLESH, BLOOD, AND BONE

Harry felt his feet slam into the ground; his injuredleg gave way, and he fell forward; his hand let go ofthe Triwizard Cup at last. He raised his head.

“Where are we?” he said.

Cedric shook his head. He got up, pulled Harry to hisfeet, and they looked around.

They had left the Hogwarts grounds completely; theyhad obviously traveled miles — perhaps hundreds ofmiles — for even the mountains surrounding thecastle were gone. They were standing instead in adark and overgrown graveyard; the black outline of asmall church was visible beyond a large yew tree totheir right. A hill rose above them to their left. Harrycould just make out the outline of a fine old house onthe hillside.

Cedric looked down at the Triwizard Cup and then upat Harry.

Page | 703

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Did anyone tell you the cup was a Portkey?” heasked.

“Nope,” said Harry. He was looking around thegraveyard. It was completely silent and slightly eerie.“Is this supposed to be part of the task?”

“I dunno,” said Cedric. He sounded slightly nervous.“Wands out, d’you reckon?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, glad that Cedric had made thesuggestion rather than him.

They pulled out their wands. Harry kept lookingaround him. He had, yet again, the strange feelingthat they were being watched.

“Someone’s coming,” he said suddenly.

Squinting tensely through the darkness, they watchedthe figure drawing nearer, walking steadily towardthem between the graves. Harry couldn’t make out aface, but from the way it was walking and holding itsarms, he could tell that it was carrying something.Whoever it was, he was short, and wearing a hoodedcloak pulled up over his head to obscure his face. And— several paces nearer, the gap between them closingall the time — Harry saw that the thing in theperson’s arms looked like a baby ... or was it merely abundle of robes?

Harry lowered his wand slightly and glanced sidewaysat Cedric. Cedric shot him a quizzical look. They bothturned back to watch the approaching figure.

It stopped beside a towering marble headstone, onlysix feet from them. For a second, Harry and Cedricand the short figure simply looked at one another.

Page | 704

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

And then, without warning, Harry’s scar explodedwith pain. It was agony such as he had never felt inall his life; his wand slipped from his fingers as he puthis hands over his face; his knees buckled; he was onthe ground and he could see nothing at all; his headwas about to split open.

From far away, above his head, he heard a high, coldvoice say, “Kill the spare.”

A swishing noise and a second voice, which screechedthe words to the night: “Avada KedavraV’

A blast of green light blazed through Harry’s eyelids,and he heard something heavy fall to the groundbeside him; the pain in his scar reached such a pitchthat he retched, and then it diminished; terrified ofwhat he was about to see, he opened his stingingeyes.

Cedric was lying spread-eagled on the ground besidehim. He was dead.

For a second that contained an eternity, Harry staredinto Cedric’s face, at his open gray eyes, blank andexpressionless as the windows of a deserted house, athis half-open mouth, which looked slightly surprised.And then, before Harry’s mind had accepted what hewas seeing, before he could feel anything but numbdisbelief, he felt himself being pulled to his feet.

The short man in the cloak had put down his bundle,lit his wand, and was dragging Harry toward themarble headstone. Harry saw the name upon itflickering in the wandlight before he was forcedaround and slammed against it.

TOM RIDDLE

Page | 705

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The cloaked man was now conjuring tight cordsaround Harry, tying him from neck to ankles to theheadstone. Harry could hear shallow, fast breathingfrom the depths of the hood; he struggled, and theman hit him — hit him with a hand that had a fingermissing. And Harry realized who was under the hood.It was Wormtail.

“You!” he gasped.

But Wormtail, who had finished conjuring the ropes,did not reply; he was busy checking the tightness ofthe cords, his fingers trembling uncontrollably,fumbling over the knots. Once sure that Harry wasbound so tightly to the headstone that he couldn’tmove an inch, Wormtail drew a length of some blackmaterial from the inside of his cloak and stuffed itroughly into Harry’s mouth; then, without a word, heturned from Harry and hurried away. Harry couldn’tmake a sound, nor could he see where Wormtail hadgone; he couldn’t turn his head to see beyond theheadstone; he could see only what was right in frontof him.

Cedric’s body was lying some twenty feet away. Someway beyond him, glinting in the starlight, lay theTriwizard Cup. Harry’s wand was on the ground atCedric’s feet. The bundle of robes that Harry hadthought was a baby was close by, at the foot of thegrave. It seemed to be stirring fretfully. Harry watchedit, and his scar seared with pain again ... and hesuddenly knew that he didn’t want to see what was inthose robes ... he didn’t want that bundle opened. ...

He could hear noises at his feet. He looked down andsaw a gigantic snake slithering through the grass,circling the headstone where he was tied. Wormtail’sfast, wheezy breathing was growing louder again. Itsounded as though he was forcing something heavyPage | 706 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

across the ground. Then he came back within Harry’srange of vision, and Harry saw him pushing a stonecauldron to the foot of the grave. It was full of whatseemed to be water — Harry could hear it sloppingaround — and it was larger than any cauldron Harryhad ever used; a great stone belly large enough for afull-grown man to sit in.

The thing inside the bundle of robes on the groundwas stirring more persistently, as though it was tryingto free itself. Now Wormtail was busying himself atthe bottom of the cauldron with a wand. Suddenlythere were crackling flames beneath it. The largesnake slithered away into the darkness.

The liquid in the cauldron seemed to heat very fast.The surface began not only to bubble, but to send outfiery sparks, as though it were on fire. Steam wasthickening, blurring the outline of Wormtail tendingthe fire. The movements beneath the robes becamemore agitated. And Harry heard the high, cold voiceagain.

“Hurry\”

The whole surface of the water was alight with sparksnow. It might have been encrusted with diamonds.

“It is ready, Master.”

“Now ...” said the cold voice.

Wormtail pulled open the robes on the ground,revealing what was inside them, and Harry let out ayell that was strangled in the wad of material blockinghis mouth.

It was as though Wormtail had flipped over a stoneand revealed something ugly, slimy, and blind — but

Page | 707 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

worse, a hundred times worse. The thing Wormtailhad been carrying had the shape of a crouchedhuman child, except that Harry had never seenanything less like a child. It was hairless and scaly -looking, a dark, raw, reddish black. Its arms and legswere thin and feeble, and its face — no child aliveever had a face like that — flat and snakelike, withgleaming red eyes.

The thing seemed almost helpless; it raised its thinarms, put them around Wormtail’s neck, andWormtail lifted it. As he did so, his hood fell back,and Harry saw the look of revulsion on Wormtail’sweak, pale face in the firelight as he carried thecreature to the rim of the cauldron. For one moment,Harry saw the evil, flat face illuminated in the sparksdancing on the surface of the potion. And thenWormtail lowered the creature into the cauldron;there was a hiss, and it vanished below the surface;Harry heard its frail body hit the bottom with a softthud.

Let it drown, Harry thought, his scar burning almostpast endurance, please ... let it drown. ...

Wormtail was speaking. His voice shook; he seemedfrightened beyond his wits. He raised his wand,closed his eyes, and spoke to the night.

“Bone of the father, unknowingly given, you will renewyour son!”

The surface of the grave at Harry’s feet cracked.Horrified, Harry watched as a fine trickle of dust roseinto the air at Wormtail’s command and fell softly intothe cauldron. The diamond surface of the water brokeand hissed; it sent sparks in all directions and turneda vivid, poisonous-looking blue.

Page | 708

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

And now Wormtail was whimpering. He pulled a long,thin, shining silver dagger from inside his cloak. Hisvoice broke into petrified sobs.

“Flesh — of the servant — w-willingly given — you will— revive — your master.”

He stretched his right hand out in front of him — thehand with the missing finger. He gripped the daggervery tightly in his left hand and swung it upward.

Harry realized what Wormtail was about to do asecond before it happened — he closed his eyes astightly as he could, but he could not block the screamthat pierced the night, that went through Harry asthough he had been stabbed with the dagger too. Heheard something fall to the ground, heard Wormtail’sanguished panting, then a sickening splash, assomething was dropped into the cauldron. Harrycouldn’t stand to look ... but the potion had turned aburning red; the light of it shone through Harry’sclosed eyelids...

Wormtail was gasping and moaning with agony. Notuntil Harry felt Wormtail’s anguished breath on hisface did he realize that Wormtail was right in front ofhim.

“B-blood of the enemy ... forcibly taken ... you will...resurrect your foe.”

Harry could do nothing to prevent it, he was tied tootightly. ... Squinting down, struggling hopelessly atthe ropes binding him, he saw the shining silverdagger shaking in Wormtail’s remaining hand. He feltits point penetrate the crook of his right arm andblood seeping down the sleeve of his torn robes.Wormtail, still panting with pain, fumbled in his

Page | 709

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

pocket for a glass vial and held it to Harry’s cut, sothat a dribble of blood fell into it.

He staggered back to the cauldron with Harry’s blood.He poured it inside. The liquid within turned,instantly, a blinding white. Wormtail, his job done,dropped to his knees beside the cauldron, thenslumped sideways and lay on the ground, cradling thebleeding stump of his arm, gasping and sobbing.

The cauldron was simmering, sending its diamondsparks in all directions, so blindingly bright that itturned all else to velvety blackness. Nothinghappened. ...

Let it have drowned, Harry thought, let it have gonewrong. ...

And then, suddenly, the sparks emanating from thecauldron were extinguished. A surge of white steambillowed thickly from the cauldron instead,obliterating everything in front of Harry, so that hecouldn’t see Wormtail or Cedric or anything but vaporhanging in the air... It’s gone wrong, he thought... it’sdrowned ... please ... please let it be dead...

But then, through the mist in front of him, he saw,with an icy surge of terror, the dark outline of a man,tall and skeletally thin, rising slowly from inside thecauldron.

“Robe me,” said the high, cold voice from behind thesteam, and Wormtail, sobbing and moaning, stillcradling his mutilated arm, scrambled to pick up theblack robes from the ground, got to his feet, reachedup, and pulled them one-handed over his master’shead.

Page | 710

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

The thin man stepped out of the cauldron, staring atHarry ... and Harry stared back into the face that hadhaunted his nightmares for three years. Whiter than askull, with wide, livid scarlet eyes and a nose thatwas flat as a snake’s with slits for nostrils ...

Lord Voldemort had risen again.

Page | 711

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE DEATH EATERS

Voldemort looked away from Harry and beganexamining his own body. His hands were like large,pale spiders; his long white fingers caressed his ownchest, his arms, his face; the red eyes, whose pupilswere slits, like a cat’s, gleamed still more brightlythrough the darkness. He held up his hands andflexed the fingers, his expression rapt and exultant.

He took not the slightest notice of Wormtail, who laytwitching and bleeding on the ground, nor of the greatsnake, which had slithered back into sight and wascircling Harry again, hissing. Voldemort slipped one ofthose unnaturally long-fingered hands into a deeppocket and drew out a wand. He caressed it gentlytoo; and then he raised it, and pointed it at Wormtail,who was lifted off the ground and thrown against theheadstone where Harry was tied; he fell to the foot ofit and lay there, crumpled up and crying. Voldemortturned his scarlet eyes upon Harry, laughing a high,cold, mirthless laugh.

Wormtail’s robes were shining with blood now; he hadwrapped the stump of his arm in them.

Page | 712 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“My Lord ...” he choked, “my Lord ... you promised ...you did promise ...”

“Hold out your arm,” said Voldemort lazily.

“Oh Master ... thank you, Master ...”

He extended the bleeding stump, but Voldemortlaughed again.

“The other arm, Wormtail.”

“Master, please ... please ...”

Voldemort bent down and pulled out Wormtail’s leftarm; he forced the sleeve of Wormtail’s robes up pasthis elbow, and Harry saw something upon the skinthere, something like a vivid red tattoo — a skull witha snake protruding from its mouth — the image thathad appeared in the sky at the Quidditch World Cup:the Dark Mark. Voldemort examined it carefully,ignoring Wormtail’s uncontrollable weeping.

“It is back,” he said softly, “they will all have noticed it... and now, we shall see ... now we shall know ...”

He pressed his long white forefinger to the brand onWormtail’s arm.

The scar on Harry’s forehead seared with a sharppain again, and Wormtail let out a fresh howl;Voldemort removed his fingers from Wormtail’s mark,and Harry saw that it had turned jet black.

A look of cruel satisfaction on his face, Voldemortstraightened up, threw back his head, and staredaround at the dark graveyard.

Page | 713

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“How many will be brave enough to return when theyfeel it?” he whispered, his gleaming red eyes fixedupon the stars. “And how many will be foolish enoughto stay away?”

He began to pace up and down before Harry andWormtail, eyes sweeping the graveyard all the while.After a minute or so, he looked down at Harry again,a cruel smile twisting his snakelike face.

“You stand, Harry Potter, upon the remains of my latefather,” he hissed softly. “A Muggle and a fool ... verylike your dear mother. But they both had their uses,did they not? Your mother died to defend you as achild ... and I killed my father, and see how useful hehas proved himself, in death. ...”

Voldemort laughed again. Up and down he paced,looking all around him as he walked, and the snakecontinued to circle in the grass.

“You see that house upon the hillside, Potter? Myfather lived there. My mother, a witch who lived herein this village, fell in love with him. But he abandonedher when she told him what she was. ... He didn’t likemagic, my father ...

“He left her and returned to his Muggle parents beforeI was even born, Potter, and she died giving birth tome, leaving me to be raised in a Muggle orphanage ...but I vowed to find him ... I revenged myself uponhim, that fool who gave me his name ... Tom Riddle.

Still he paced, his red eyes darting from grave tograve.

Page | 714

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Listen to me, reliving family history ...” he saidquietly, “why, I am growing quite sentimental. ... Butlook, Harry! My true family returns. ...”

The air was suddenly full of the swishing of cloaks.Between graves, behind the yew tree, in everyshadowy space, wizards were Apparating. All of themwere hooded and masked. And one by one they movedforward ... slowly, cautiously, as though they couldhardly believe their eyes. Voldemort stood in silence,waiting for them. Then one of the Death Eaters fell tohis knees, crawled toward Voldemort, and kissed thehem of his black robes.

“Master ... Master ...” he murmured.

The Death Eaters behind him did the same; each ofthem approaching Voldemort on his knees andkissing his robes, before backing away and standingup, forming a silent circle, which enclosed TomRiddle’s grave, Harry, Voldemort, and the sobbing andtwitching heap that was Wormtail. Yet they left gapsin the circle, as though waiting for more people.Voldemort, however, did not seem to expect more. Helooked around at the hooded faces, and though therewas no wind, a rustling seemed to run around thecircle, as though it had shivered.

“Welcome, Death Eaters,” said Voldemort quietly.“Thirteen years ... thirteen years since last we met.

Yet you answer my call as though it were yesterday.

... We are still united under the Dark Mark, then! Orare we?”

He put back his terrible face and sniffed, his slit-likenostrils widening.

“I smell guilt,” he said. “There is a stench of guiltupon the air.”

Page | 715 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

A second shiver ran around the circle, as though eachmember of it longed, but did not dare, to step backfrom him.

“I see you all, whole and healthy, with your powersintact — such prompt appearances! — and I askmyself ... why did this band of wizards never come tothe aid of their master, to whom they swore eternalloyalty?”

No one spoke. No one moved except Wormtail, whowas upon the ground, still sobbing over his bleedingarm.

“And I answer myself,” whispered Voldemort, “theymust have believed me broken, they thought I wasgone. They slipped back among my enemies, and theypleaded innocence, and ignorance, and bewitchment.

“And then I ask myself, but how could they havebelieved I would not rise again? They, who knew thesteps I took, long ago, to guard myself against mortaldeath? They, who had seen proofs of the immensity ofmy power in the times when I was mightier than anywizard living?

“And I answer myself, perhaps they believed a stillgreater power could exist, one that could vanquisheven Lord Voldemort ... perhaps they now payallegiance to another ... perhaps that champion ofcommoners, of Mudbloods and Muggles, AlbusDumbledore?”

At the mention of Dumbledore’s name, the membersof the circle stirred, and some muttered and shooktheir heads. Voldemort ignored them.

Page | 716

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“It is a disappointment to me ... I confess myselfdisappointed. ...”

One of the men suddenly flung himself forward,breaking the circle. Trembling from head to foot, hecollapsed at Voldemort’s feet.

“Master!” he shrieked, “Master, forgive me! Forgive usall!”

Voldemort began to laugh. He raised his wand.

“Cruciol”

The Death Eater on the ground writhed and shrieked;Harry was sure the sound must carry to the housesaround. ... Let the police come, he thought desperately... anyone ... anything ...

Voldemort raised his wand. The tortured Death Eaterlay flat upon the ground, gasping.

“Get up, Avery,” said Voldemort softly. “Stand up. Youask for forgiveness? I do not forgive. I do not forget.Thirteen long years ... I want thirteen years’repayment before I forgive you. Wormtail here haspaid some of his debt already, have you not,Wormtail?”

He looked down at Wormtail, who continued to sob.

“You returned to me, not out of loyalty, but out of fearof your old friends. You deserve this pain, Wormtail.You know that, don’t you?”

“Yes, Master,” moaned Wormtail, “please, Master ...please ...”

Page | 717

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Yet you helped return me to my body,” saidVoldemort coolly, watching Wormtail sob on theground. “Worthless and traitorous as you are, youhelped me ... and Lord Voldemort rewards hishelpers. ...”

Voldemort raised his wand again and whirled itthrough the air. A streak of what looked like moltensilver hung shining in the wand’s wake. Momentarilyshapeless, it writhed and then formed itself into agleaming replica of a human hand, bright asmoonlight, which soared downward and fixed itselfupon Wormtail’s bleeding wrist.

Wormtail’s sobbing stopped abruptly. His breathingharsh and ragged, he raised his head and stared indisbelief at the silver hand, now attached seamlesslyto his arm, as though he were wearing a dazzlingglove. He flexed the shining fingers, then, trembling,picked up a small twig on the ground and crushed itinto powder.

“My Lord,” he whispered. “Master ... it is beautiful ...thank you ... thank you. ...”

He scrambled forward on his knees and kissed thehem of Voldemort’s robes.

“May your loyalty never waver again, Wormtail,” saidVoldemort.

“No, my Lord ... never, my Lord ...”

Wormtail stood up and took his place in the circle,staring at his powerful new hand, his face stillshining with tears. Voldemort now approached theman on Wormtail’s right.

Page | 718

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Lucius, my slippery friend,” he whispered, haltingbefore him. “I am told that you have not renouncedthe old ways, though to the world you present arespectable face. You are still ready to take the lead ina spot of Muggle-torture, I believe? Yet you never triedto find me, Lucius. ... Your exploits at the QuidditchWorld Cup were fun, I daresay ... but might not yourenergies have been better directed toward finding andaiding your master?”

“My Lord, I was constantly on the alert,” came LuciusMalfoy’s voice swiftly from beneath the hood. “Hadthere been any sign from you, any whisper of yourwhereabouts, I would have been at your sideimmediately, nothing could have prevented me —”

“And yet you ran from my Mark, when a faithfulDeath Eater sent it into the sky last summer?” saidVoldemort lazily, and Mr. Malfoy stopped talkingabruptly. “Yes, I know all about that, Lucius. ... Youhave disappointed me. ... I expect more faithfulservice in the future.”

“Of course, my Lord, of course. ... You are merciful,thank you. ...”

Voldemort moved on, and stopped, staring at thespace — large enough for two people — thatseparated Malfoy and the next man.

“The Lestranges should stand here,” said Voldemortquietly. “But they are entombed in Azkaban. Theywere faithful. They went to Azkaban rather thanrenounce me. ... When Azkaban is broken open, theLestranges will be honored beyond their dreams. Thedementors will join us ... they are our natural allies ...we will recall the banished giants ... I shall have allmy devoted servants returned to me, and an army ofcreatures whom all fear. ...”

Page | 719 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He walked on. Some of the Death Eaters he passed insilence, but he paused before others and spoke tothem.

“Macnair ... destroying dangerous beasts for theMinistry of Magic now, Wormtail tells me? You shallhave better victims than that soon, Macnair. LordVoldemort will provide. ...”

“Thank you, Master ... thank you,” murmuredMacnair.

“And here” — Voldemort moved on to the two largesthooded figures — “we have Crabbe ... you will dobetter this time, will you not, Crabbe? And you,Goyle?”

They bowed clumsily, muttering dully.

“Yes, Master ...”

“We will, Master. ...”

“The same goes for you, Nott,” said Voldemort quietlyas he walked past a stooped figure in Mr. Goyle’sshadow.

“My Lord, I prostrate myself before you, I am yourmost faithful —”

“That will do,” said Voldemort.

He had reached the largest gap of all, and he stoodsurveying it with his blank, red eyes, as though hecould see people standing there.

“And here we have six missing Death Eaters ... threedead in my service. One, too cowardly to return ... hewill pay. One, who I believe has left me forever ... he

Page | 720 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

will be killed, of course ... and one, who remains mymost faithful servant, and who has already reenteredmy service.”

The Death Eaters stirred, and Harry saw their eyesdart sideways at one another through their masks.

“He is at Hogwarts, that faithful servant, and it wasthrough his efforts that our young friend arrived heretonight. ...

“Yes,” said Voldemort, a grin curling his lipless mouthas the eyes of the circle flashed in Harry’s direction.“Harry Potter has kindly joined us for my rebirthingparty. One might go so far as to call him my guest ofhonor.”

There was a silence. Then the Death Eater to the rightof Wormtail stepped forward, and Lucius Malfoy’svoice spoke from under the mask.

“Master, we crave to know ... we beg you to tell us ...how you have achieved this ... this miracle ... howyou managed to return to us. ...”

“Ah, what a story it is, Lucius,” said Voldemort. “Andit begins — and ends — with my young friend here.”

He walked lazily over to stand next to Harry, so thatthe eyes of the whole circle were upon the two ofthem. The snake continued to circle.

“You know, of course, that they have called this boymy downfall?” Voldemort said softly, his red eyesupon Harry, whose scar began to burn so fiercely thathe almost screamed in agony. “You all know that onthe night I lost my powers and my body, I tried to killhim. His mother died in the attempt to save him —and unwittingly provided him with a protection IPage | 721 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

admit I had not foreseen. ... I could not touch theboy.”

Voldemort raised one of his long white fingers and putit very close to Harry’s cheek.

“His mother left upon him the traces of her sacrifice.

... This is old magic, I should have remembered it, Iwas foolish to overlook it ... but no matter. I cantouch him now.”

Harry felt the cold tip of the long white finger touchhim, and thought his head would burst with the pain.Voldemort laughed softly in his ear, then took thefinger away and continued addressing the DeathEaters.

“I miscalculated, my friends, I admit it. My curse wasdeflected by the woman’s foolish sacrifice, and itrebounded upon myself. Aaah ... pain beyond pain,my friends; nothing could have prepared me for it. Iwas ripped from my body, I was less than spirit, lessthan the meanest ghost ... but still, I was alive. WhatI was, even I do not know ... I, who have gone furtherthan anybody along the path that leads toimmortality. You know my goal — to conquer death.And now, I was tested, and it appeared that one ormore of my experiments had worked ... for I had notbeen killed, though the curse should have done it.Nevertheless, I was as powerless as the weakestcreature alive, and without the means to help myself... for I had no body, and every spell that might havehelped me required the use of a wand. ...

“I remember only forcing myself, sleeplessly,endlessly, second by second, to exist. ... I settled in afaraway place, in a forest, and I waited. ... Surely, oneof my faithful Death Eaters would try and find me ...one of them would come and perform the magic IPage | 722 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

could not, to restore me to a body ... but I waited invain. ...”

The shiver ran once more around the circle oflistening Death Eaters. Voldemort let the silencespiral horribly before continuing.

“Only one power remained to me. I could possess thebodies of others. But I dared not go where otherhumans were plentiful, for I knew that the Aurorswere still abroad and searching for me. I sometimesinhabited animals — snakes, of course, being mypreference — but I was little better off inside themthan as pure spirit, for their bodies were ill adapted toperform magic ... and my possession of themshortened their lives; none of them lasted long. ...

“Then ... four years ago ... the means for my returnseemed assured. A wizard — young, foolish, andgullible — wandered across my path in the forest Ihad made my home. Oh, he seemed the very chance Ihad been dreaming of ... for he was a teacher atDumbledore’s school ... he was easy to bend to mywill ... he brought me back to this country, and aftera while, I took possession of his body, to supervisehim closely as he carried out my orders. But my planfailed. I did not manage to steal the Sorcerer’s Stone. Iwas not to be assured immortal life. I was thwarted ...thwarted, once again, by Harry Potter. ...”

Silence once more; nothing was stirring, not even theleaves on the yew tree. The Death Eaters were quitemotionless, the glittering eyes in their masks fixedupon Voldemort, and upon Harry.

“The servant died when I left his body, and I was leftas weak as ever I had been,” Voldemort continued. “Ireturned to my hiding place far away, and I will notpretend to you that I didn’t then fear that I might

Page | 723 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

never regain my powers. ... Yes, that was perhaps mydarkest hour ... I could not hope that I would be sentanother wizard to possess ... and I had given up hope,now, that any of my Death Eaters cared what hadbecome of me. ...”

One or two of the masked wizards in the circle moveduncomfortably, but Voldemort took no notice.

“And then, not even a year ago, when I had almostabandoned hope, it happened at last ... a servantreturned to me. Wormtail here, who had faked hisown death to escape justice, was driven out of hidingby those he had once counted friends, and decided toreturn to his master. He sought me in the countrywhere it had long been rumored I was hiding ...helped, of course, by the rats he met along the way.Wormtail has a curious affinity with rats, do you not,Wormtail? His filthy little friends told him there was aplace, deep in an Albanian forest, that they avoided,where small animals like themselves had met theirdeaths by a dark shadow that possessed them. ...

“But his journey back to me was not smooth, was it,Wormtail? For, hungry one night, on the edge of thevery forest where he had hoped to find me, hefoolishly stopped at an inn for some food ... and whoshould he meet there, but one Bertha Jorkins, awitch from the Ministry of Magic.

“Now see the way that fate favors Lord Voldemort.

This might have been the end of Wormtail, and of mylast hope for regeneration. But Wormtail — displayinga presence of mind I would never have expected fromhim — convinced Bertha Jorkins to accompany himon a nighttime stroll. He overpowered her ... hebrought her to me. And Bertha Jorkins, who mighthave ruined all, proved instead to be a gift beyond my

Page | 724

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

wildest dreams ... for — with a little persuasion — shebecame a veritable mine of information.

“She told me that the Triwizard Tournament would beplayed at Hogwarts this year. She told me that sheknew of a faithful Death Eater who would be only toowilling to help me, if I could only contact him. Shetold me many things ... but the means I used to breakthe Memory Charm upon her were powerful, andwhen I had extracted all useful information from her,her mind and body were both damaged beyond repair.She had now served her purpose. I could not possessher. I disposed of her.”

Voldemort smiled his terrible smile, his red eyesblank and pitiless.

“Wormtail’s body, of course, was ill adapted forpossession, as all assumed him dead, and wouldattract far too much attention if noticed. However, hewas the able-bodied servant I needed, and, poorwizard though he is, Wormtail was able to follow theinstructions I gave him, which would return me to arudimentary, weak body of my own, a body I would beable to inhabit while awaiting the essentialingredients for true rebirth ... a spell or two of myown invention ... a little help from my dear Nagini,”Voldemort’s red eyes fell upon the continually circlingsnake, “a potion concocted from unicorn blood, andthe snake venom Nagini provided ... I was soonreturned to an almost human form, and strongenough to travel.

“There was no hope of stealing the Sorcerer’s Stoneanymore, for I knew that Dumbledore would haveseen to it that it was destroyed. But I was willing toembrace mortal life again, before chasing immortality.I set my sights lower ... I would settle for my old bodyback again, and my old strength.

Page | 725 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“I knew that to achieve this — it is an old piece ofDark Magic, the potion that revived me tonight — Iwould need three powerful ingredients. Well, one ofthem was already at hand, was it not, Wormtail?

Flesh given by a servant. ...

“My father’s bone, naturally, meant that we wouldhave to come here, where he was buried. But theblood of a foe ... Wormtail would have had me use anywizard, would you not, Wormtail? Any wizard whohad hated me ... as so many of them still do. But Iknew the one I must use, if I was to rise again, morepowerful than I had been when I had fallen. I wantedHarry Potter’s blood. I wanted the blood of the onewho had stripped me of power thirteen years ago ...for the lingering protection his mother once gave himwould then reside in my veins too. ...

“But how to get at Harry Potter? For he has beenbetter protected than I think even he knows,protected in ways devised by Dumbledore long ago,when it fell to him to arrange the boy’s future.Dumbledore invoked an ancient magic, to ensure theboy’s protection as long as he is in his relations’ care.Not even I can touch him there. ... Then, of course,there was the Quidditch World Cup. ... I thought hisprotection might be weaker there, away from hisrelations and Dumbledore, but I was not yet strongenough to attempt kidnap in the midst of a horde ofMinistry wizards. And then, the boy would return toHogwarts, where he is under the crooked nose of thatMuggle-loving fool from morning until night. So howcould I take him?

“Why ... by using Bertha Jorkins’s information, ofcourse. Use my one faithful Death Eater, stationed atHogwarts, to ensure that the boy’s name was enteredinto the Goblet of Fire. Use my Death Eater to ensurethat the boy won the tournament — that he touchedPage | 726 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the Triwizard Cup first — the cup which my DeathEater had turned into a Portkey, which would bringhim here, beyond the reach of Dumbledore’s help andprotection, and into my waiting arms. And here he is... the boy you all believed had been my downfall...”

Voldemort moved slowly forward and turned to faceHarry. He raised his wand.

“Crucio\”

It was pain beyond anything Harry had everexperienced; his very bones were on fire; his head wassurely splitting along his scar; his eyes were rollingmadly in his head; he wanted it to end ... to black out...to die ...

And then it was gone. He was hanging limply in theropes binding him to the headstone of Voldemort’sfather, looking up into those bright red eyes througha kind of mist. The night was ringing with the soundof the Death Eaters’ laughter.

“You see, I think, how foolish it was to suppose thatthis boy could ever have been stronger than me,” saidVoldemort. “But I want there to be no mistake inanybody’s mind. Harry Potter escaped me by a luckychance. And I am now going to prove my power bykilling him, here and now, in front of you all, whenthere is no Dumbledore to help him, and no mother todie for him. I will give him his chance. He will beallowed to fight, and you will be left in no doubtwhich of us is the stronger. Just a little longer,Nagini,” he whispered, and the snake glided awaythrough the grass to where the Death Eaters stoodwatching.

“Now untie him, Wormtail, and give him back hiswand.”

Page | 727 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





PRIORI INCANTATEM

Wormtail approached Harry, who scrambled to findhis feet, to support his own weight before the ropeswere untied. Wormtail raised his new silver hand,pulled out the wad of material gagging Harry, andthen, with one swipe, cut through the bonds tyingHarry to the gravestone.

There was a split second, perhaps, when Harry mighthave considered running for it, but his injured legshook under him as he stood on the overgrown grave,as the Death Eaters closed ranks, forming a tightercircle around him and Voldemort, so that the gapswhere the missing Death Eaters should have stoodwere filled. Wormtail walked out of the circle to theplace where Cedric’s body lay and returned withHarry’s wand, which he thrust roughly into Harry’shand without looking at him. Then Wormtail resumedhis place in the circle of watching Death Eaters.

“You have been taught how to duel, Harry Potter?”said Voldemort softly, his red eyes glinting throughthe darkness.

Page | 728 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

At these words Harry remembered, as though from aformer life, the dueling club at Hogwarts he hadattended briefly two years ago. ... All he had learnedthere was the Disarming Spell, “Expelliarmus” ... andwhat use would it be to deprive Voldemort of hiswand, even if he could, when he was surrounded byDeath Eaters, outnumbered by at least thirty to one?He had never learned anything that could possibly fithim for this. He knew he was facing the thing againstwhich Moody had always warned ... the un-blockableAvada Kedavra curse — and Voldemort was right —his mother was not here to die for him this time. ...

He was quite unprotected. ...

“We bow to each other, Harry,” said Voldemort,bending a little, but keeping his snakelike faceupturned to Harry. “Come, the niceties must beobserved. ... Dumbledore would like you to showmanners. ... Bow to death, Harry. ...”

The Death Eaters were laughing again. Voldemort’slipless mouth was smiling. Harry did not bow. He wasnot going to let Voldemort play with him before killinghim ... he was not going to give him that satisfaction.

“I said, bow,” Voldemort said, raising his wand — andHarry felt his spine curve as though a huge, invisiblehand were bending him ruthlessly forward, and theDeath Eaters laughed harder than ever.

“Very good,” said Voldemort softly, and as he raisedhis wand the pressure bearing down upon Harry liftedtoo. “And now you face me, like a man ... straight-backed and proud, the way your father died. ...

“And now — we duel.”

Page | 729

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort raised his wand, and before Harry could doanything to defend himself, before he could evenmove, he had been hit again by the Cruciatus Curse.The pain was so intense, so all-consuming, that he nolonger knew where he was. ... White-hot knives werepiercing every inch of his skin, his head was surelygoing to burst with pain, he was screaming moreloudly than he’d ever screamed in his life —

And then it stopped. Harry rolled over and scrambledto his feet; he was shaking as uncontrollably asWormtail had done when his hand had been cut off;he staggered sideways into the wall of watching DeathEaters, and they pushed him away, back towardVoldemort.

“A little break,” said Voldemort, the slit-like nostrilsdilating with excitement, “a little pause ... That hurt,didn’t it, Harry? You don’t want me to do that again,do you?”

Harry didn’t answer. He was going to die like Cedric,those pitiless red eyes were telling him so ... he wasgoing to die, and there was nothing he could do aboutit... but he wasn’t going to play along. He wasn’t goingto obey Voldemort ... he wasn’t going to beg. ...

“I asked you whether you want me to do that again,”said Voldemort softly. “Answer me! ImperioV’

And Harry felt, for the third time in his life, thesensation that his mind had been wiped of allthought. ... Ah, it was bliss, not to think, it was asthough he were floating, dreaming ... just answer no... say no ... just answer no. ...

I will not, said a stronger voice, in the back of hishead, I won’t answer. ...

Page | 730

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Just answer no. ...

I won’t do it, I won’t say it. ...

Just answer no. ...

“I WONT!”

And these words burst from Harry’s mouth; theyechoed through the graveyard, and the dream statewas lifted as suddenly as though cold water had beenthrown over him — back rushed the aches that theCruciatus Curse had left all over his body — backrushed the realization of where he was, and what hewas facing. ...

“You won’t?” said Voldemort quietly, and the DeathEaters were not laughing now. “You won’t say no?Harry, obedience is a virtue I need to teach you beforeyou die. ... Perhaps another little dose of pain?”

Voldemort raised his wand, but this time Harry wasready; with the reflexes born of his Quidditchtraining, he flung himself sideways onto the ground;he rolled behind the marble headstone of Voldemort’sfather, and he heard it crack as the curse missedhim.

“We are not playing hide-and-seek, Harry,” saidVoldemort’s soft, cold voice, drawing nearer, as theDeath Eaters laughed. “You cannot hide from me.

Does this mean you are tired of our duel? Does thismean that you would prefer me to finish it now,

Harry? Come out, Harry ... come out and play, then...it will be quick ... it might even be painless ... Iwould not know ... I have never died. ...”

Harry crouched behind the headstone and knew theend had come. There was no hope ... no help to be

Page | 731 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

had. And as he heard Voldemort draw nearer still, heknew one thing only, and it was beyond fear orreason: He was not going to die crouching here like achild playing hide-and-seek; he was not going to diekneeling at Voldemort’s feet ... he was going to dieupright like his father, and he was going to die tryingto defend himself, even if no defense was possible. ...

Before Voldemort could stick his snakelike facearound the headstone, Harry stood up ... he grippedhis wand tightly in his hand, thrust it out in front ofhim, and threw himself around the headstone, facingVoldemort.

Voldemort was ready. As Harry shouted,

“ExpelliarmusV’ Voldemort cried, “Avada KedavraV’

A jet of green light issued from Voldemort’s wand justas a jet of red light blasted from Harry’s — they metin midair — and suddenly Harry’s wand was vibratingas though an electric charge were surging through it;his hand seized up around it; he couldn’t havereleased it if he’d wanted to — and a narrow beam oflight connected the two wands, neither red nor green,but bright, deep gold. Harry, following the beam withhis astonished gaze, saw that Voldemort’s long whitefingers too were gripping a wand that was shakingand vibrating.

And then — nothing could have prepared Harry forthis — he felt his feet lift from the ground. He andVoldemort were both being raised into the air, theirwands still connected by that thread of shimmeringgolden light. They glided away from the tombstone ofVoldemort’s father and then came to rest on a patchof ground that was clear and free of graves. ... TheDeath Eaters were shouting; they were askingVoldemort for instructions; they were closing in,reforming the circle around Harry and Voldemort, thePage | 732 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

snake slithering at their heels, some of them drawingtheir wands —

The golden thread connecting Harry and Voldemortsplintered; though the wands remained connected, athousand more beams arced high over Harry andVoldemort, crisscrossing all around them, until theywere enclosed in a golden, dome-shaped web, a cageof light, beyond which the Death Eaters circled likejackals, their cries strangely muffled now. ...

“Do nothing!” Voldemort shrieked to the DeathEaters, and Harry saw his red eyes wide withastonishment at what was happening, saw himfighting to break the thread of light still connectinghis wand with Harry’s; Harry held onto his wandmore tightly, with both hands, and the golden threadremained unbroken. “Do nothing unless I commandyou!” Voldemort shouted to the Death Eaters.

And then an unearthly and beautiful sound filled theair. ... It was coming from every thread of the light-spun web vibrating around Harry and Voldemort. Itwas a sound Harry recognized, though he had heardit only once before in his life: phoenix song.

It was the sound of hope to Harry ... the mostbeautiful and welcome thing he had ever heard in hislife. ... He felt as though the song were inside himinstead of just around him. ... It was the sound heconnected with Dumbledore, and it was almost asthough a friend were speaking in his ear. ...

Don’t break the connection.

I know, Harry told the music, I know I mustn’t ... butno sooner had he thought it, than the thing becamemuch harder to do. His wand began to vibrate morepowerfully than ever ... and now the beam between

Page | 733 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire-J.K. Rowling

him and Voldemort changed too ... it was as thoughlarge beads of light were sliding up and down thethread connecting the wands — Harry felt his wandgive a shudder under his hand as the light beadsbegan to slide slowly and steadily his way. ... Thedirection of the beam’s movement was now towardhim, from Voldemort, and he felt his wand shudderangrily. ...

As the closest bead of light moved nearer to Harry’swand tip, the wood beneath his fingers grew so hot hefeared it would burst into flame. The closer that beadmoved, the harder Harry’s wand vibrated; he was surehis wand would not survive contact with it; it felt asthough it was about to shatter under his fingers —

He concentrated every last particle of his mind uponforcing the bead back toward Voldemort, his ears fullof phoenix song, his eyes furious, fixed ... and slowly,very slowly, the beads quivered to a halt, and then,just as slowly, they began to move the other way ...and it was Voldemort’s wand that was vibrating extra-hard now ... Voldemort who looked astonished, andalmost fearful. ...

One of the beads of light was quivering, inches fromthe tip of Voldemort’s wand. Harry didn’t understandwhy he was doing it, didn’t know what it mightachieve ... but he now concentrated as he had neverdone in his life on forcing that bead of light right backinto Voldemort’s wand ... and slowly ... very slowly ...it moved along the golden thread ... it trembled for amoment... and then it connected. ...

At once, Voldemort’s wand began to emit echoingscreams of pain ... then — Voldemort’s red eyeswidened with shock — a dense, smoky hand flew outof the tip of it and vanished ... the ghost of the handhe had made Wormtail ... more shouts of pain ... andPage | 734 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

then something much larger began to blossom fromVoldemort’s wand tip, a great, grayish something,that looked as though it were made of the solidest,densest smoke. ... It was a head ... now a chest andarms ... the torso of Cedric Diggory.

If ever Harry might have released his wand fromshock, it would have been then, but instinct kept himclutching his wand tightly, so that the thread ofgolden light remained unbroken, even though thethick gray ghost of Cedric Diggory (was it a ghost? itlooked so solid) emerged in its entirety from the end ofVoldemort’s wand, as though it were squeezing itselfout of a very narrow tunnel ... and this shade ofCedric stood up, and looked up and down the goldenthread of light, and spoke.

“Hold on, Harry,” it said.

Its voice was distant and echoing. Harry looked atVoldemort ... his wide red eyes were still shocked ...he had no more expected this than Harry had ... and,very dimly, Harry heard the frightened yells of theDeath Eaters, prowling around the edges of thegolden dome. ...

More screams of pain from the wand ... and thensomething else emerged from its tip ... the denseshadow of a second head, quickly followed by armsand torso ... an old man Harry had seen only in adream was now pushing himself out of the end of thewand just as Cedric had done ... and his ghost, or hisshadow, or whatever it was, fell next to Cedric’s, andsurveyed Harry and Voldemort, and the golden web,and the connected wands, with mild surprise, leaningon his walking stick. ...

Page | 735

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“He was a real wizard, then?” the old man said, hiseyes on Voldemort. “Killed me, that one did. ... Youfight him, boy. ...”

But already, yet another head was emerging ... andthis head, gray as a smoky statue, was a woman’s. ...Harry, both arms shaking now as he fought to keephis wand still, saw her drop to the ground andstraighten up like the others, staring. ...

The shadow of Bertha Jorkins surveyed the battlebefore her with wide eyes.

“Don’t let go, now!” she cried, and her voice echoedlike Cedric’s as though from very far away. “Don’t lethim get you, Harry — don’t let go!”

She and the other two shadowy figures began to pacearound the inner walls of the golden web, while theDeath Eaters flitted around the outside of it ... andVoldemort’s dead victims whispered as they circledthe duelers, whispered words of encouragement toHarry, and hissed words Harry couldn’t hear toVoldemort.

And now another head was emerging from the tip ofVoldemort’s wand ... and Harry knew when he saw itwho it would be ... he knew, as though he hadexpected it from the moment when Cedric hadappeared from the wand ... knew, because the womanwas the one he’d thought of more than any othertonight. ...

The smoky shadow of a young woman with long hairfell to the ground as Bertha had done, straightenedup, and looked at him ... and Harry, his arms shakingmadly now, looked back into the ghostly face of hismother.

Page | 736

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Your father’s coming ...” she said quietly. “Hold onfor your father ... it will be all right ... hold on. ...”

And he came ... first his head, then his body ... talland untidy-haired like Harry, the smoky, shadowyform of James Potter blossomed from the end ofVoldemort’s wand, fell to the ground, andstraightened like his wife. He walked close to Harry,looking down at him, and he spoke in the samedistant, echoing voice as the others, but quietly, sothat Voldemort, his face now livid with fear as hisvictims prowled around him, could not hear. ...

“When the connection is broken, we will linger foronly moments ... but we will give you time ... youmust get to the Portkey, it will return you to Hogwarts... do you understand, Harry?”

“Yes,” Harry gasped, fighting now to keep a hold onhis wand, which was slipping and sliding beneath hisfingers.

“Harry ...” whispered the figure of Cedric, “take mybody back, will you? Take my body back to myparents. ...”

“I will,” said Harry, his face screwed up with the effortof holding the wand.

“Do it now,” whispered his father’s voice, “be ready torun ... do it now. ...”

“NOW!” Harry yelled; he didn’t think he could haveheld on for another moment anyway — he pulled hiswand upward with an almighty wrench, and thegolden thread broke; the cage of light vanished, thephoenix song died — but the shadowy figures ofVoldemort’s victims did not disappear — they were

Page | 737

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

closing in upon Voldemort, shielding Harry from hisgaze —

And Harry ran as he had never run in his life,knocking two stunned Death Eaters aside as hepassed; he zigzagged behind headstones, feeling theircurses following him, hearing them hit theheadstones — he was dodging curses and graves,pelting toward Cedric’s body, no longer aware of thepain in his leg, his whole being concentrated on whathe had to do —

“Stun him\” he heard Voldemort scream.

Ten feet from Cedric, Harry dived behind a marbleangel to avoid the jets of red light and saw the tip ofits wing shatter as the spells hit it. Gripping his wandmore tightly, he dashed out from behind the angel —

“Impedimental” he bellowed, pointing his wand wildlyover his shoulder at the Death Eaters running at him.

From a muffled yell, he thought he had stopped atleast one of them, but there was no time to stop andlook; he jumped over the cup and dived as he heardmore wand blasts behind him; more jets of light flewover his head as he fell, stretching out his hand tograb Cedric’s arm —

“Stand aside! I will kill him! He is mine!” shriekedVoldemort.

Harry’s hand had closed on Cedric’s wrist; onetombstone stood between him and Voldemort, butCedric was too heavy to carry, and the cup was out ofreach —

Page | 738

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort’s red eyes flamed in the darkness. Harrysaw his mouth curl into a smile, saw him raise hiswand.

“Acciol” Harry yelled, pointing his wand at theTriwizard Cup.

It flew into the air and soared toward him. Harrycaught it by the handle —

He heard Voldemort’s scream of fury at the samemoment that he felt the jerk behind his navel thatmeant the Portkey had worked — it was speeding himaway in a whirl of wind and color, and Cedric alongwith him. ... They were going back.

Page | 739

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





VERITASERUM

Harry felt himself slam flat into the ground; his facewas pressed into grass; the smell of it filled hisnostrils. He had closed his eyes while the Portkeytransported him, and he kept them closed now. Hedid not move. All the breath seemed to have beenknocked out of him; his head was swimming so badlyhe felt as though the ground beneath him wereswaying like the deck of a ship. To hold himselfsteady, he tightened his hold on the two things hewas still clutching: the smooth, cold handle of the Tri-wizard Cup and Cedric’s body. He felt as though hewould slide away into the blackness gathering at theedges of his brain if he let go of either of them. Shockand exhaustion kept him on the ground, breathing inthe smell of the grass, waiting ... waiting for someoneto do something ... something to happen ... and allthe while, his scar burned dully on his forehead. ...

A torrent of sound deafened and confused him; therewere voices everywhere, footsteps, screams. ... Heremained where he was, his face screwed up against

Page | 740

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the noise, as though it were a nightmare that wouldpass. ...

Then a pair of hands seized him roughly and turnedhim over.

“Harry! HarryV’

He opened his eyes.

He was looking up at the starry sky, and AlbusDumbledore was crouched over him. The darkshadows of a crowd of people pressed in aroundthem, pushing nearer; Harry felt the ground beneathhis head reverberating with their footsteps.

He had come back to the edge of the maze. He couldsee the stands rising above him, the shapes of peoplemoving in them, the stars above.

Harry let go of the cup, but he clutched Cedric to himeven more tightly. He raised his free hand and seizedDumbledore’s wrist, while Dumbledore’s face swam inand out of focus.

“He’s back,” Harry whispered. “He’s back. Voldemort.”

“What’s going on? What’s happened?”

The face of Cornelius Fudge appeared upside downover Harry; it looked white, appalled.

“My God — Diggory!” it whispered. “Dumbledore —he’s dead!”

The words were repeated, the shadowy figurespressing in on them gasped it to those around them... and then others shouted it — screeched it — into

Page | 741

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

the night — “He’s dead!” “He’s dead!” “Cedric Diggory!Dead).”

“Harry, let go of him,” he heard Fudge’s voice say, andhe felt fingers trying to pry him from Cedric’s limpbody, but Harry wouldn’t let him go. ThenDumbledore’s face, which was still blurred andmisted, came closer.

“Harry, you can’t help him now. It’s over. Let go.”

“He wanted me to bring him back,” Harry muttered —it seemed important to explain this. “He wanted me tobring him back to his parents. ...”

“That’s right, Harry ... just let go now. ...”

Dumbledore bent down, and with extraordinarystrength for a man so old and thin, raised Harry fromthe ground and set him on his feet. Harry swayed. Hishead was pounding. His injured leg would no longersupport his weight. The crowd around them jostled,fighting to get closer, pressing darkly in on him —“What’s happened?” “What’s wrong with him?”

“Diggory’s dead\”

“He’ll need to go to the hospital wing!” Fudge wassaying loudly. “He’s ill, he’s injured — Dumbledore,Diggory’s parents, they’re here, they’re in the stands.

“I’ll take Harry, Dumbledore, I’ll take him —”

“No, I would prefer —”

“Dumbledore, Amos Diggory’s running ... he’s comingover. ... Don’t you think you should tell him — beforehe sees — ?”

Page | 742 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, stay here —”

Girls were screaming, sobbing hysterically. ... Thescene flickered oddly before Harry’s eyes. ...

“It’s all right, son, I’ve got you ... come on ... hospitalwing ...”

“Dumbledore said stay,” said Harry thickly, thepounding in his scar making him feel as though hewas about to throw up; his vision was blurring worsethan ever.

“You need to lie down. ... Come on now. ...”

Someone larger and stronger than he was was halfpulling, half carrying him through the frightenedcrowd. Harry heard people gasping, screaming, andshouting as the man supporting him pushed a paththrough them, taking him back to the castle. Acrossthe lawn, past the lake and the Durmstrang ship,Harry heard nothing but the heavy breathing of theman helping him walk.

“What happened, Harry?” the man asked at last as helifted Harry up the stone steps. Clunk. Clunk. Clunk.

It was Mad-Eye Moody.

“Cup was a Portkey,” said Harry as they crossed theentrance hall. “Took me and Cedric to a graveyard ...and Voldemort was there ... Lord Voldemort ...”

Clunk. Clunk. Clunk. Up the marble stairs ...

“The Dark Lord was there? What happened then?”

“Killed Cedric ... they killed Cedric. ...”

“And then?”

Page | 743 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Clunk. Clunk. Clunk. Along the corridor ...

“Made a potion ... got his body back. ...”

“The Dark Lord got his body back? He’s returned?”“And the Death Eaters came ... and then we dueled.

“You dueled with the Dark Lord?”

“Got away ... my wand ... did something funny. ... Isaw my mum and dad ... they came out of his wand.

“In here, Harry ... in here, and sit down. ... You’ll beall right now ... drink this. ...”

Harry heard a key scrape in a lock and felt a cupbeing pushed into his hands.

“Drink it ... you’ll feel better ... come on, now, Harry, Ineed to know exactly what happened. ...”

Moody helped tip the stuff down Harry’s throat; hecoughed, a peppery taste burning his throat. Moody’soffice came into sharper focus, and so did Moodyhimself. ... He looked as white as Fudge had looked,and both eyes were fixed unblinkingly upon Harry’sface.

“Voldemort’s back, Harry? You’re sure he’s back? Howdid he do it?”

“He took stuff from his father’s grave, and fromWormtail, and me,” said Harry. His head felt clearer;his scar wasn’t hurting so badly; he could now seeMoody’s face distinctly, even though the office was

Page | 744

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

dark. He could still hear screaming and shoutingfrom the distant Quidditch field.

“What did the Dark Lord take from you?” said Moody.

“Blood,” said Harry, raising his arm. His sleeve wasripped where Wormtail’s dagger had torn it.

Moody let out his breath in a long, low hiss.

“And the Death Eaters? They returned?”

“Yes,” said Harry. “Loads of them ...”

“How did he treat them?” Moody asked quietly. “Didhe forgive them?”

But Harry had suddenly remembered. He should havetold Dumbledore, he should have said it straightaway

“There’s a Death Eater at Hogwarts! There’s a DeathEater here — they put my name in the Goblet of Fire,they made sure I got through to the end —”

Harry tried to get up, but Moody pushed him backdown.

“I know who the Death Eater is,” he said quietly.

“Karkaroff?” said Harry wildly. “Where is he? Haveyou got him? Is he locked up?”

“Karkaroff?” said Moody with an odd laugh.

“Karkaroff fled tonight, when he felt the Dark Markburn upon his arm. He betrayed too many faithfulsupporters of the Dark Lord to wish to meet them ...but I doubt he will get far. The Dark Lord has ways oftracking his enemies.”

Page | 745 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Karkaroff’s gone? He ran away? But then — he didn’tput my name in the goblet?”

“No,” said Moody slowly. “No, he didn’t. It was I whodid that.”

Harry heard, but didn’t believe.

“No, you didn’t,” he said. “You didn’t do that ... youcan’t have done ...”

“I assure you I did,” said Moody, and his magical eyeswung around and fixed upon the door, and Harryknew he was making sure that there was no oneoutside it. At the same time, Moody drew out hiswand and pointed it at Harry.

“He forgave them, then?” he said. “The Death Eaterswho went free? The ones who escaped Azkaban?”

“What?” said Harry.

He was looking at the wand Moody was pointing athim. This was a bad joke, it had to be.

“I asked you,” said Moody quietly, “whether he forgavethe scum who never even went to look for him. Thosetreacherous cowards who wouldn’t even braveAzkaban for him. The faithless, worthless bits of filthwho were brave enough to cavort in masks at theQuidditch World Cup, but fled at the sight of the DarkMark when I fired it into the sky.”

“ You fired ... What are you talking about ... ?”

“I told you, Harry ... I told you. If there’s one thing Ihate more than any other, it’s a Death Eater whowalked free. They turned their backs on my masterwhen he needed them most. I expected him to punish

Page | 746 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

them. I expected him to torture them. Tell me he hurtthem, Harry. ...” Moody’s face was suddenly lit withan insane smile. “Tell me he told them that I, I aloneremained faithful ... prepared to risk everything todeliver to him the one thing he wanted above all ...you.”

“You didn’t ... it — it can’t be you. ...”

“Who put your name in the Goblet of Fire, under thename of a different school? I did. Who frightened offevery person I thought might try to hurt you orprevent you from winning the tournament? I did. Whonudged Hagrid into showing you the dragons? I did.Who helped you see the only way you could beat thedragon? I did.”

Moody’s magical eye had now left the door. It wasfixed upon Harry. His lopsided mouth leered morewidely than ever.

“It hasn’t been easy, Harry, guiding you through thesetasks without arousing suspicion. I have had to useevery ounce of cunning I possess, so that my handwould not be detectable in your success. Dumbledorewould have been very suspicious if you had managedeverything too easily. As long as you got into thatmaze, preferably with a decent head start — then, Iknew, I would have a chance of getting rid of theother champions and leaving your way clear. But Ialso had to contend with your stupidity. The secondtask ... that was when I was most afraid we wouldfail. I was keeping watch on you, Potter. I knew youhadn’t worked out the egg’s clue, so I had to give youanother hint —”

“You didn’t,” Harry said hoarsely. “Cedric gave me theclue —”

Page | 747

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Who told Cedric to open it underwater? I did. Itrusted that he would pass the information on to you.Decent people are so easy to manipulate, Potter. I wassure Cedric would want to repay you for telling himabout the dragons, and so he did. But even then,Potter, even then you seemed likely to fail. I waswatching all the time ... all those hours in the library.Didn’t you realize that the book you needed was inyour dormitory all along? I planted it there early on, Igave it to the Longbottom boy, don’t you remember?Magical Water Plants of the Mediterranean. It wouldhave told you all you needed to know about gillyweed.

I expected you to ask everyone and anyone you couldfor help. Longbottom would have told you in aninstant. But you did not ... you did not. ... You have astreak of pride and independence that might haveruined all.

“So what could I do? Feed you information fromanother innocent source. You told me at the Yule Balla house-elf called Dobby had given you a Christmaspresent. I called the elf to the staffroom to collectsome robes for cleaning. I staged a loud conversationwith Professor McGonagall about the hostages whohad been taken, and whether Potter would think touse gillyweed. And your little elf friend ran straight toSnape’s office and then hurried to find you. ...”

Moody’s wand was still pointing directly at Harry’sheart. Over his shoulder, foggy shapes were moving inthe Foe-Glass on the wall.

“You were so long in that lake, Potter, I thought youhad drowned. But luckily, Dumbledore took youridiocy for nobility, and marked you high for it. Ibreathed again.

“You had an easier time of it than you should have inthat maze tonight, of course,” said Moody. “I was

Page | 748 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

patrolling around it, able to see through the outerhedges, able to curse many obstacles out of your way.I Stunned Fleur Delacour as she passed. I put theImperius Curse on Krum, so that he would finishDiggory and leave your path to the cup clear.”

Harry stared at Moody. He just didn’t see how thiscould be. ... Dumbledore’s friend, the famous Auror... the one who had caught so many Death Eaters ...

It made no sense ... no sense at all. ...

The foggy shapes in the Foe-Glass were sharpening,had become more distinct. Harry could see theoutlines of three people over Moody’s shoulder,moving closer and closer. But Moody wasn’t watchingthem. His magical eye was upon Harry.

“The Dark Lord didn’t manage to kill you, Potter, andhe so wanted to,” whispered Moody. “Imagine how hewill reward me when he finds I have done it for him. Igave you to him — the thing he needed above all toregenerate — and then I killed you for him. I will behonored beyond all other Death Eaters. I will be hisdearest, his closest supporter ... closer than a son. ...”

Moody’s normal eye was bulging, the magical eyefixed upon Harry. The door was barred, and Harryknew he would never reach his own wand in time. ...

“The Dark Lord and I,” said Moody, and he lookedcompletely insane now, towering over Harry, leeringdown at him, “have much in common. Both of us, forinstance, had very disappointing fathers ... verydisappointing indeed. Both of us suffered theindignity, Harry, of being named after those fathers.And both of us had the pleasure ... the very greatpleasure ... of killing our fathers to ensure thecontinued rise of the Dark Order!”

Page | 749

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You’re mad,” Harry said — he couldn’t stop himself— “you’re mad!”

“Mad, am I?” said Moody, his voice risinguncontrollably. “We’ll see! We’ll see who’s mad, nowthat the Dark Lord has returned, with me at his side!He is back, Harry Potter, you did not conquer him —and now — I conquer you!”

Moody raised his wand, he opened his mouth; Harryplunged his own hand into his robes —

“Stupefy\” There was a blinding flash of red light, andwith a great splintering and crashing, the door ofMoody’s office was blasted apart —

Moody was thrown backward onto the office floor.Harry, still staring at the place where Moody’s facehad been, saw Albus Dumbledore, Professor Snape,and Professor McGonagall looking back at him out ofthe Foe-Glass. He looked around and saw the three ofthem standing in the doorway, Dumbledore in front,his wand outstretched.

At that moment, Harry fully understood for the firsttime why people said Dumbledore was the only wizardVoldemort had ever feared. The look uponDumbledore’s face as he stared down at theunconscious form of Mad-Eye Moody was moreterrible than Harry could have ever imagined. Therewas no benign smile upon Dumbledore’s face, notwinkle in the eyes behind the spectacles. There wascold fury in every line of the ancient face; a sense ofpower radiated from Dumbledore as though he weregiving off burning heat.

He stepped into the office, placed a foot underneathMoody’s unconscious body, and kicked him over ontohis back, so that his face was visible. Snape followed

Page | 750 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

him, looking into the Foe-Glass, where his own facewas still visible, glaring into the room. ProfessorMcGonagall went straight to Harry.

“Come along, Potter,” she whispered. The thin line ofher mouth was twitching as though she was about tocry. “Come along ... hospital wing ...”

“No,” said Dumbledore sharply.

“Dumbledore, he ought to — look at him — he’s beenthrough enough tonight —”

“He will stay, Minerva, because he needs tounderstand,” said Dumbledore curtly. “Understandingis the first step to acceptance, and only withacceptance can there be recovery. He needs to knowwho has put him through the ordeal he has sufferedtonight, and why.”

“Moody,” Harry said. He was still in a state ofcomplete disbelief. “How can it have been Moody?”

“This is not Alastor Moody,” said Dumbledore quietly.“You have never known Alastor Moody. The realMoody would not have removed you from my sightafter what happened tonight. The moment he tookyou, I knew — and I followed.”

Dumbledore bent down over Moody’s limp form andput a hand inside his robes. He pulled out Moody’ship flask and a set of keys on a ring. Then he turnedto Professors McGonagall and Snape.

“Severus, please fetch me the strongest Truth Potionyou possess, and then go down to the kitchens andbring up the house-elf called Winky. Minerva, kindlygo down to Hagrid’s house, where you will find a largeblack dog sitting in the pumpkin patch. Take the dogPage | 751 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

up to my office, tell him I will be with him shortly,then come back here.”

If either Snape or McGonagall found theseinstructions peculiar, they hid their confusion. Bothturned at once and left the office. Dumbledore walkedover to the trunk with seven locks, fitted the first keyin the lock, and opened it. It contained a mass ofspell-books. Dumbledore closed the trunk, placed asecond key in the second lock, and opened the trunkagain. The spellbooks had vanished; this time itcontained an assortment of broken Sneako-scopes,some parchment and quills, and what looked like asilvery Invisibility Cloak. Harry watched, astounded,as Dumbledore placed the third, fourth, fifth, andsixth keys in their respective locks, reopening thetrunk, and each time revealing different contents.Then he placed the seventh key in the lock, threwopen the lid, and Harry let out a cry of amazement.

He was looking down into a kind of pit, anunderground room, and lying on the floor some tenfeet below, apparently fast asleep, thin and starved inappearance, was the real Mad-Eye Moody. Hiswooden leg was gone, the socket that should haveheld the magical eye looked empty beneath its lid,and chunks of his grizzled hair were missing. Harrystared, thunderstruck, between the sleeping Moody inthe trunk and the unconscious Moody lying on thefloor of the office.

Dumbledore climbed into the trunk, lowered himself,and fell lightly onto the floor beside the sleepingMoody. He bent over him.

“Stunned — controlled by the Imperius Curse — veryweak,” he said. “Of course, they would have needed tokeep him alive. Harry, throw down the imposter’s

Page | 752

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

cloak — he’s freezing. Madam Pomfrey will need to seehim, but he seems in no immediate danger.”

Harry did as he was told; Dumbledore covered Moodyin the cloak, tucked it around him, and clamberedout of the trunk again. Then he picked up the hipflask that stood upon the desk, unscrewed it, andturned it over. A thick glutinous liquid splattered ontothe office floor.

“Polyjuice Potion, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “You seethe simplicity of it, and the brilliance. For Moodynever does drink except from his hip flask, he’s wellknown for it. The imposter needed, of course, to keepthe real Moody close by, so that he could continuemaking the potion. You see his hair ...” Dumbledorelooked down on the Moody in the trunk. “Theimposter has been cutting it off all year, see where itis uneven? But I think, in the excitement of tonight,our fake Moody might have forgotten to take it asfrequently as he should have done ... on the hour ...every hour. ... We shall see.”

Dumbledore pulled out the chair at the desk and satdown upon it, his eyes fixed upon the unconsciousMoody on the floor. Harry stared at him too. Minutespassed in silence. ...

Then, before Harry’s very eyes, the face of the man onthe floor began to change. The scars weredisappearing, the skin was becoming smooth; themangled nose became whole and started to shrink.The long mane of grizzled gray hair was withdrawinginto the scalp and turning the color of straw.Suddenly, with a loud clunk, the wooden leg fell awayas a normal leg regrew in its place; next moment, themagical eyeball had popped out of the man’s face as areal eye replaced it; it rolled away across the floor andcontinued to swivel in every direction.

Page | 753 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry saw a man lying before him, pale-skinned,slightly freckled, with a mop of fair hair. He knew whohe was. He had seen him in Dumbledore’s Pensieve,had watched him being led away from court by thedementors, trying to convince Mr. Crouch that he wasinnocent ... but he was lined around the eyes nowand looked much older. ...

There were hurried footsteps outside in the corridor.Snape had returned with Winky at his heels.

Professor McGonagall was right behind them.

“Crouch!” Snape said, stopping dead in the doorway.“Barty Crouch!”

“Good heavens,” said Professor McGonagall, stoppingdead and staring down at the man on the floor.

Filthy, disheveled, Winky peered around Snape’s legs.Her mouth opened wide and she let out a piercingshriek.

“Master Barty, Master Barty, what is you doing here?”

She flung herself forward onto the young man’s chest.

“You is killed him! You is killed him! You is killedMaster’s son!”

“He is simply Stunned, Winky,” said Dumbledore.“Step aside, please. Severus, you have the potion?”

Snape handed Dumbledore a small glass bottle ofcompletely clear liquid: the Veritaserum with whichhe had threatened Harry in class. Dumbledore got up,bent over the man on the floor, and pulled him into asitting position against the wall beneath the Foe-Glass, in which the reflections of Dumbledore, Snape,and McGonagall were still glaring down upon themPage | 754 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

all. Winky remained on her knees, trembling, herhands over her face. Dumbledore forced the man’smouth open and poured three drops inside it. Thenhe pointed his wand at the man’s chest and said,“Rennervate.”

Crouch’s son opened his eyes. His face was slack, hisgaze unfocused. Dumbledore knelt before him, so thattheir faces were level.

“Can you hear me?” Dumbledore asked quietly.

The man’s eyelids flickered.

“Yes,” he muttered.

“I would like you to tell us,” said Dumbledore softly,“how you came to be here. How did you escape fromAzkaban?”

Crouch took a deep, shuddering breath, then beganto speak in a flat, expressionless voice.

“My mother saved me. She knew she was dying. Shepersuaded my father to rescue me as a last favor toher. He loved her as he had never loved me. Heagreed. They came to visit me. They gave me a draft ofPolyjuice Potion containing one of my mother’s hairs.She took a draft of Polyjuice Potion containing one ofmy hairs. We took on each other’s appearance.”

Winky was shaking her head, trembling.

“Say no more, Master Barty, say no more, you isgetting your father into trouble!”

But Crouch took another deep breath and continuedin the same flat voice.

Page | 755

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“The dementors are blind. They sensed one healthy,one dying person entering Azkaban. They sensed onehealthy, one dying person leaving it. My fathersmuggled me out, disguised as my mother, in caseany prisoners were watching through their doors.

“My mother died a short while afterward in Azkaban.She was careful to drink Polyjuice Potion until theend. She was buried under my name and bearing myappearance. Everyone believed her to be me.”

The man’s eyelids flickered.

“And what did your father do with you, when he hadgot you home?” said Dumbledore quietly.

“Staged my mother’s death. A quiet, private funeral.That grave is empty. The house-elf nursed me back tohealth. Then I had to be concealed. I had to becontrolled. My father had to use a number of spells tosubdue me. When I had recovered my strength, Ithought only of finding my master ... of returning tohis service.”

“How did your father subdue you?” said Dumbledore.

“The Imperius Curse,” Crouch said. “I was under myfather’s control. I was forced to wear an InvisibilityCloak day and night. I was always with the house-elf.She was my keeper and caretaker. She pitied me. Shepersuaded my father to give me occasional treats.Rewards for my good behavior.”

“Master Barty, Master Barty,” sobbed Winky throughher hands. “You isn’t ought to tell them, we is gettingin trouble. ...”

Page | 756

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Did anybody ever discover that you were still alive?”said Dumbledore softly. “Did anyone know exceptyour father and the house-elf?”

“Yes,” said Crouch, his eyelids flickering again. “Awitch in my father’s office. Bertha Jorkins. She cameto the house with papers for my father’s signature. Hewas not at home. Winky showed her inside andreturned to the kitchen, to me. But Bertha Jorkinsheard Winky talking to me. She came to investigate.She heard enough to guess who was hiding under theInvisibility Cloak. My father arrived home. Sheconfronted him. He put a very powerful MemoryCharm on her to make her forget what she’d foundout. Too powerful. He said it damaged her memorypermanently.”

“Why is she coming to nose into my master’s privatebusiness?” sobbed Winky. “Why isn’t she leaving usbe?”

“Tell me about the Quidditch World Cup,” saidDumbledore.

“Winky talked my father into it,” said Crouch, still inthe same monotonous voice. “She spent monthspersuading him. I had not left the house for years. Ihad loved Quidditch. Let him go, she said. He will bein his Invisibility Cloak. He can watch. Let him smellfresh air for once. She said my mother would havewanted it. She told my father that my mother haddied to give me freedom. She had not saved me for alife of imprisonment. He agreed in the end.

“It was carefully planned. My father led me and Winkyup to the Top Box early in the day. Winky was to saythat she was saving a seat for my father. I was to sitthere, invisible. When everyone had left the box, we

Page | 757

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

would emerge. Winky would appear to be alone.Nobody would ever know.

“But Winky didn’t know that I was growing stronger. Iwas starting to fight my father’s Imperius Curse.

There were times when I was almost myself again.There were brief periods when I seemed outside hiscontrol. It happened, there, in the Top Box. It was likewaking from a deep sleep. I found myself out inpublic, in the middle of the match, and I saw, in frontof me, a wand sticking out of a boy’s pocket. I had notbeen allowed a wand since before Azkaban. I stole it.Winky didn’t know. Winky is frightened of heights.

She had her face hidden.”

“Master Barty, you bad boy!” whispered Winky, tearstrickling between her fingers.

“So you took the wand,” said Dumbledore, “and whatdid you do with it?”

“We went back to the tent,” said Crouch. “Then weheard them. We heard the Death Eaters. The oneswho had never been to Azkaban. The ones who hadnever suffered for my master. They had turned theirbacks on him. They were not enslaved, as I was. Theywere free to seek him, but they did not. They weremerely making sport of Muggles. The sound of theirvoices awoke me. My mind was clearer than it hadbeen in years. I was angry. I had the wand. I wantedto attack them for their disloyalty to my master. Myfather had left the tent; he had gone to free theMuggles. Winky was afraid to see me so angry. Sheused her own brand of magic to bind me to her. Shepulled me from the tent, pulled me into the forest,away from the Death Eaters. I tried to hold her back. Iwanted to return to the campsite. I wanted to showthose Death Eaters what loyalty to the Dark Lord

Page | 758

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

meant, and to punish them for their lack of it. I usedthe stolen wand to cast the Dark Mark into the sky.

“Ministry wizards arrived. They shot Stunning Spellseverywhere. One of the spells came through the treeswhere Winky and I stood. The bond connecting uswas broken. We were both Stunned.

“When Winky was discovered, my father knew I mustbe nearby. He searched the bushes where she hadbeen found and felt me lying there. He waited untilthe other Ministry members had left the forest. He putme back under the Imperius Curse and took mehome. He dismissed Winky. She had failed him. Shehad let me acquire a wand. She had almost let meescape.”

Winky let out a wail of despair.

“Now it was just Father and I, alone in the house. Andthen ... and then ...” Crouch’s head rolled on hisneck, and an insane grin spread across his face. “Mymaster came for me.

“He arrived at our house late one night in the arms ofhis servant Wormtail. My master had found out that Iwas still alive. He had captured Bertha Jorkins inAlbania. He had tortured her. She told him a greatdeal. She told him about the Triwizard Tournament.She told him the old Auror, Moody, was going to teachat Hogwarts. He tortured her until he broke throughthe Memory Charm my father had placed upon her.She told him I had escaped from Azkaban. She toldhim my father kept me imprisoned to prevent me fromseeking my master. And so my master knew that Iwas still his faithful servant — perhaps the mostfaithful of all. My master conceived a plan, basedupon the information Bertha had given him. He

Page | 759

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

needed me. He arrived at our house near midnight.

My father answered the door.”

The smile spread wider over Crouch’s face, as thoughrecalling the sweetest memory of his life. Winky’spetrified brown eyes were visible through her fingers.She seemed too appalled to speak.

“It was very quick. My father was placed under theImperius Curse by my master. Now my father was theone imprisoned, controlled. My master forced him togo about his business as usual, to act as thoughnothing was wrong. And I was released. I awoke. Iwas myself again, alive as I hadn’t been in years.”

“And what did Lord Voldemort ask you to do?” saidDumbledore.

“He asked me whether I was ready to risk everythingfor him. I was ready. It was my dream, my greatestambition, to serve him, to prove myself to him. Hetold me he needed to place a faithful servant atHogwarts. A servant who would guide Harry Potterthrough the Triwizard Tournament without appearingto do so. A servant who would watch over HarryPotter. Ensure he reached the Triwizard Cup. Turnthe cup into a Portkey, which would take the firstperson to touch it to my master. But first —”

“You needed Alastor Moody,” said Dumbledore. Hisblue eyes were blazing, though his voice remainedcalm.

“Wormtail and I did it. We had prepared the PolyjuicePotion beforehand. We journeyed to his house. Moodyput up a struggle. There was a commotion. Wemanaged to subdue him just in time. Forced him intoa compartment of his own magical trunk. Took someof his hair and added it to the potion. I drank it; IPage | 760 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

became Moody’s double. I took his leg and his eye. Iwas ready to face Arthur Weasley when he arrived tosort out the Muggles who had heard a disturbance. Imade the dustbins move around the yard. I toldArthur Weasley I had heard intruders in my yard,who had set off the dustbins. Then I packed upMoody’s clothes and Dark detectors, put them in thetrunk with Moody, and set off for Hogwarts. I kepthim alive, under the Imperius Curse. I wanted to beable to question him. To find out about his past, learnhis habits, so that I could fool even Dumbledore. Ialso needed his hair to make the Polyjuice Potion. Theother ingredients were easy. I stole boom-slang skinfrom the dungeons. When the Potions master foundme in his office, I said I was under orders to searchit.”

“And what became of Wormtail after you attackedMoody?” said Dumbledore.

“Wormtail returned to care for my master, in myfather’s house, and to keep watch over my father.”

“But your father escaped,” said Dumbledore.

“Yes. After a while he began to fight the ImperiusCurse just as I had done. There were periods when heknew what was happening. My master decided it wasno longer safe for my father to leave the house. Heforced him to send letters to the Ministry instead. Hemade him write and say he was ill. But Wormtailneglected his duty. He was not watchful enough. Myfather escaped. My master guessed that he washeading for Hogwarts. My father was going to tellDumbledore everything, to confess. He was going toadmit that he had smuggled me from Azkaban.

“My master sent me word of my father’s escape. Hetold me to stop him at all costs. So I waited and

Page | 761 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

watched. I used the map I had taken from HarryPotter. The map that had almost mined everything.”

“Map?” said Dumbledore quickly. “What map is this?”

“Potter’s map of Hogwarts. Potter saw me on it. Pottersaw me stealing more ingredients for the PolyjuicePotion from Snape’s office one night. He thought I wasmy father. We have the same first name. I took themap from Potter that night. I told him my fatherhated Dark wizards. Potter believed my father wasafter Snape.

“For a week I waited for my father to arrive atHogwarts. At last, one evening, the map showed myfather entering the grounds. I pulled on my InvisibilityCloak and went down to meet him. He was walkingaround the edge of the forest. Then Potter came, andKrum. I waited. I could not hurt Potter; my masterneeded him. Potter ran to get Dumbledore. I StunnedKrum. I killed my father.”

“iVoooo!” wailed Winky. “Master Barty, Master Barty,what is you saying?”

“You killed your father,” Dumbledore said, in thesame soft voice. “What did you do with the body?”

“Carried it into the forest. Covered it with theInvisibility Cloak. I had the map with me. I watchedPotter run into the castle. He met Snape. Dumbledorejoined them. I watched Potter bringing Dumbledoreout of the castle. I walked back out of the forest,doubled around behind them, went to meet them. Itold Dumbledore Snape had told me where to come.

“Dumbledore told me to go and look for my father. Iwent back to my father’s body. Watched the map.When everyone was gone, I Transfigured my father’s

Page | 762 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

body. He became a bone ... I buried it, while wearingthe Invisibility Cloak, in the freshly dug earth in frontof Hagrid’s cabin.”

There was complete silence now, except for Winky’scontinued sobs. Then Dumbledore said, “And tonight

“I offered to carry the Triwizard Cup into the mazebefore dinner,” whispered Barty Crouch. “Turned itinto a Portkey. My master’s plan worked. He isreturned to power and I will be honored by himbeyond the dreams of wizards.”

The insane smile lit his features once more, and hishead drooped onto his shoulder as Winky wailed andsobbed at his side.

Page | 763

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE PARTING OF THE WAYS

Dumbledore stood up. He stared down at BartyCrouch for a moment with disgust on his face. Thenhe raised his wand once more and ropes flew out of it,ropes that twisted themselves around Barty Crouch,binding him tightly. He turned to ProfessorMcGonagall.

“Minerva, could I ask you to stand guard here while Itake Harry upstairs?”

“Of course,” said Professor McGonagall. She lookedslightly nauseous, as though she had just watchedsomeone being sick. However, when she drew out herwand and pointed it at Barty Crouch, her hand wasquite steady.

“Severus” — Dumbledore turned to Snape — “pleasetell Madam Pomfrey to come down here; we need toget Alastor Moody into the hospital wing. Then godown into the grounds, find Cornelius Fudge, andbring him up to this office. He will undoubtedly want

Page | 764

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

to question Crouch himself. Tell him I will be in thehospital wing in half an hour’s time if he needs me.”

Snape nodded silently and swept out of the room.

“Harry?” Dumbledore said gently.

Harry got up and swayed again; the pain in his leg,which he had not noticed all the time he had beenlistening to Crouch, now returned in full measure. Healso realized that he was shaking. Dumbledoregripped his arm and helped him out into the darkcorridor.

“I want you to come up to my office first, Harry,” hesaid quietly as they headed up the passageway.

“Sirius is waiting for us there.”

Harry nodded. A kind of numbness and a sense ofcomplete unreality were upon him, but he did notcare; he was even glad of it. He didn’t want to have tothink about anything that had happened since he hadfirst touched the Triwizard Cup. He didn’t want tohave to examine the memories, fresh and sharp asphotographs, which kept flashing across his mind.Mad-Eye Moody, inside the trunk. Wormtail, slumpedon the ground, cradling his stump of an arm.Voldemort, rising from the steaming cauldron. Cedric... dead ... Cedric, asking to be returned to hisparents. ...

“Professor,” Harry mumbled, “where are Mr. and Mrs.Diggory?”

“They are with Professor Sprout,” said Dumbledore.His voice, which had been so calm throughout theinterrogation of Barty Crouch, shook very slightly forthe first time. “She was Head of Cedric’s house, andknew him best.”

Page | 765 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

They had reached the stone gargoyle. Dumbledoregave the password, it sprang aside, and he and Harrywent up the moving spiral staircase to the oak door.Dumbledore pushed it open. Sirius was standingthere. His face was white and gaunt as it had beenwhen he had escaped Azkaban. In one swift moment,he had crossed the room.

“Harry, are you all right? I knew it — I knewsomething like this — what happened?”

His hands shook as he helped Harry into a chair infront of the desk.

“What happened?” he asked more urgently.

Dumbledore began to tell Sirius everything BartyCrouch had said. Harry was only half listening. Sotired every bone in his body was aching, he wantednothing more than to sit here, undisturbed, for hoursand hours, until he fell asleep and didn’t have tothink or feel anymore.

There was a soft rush of wings. Fawkes the phoenixhad left his perch, flown across the office, and landedon Harry’s knee.

“ ’Lo, Fawkes,” said Harry quietly. He stroked thephoenix’s beautiful scarlet-and-gold plumage. Fawkesblinked peacefully up at him. There was somethingcomforting about his warm weight.

Dumbledore stopped talking. He sat down oppositeHarry, behind his desk. He was looking at Harry, whoavoided his eyes. Dumbledore was going to questionhim. He was going to make Harry relive everything.

“I need to know what happened after you touched thePortkey in the maze, Harry,” said Dumbledore.

Page | 766 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“We can leave that till morning, can’t we,Dumbledore?” said Sirius harshly. He had put a handon Harry’s shoulder. “Let him have a sleep. Let himrest.”

Harry felt a rush of gratitude toward Sirius, butDumbledore took no notice of Sirius’s words. Heleaned forward toward Harry. Very unwillingly, Harryraised his head and looked into those blue eyes.

“If I thought I could help you,” Dumbledore saidgently, “by putting you into an enchanted sleep andallowing you to postpone the moment when youwould have to think about what has happenedtonight, I would do it. But I know better. Numbing thepain for a while will make it worse when you finallyfeel it. You have shown bravery beyond anything Icould have expected of you. I ask you to demonstrateyour courage one more time. I ask you to tell us whathappened.”

The phoenix let out one soft, quavering note. Itshivered in the air, and Harry felt as though a drop ofhot liquid had slipped down his throat into hisstomach, warming him, and strengthening him.

He took a deep breath and began to tell them. As hespoke, visions of everything that had passed thatnight seemed to rise before his eyes; he saw thesparkling surface of the potion that had revivedVoldemort; he saw the Death Eaters Apparatingbetween the graves around them; he saw Cedric’sbody, lying on the ground beside the cup.

Once or twice, Sirius made a noise as though about tosay something, his hand still tight on Harry’sshoulder, but Dumbledore raised his hand to stophim, and Harry was glad of this, because it was easierto keep going now he had started. It was even a relief;Page | 767 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

he felt almost as though something poisonous werebeing extracted from him. It was costing him every bitof determination he had to keep talking, yet he sensedthat once he had finished, he would feel better.

When Harry told of Wormtail piercing his arm withthe dagger, however, Sirius let out a vehementexclamation and Dumbledore stood up so quickly thatHarry started. Dumbledore walked around the deskand told Harry to stretch out his arm. Harry showedthem both the place where his robes were torn andthe cut beneath them.

“He said my blood would make him stronger than ifhe’d used someone else’s,” Harry told Dumbledore.

“He said the protection my — my mother left in me —he’d have it too. And he was right — he could touchme without hurting himself, he touched my face.”

For a fleeting instant, Harry thought he saw a gleamof something like triumph in Dumbledore’s eyes. Butnext second, Harry was sure he had imagined it, forwhen Dumbledore had returned to his seat behindthe desk, he looked as old and weary as Harry hadever seen him.

“Very well,” he said, sitting down again. “Voldemorthas overcome that particular barrier. Harry, continue,please.”

Harry went on; he explained how Voldemort hademerged from the cauldron, and told them all hecould remember of Voldemort’s speech to the DeathEaters. Then he told how Voldemort had untied him,returned his wand to him, and prepared to duel.

But when he reached the part where the golden beamof light had connected his and Voldemort’s wands, hefound his throat obstructed. He tried to keep talking,

Page | 768 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

but the memories of what had come out ofVoldemort’s wand were flooding into his mind. Hecould see Cedric emerging, see the old man, BerthaJorkins ... his father ... his mother ...

He was glad when Sirius broke the silence.

“The wands connected?” he said, looking from Harryto Dumbledore. “Why?”

Harry looked up at Dumbledore again, on whose facethere was an arrested look.

“Priori Incantatem,” he muttered.

His eyes gazed into Harry’s and it was almost asthough an invisible beam of understanding shotbetween them.

“The Reverse Spell effect?” said Sirius sharply.

“Exactly,” said Dumbledore. “Harry’s wand andVoldemort’s wand share cores. Each of them containsa feather from the tail of the same phoenix. Thisphoenix, in fact,” he added, and he pointed at thescarlet-and-gold bird, perching peacefully on Harry’sknee.

“My wand’s feather came from Fawkes?” Harry said,amazed.

“Yes,” said Dumbledore. “Mr. Ollivander wrote to tellme you had bought the second wand, the momentyou left his shop four years ago.”

“So what happens when a wand meets its brother?”said Sirius.

Page | 769

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“They will not work properly against each other,” saidDumbledore. “If, however, the owners of the wandsforce the wands to do battle ... a very rare effect willtake place. One of the wands will force the other toregurgitate spells it has performed — in reverse. Themost recent first ... and then those which preceded it.

He looked interrogatively at Harry, and Harry nodded.

“Which means,” said Dumbledore slowly, his eyesupon Harry’s face, “that some form of Cedric musthave reappeared.”

Harry nodded again.

“Diggory came back to life?” said Sirius sharply.

“No spell can reawaken the dead,” said Dumbledoreheavily. “All that would have happened is a kind ofreverse echo. A shadow of the living Cedric wouldhave emerged from the wand ... am I correct, Harry?”

“He spoke to me,” Harry said. He was suddenlyshaking again. “The ... the ghost Cedric, or whateverhe was, spoke.”

“An echo,” said Dumbledore, “which retained Cedric’sappearance and character. I am guessing other suchforms appeared ... less recent victims of Voldemort’swand. ...”

“An old man,” Harry said, his throat still constricted.“Bertha Jorkins. And ...”

“Your parents?” said Dumbledore quietly.

“Yes,” said Harry.

Page | 770

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Sirius’s grip on Harry’s shoulder was now so tight itwas painful.

“The last murders the wand performed,” saidDumbledore, nodding. “In reverse order. More wouldhave appeared, of course, had you maintained theconnection. Very well, Harry, these echoes, theseshadows ... what did they do?”

Harry described how the figures that had emergedfrom the wand had prowled the edges of the goldenweb, how Voldemort had seemed to fear them, howthe shadow of Harry’s father had told him what to do,how Cedric’s had made its final request.

At this point, Harry found he could not continue. Helooked around at Sirius and saw that he had his facein his hands.

Harry suddenly became aware that Fawkes had lefthis knee. The phoenix had fluttered to the floor. Itwas resting its beautiful head against Harry’s injuredleg, and thick, pearly tears were falling from its eyesonto the wound left by the spider. The pain vanished.The skin mended. His leg was repaired.

“I will say it again,” said Dumbledore as the phoenixrose into the air and resettled itself upon the perchbeside the door. “You have shown bravery beyondanything I could have expected of you tonight, Harry.You have shown bravery equal to those who diedfighting Voldemort at the height of his powers. Youhave shouldered a grown wizard’s burden and foundyourself equal to it — and you have now given us allthat we have a right to expect. You will come with meto the hospital wing. I do not want you returning tothe dormitory tonight. A Sleeping Potion, and somepeace ... Sirius, would you like to stay with him?”

Page | 771

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Sirius nodded and stood up. He transformed backinto the great black dog and walked with Harry andDumbledore out of the office, accompanying themdown a flight of stairs to the hospital wing.

When Dumbledore pushed open the door, Harry sawMrs. Weasley, Bill, Ron, and Hermione groupedaround a harassed-looking Madam Pomfrey. Theyappeared to be demanding to know where Harry wasand what had happened to him. All of them whippedaround as Harry, Dumbledore, and the black dogentered, and Mrs. Weasley let out a kind of muffledscream.

“Harry! Oh Harry!”

She started to hurry toward him, but Dumbledoremoved between them.

“Molly,” he said, holding up a hand, “please listen tome for a moment. Harry has been through a terribleordeal tonight. He has just had to relive it for me.What he needs now is sleep, and peace, and quiet. Ifhe would like you all to stay with him,” he added,looking around at Ron, Hermione, and Bill too, “youmay do so. But I do not want you questioning himuntil he is ready to answer, and certainly not thisevening.”

Mrs. Weasley nodded. She was very white. Sherounded on Ron, Hermione, and Bill as though theywere being noisy, and hissed, “Did you hear? Heneeds quiet!”

“Headmaster,” said Madam Pomfrey, staring at thegreat black dog that was Sirius, “may I ask what — ?”

“This dog will be remaining with Harry for a while,”said Dumbledore simply. “I assure you, he is

Page | 772 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

extremely well trained. Harry — I will wait while youget into bed.”

Harry felt an inexpressible sense of gratitude toDumbledore for asking the others not to questionhim. It wasn’t as though he didn’t want them there;but the thought of explaining it all over again, theidea of reliving it one more time, was more than hecould stand.

“I will be back to see you as soon as I have met withFudge, Harry,” said Dumbledore. “I would like you toremain here tomorrow until I have spoken to theschool.” He left.

As Madam Pomfrey led Harry to a nearby bed, hecaught sight of the real Moody lying motionless in abed at the far end of the room. His wooden leg andmagical eye were lying on the bedside table.

“Is he okay?” Harry asked.

“He’ll be fine,” said Madam Pomfrey, giving Harrysome pajamas and pulling screens around him. Hetook off his robes, pulled on the pajamas, and got intobed. Ron, Hermione, Bill, Mrs. Weasley, and the blackdog came around the screen and settled themselvesin chairs on either side of him. Ron and Hermionewere looking at him almost cautiously, as thoughscared of him.

“I’m all right,” he told them. “Just tired.”

Mrs. Weasley’s eyes filled with tears as she smoothedhis bedcovers unnecessarily.

Madam Pomfrey, who had bustled off to her office,returned holding a small bottle of some purple potionand a goblet.

Page | 773 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You’ll need to drink all of this, Harry,” she said. “It’sa potion for dreamless sleep.”

Harry took the goblet and drank a few mouthfuls. Hefelt himself becoming drowsy at once. Everythingaround him became hazy; the lamps around thehospital wing seemed to be winking at him in afriendly way through the screen around his bed; hisbody felt as though it was sinking deeper into thewarmth of the feather matress. Before he could finishthe potion, before he could say another word, hisexhaustion had carried him off to sleep.

Harry woke up, so warm, so very sleepy, that hedidn’t open his eyes, wanting to drop off again. Theroom was still dimly lit; he was sure it was stillnighttime and had a feeling that he couldn’t havebeen asleep very long.

Then he heard whispering around him.

“They’ll wake him if they don’t shut up!”

“What are they shouting about? Nothing else canhave happened, can it?”

Harry opened his eyes blearily Someone had removedhis glasses. He could see the fuzzy outlines of Mrs.Weasley and Bill close by. Mrs. Weasley was on herfeet.

“That’s Fudge’s voice,” she whispered. “And that’sMinerva McGonagall’s, isn’t it? But what are theyarguing about?”

Now Harry could hear them too: people shouting andrunning toward the hospital wing.

Page | 774

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Regrettable, but all the same, Minerva —” CorneliusFudge was saying loudly.

“You should never have brought it inside the castle!”yelled Professor McGonagall. “When Dumbledorefinds out —”

Harry heard the hospital doors burst open. Unnoticedby any of the people around his bed, all of whom werestaring at the door as Bill pulled back the screens,Harry sat up and put his glasses back on.

Fudge came striding up the ward. ProfessorsMcGonagall and Snape were at his heels.

“Where’s Dumbledore?” Fudge demanded of Mrs.Weasley.

“He’s not here,” said Mrs. Weasley angrily. “This is ahospital wing, Minister, don’t you think you’d dobetter to —”

But the door opened, and Dumbledore came sweepingup the ward.

“What has happened?” said Dumbledore sharply,looking from Fudge to Professor McGonagall. “Whyare you disturbing these people? Minerva, I’msurprised at you — I asked you to stand guard overBarty Crouch —”

“There is no need to stand guard over him anymore,Dumbledore!” she shrieked. “The Minister has seen tothat!”

Harry had never seen Professor McGonagall losecontrol like this. There were angry blotches of color inher cheeks, and her hands were balled into fists; shewas trembling with fury.

Page | 775 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“When we told Mr. Fudge that we had caught theDeath Eater responsible for tonight’s events,” saidSnape, in a low voice, “he seemed to feel his personalsafety was in question. He insisted on summoning adementor to accompany him into the castle. Hebrought it up to the office where Barty Crouch —”

“I told him you would not agree, Dumbledore!”Professor McGonagall fumed. “I told him you wouldnever allow dementors to set foot inside the castle,but —”

“My dear woman!” roared Fudge, who likewise lookedangrier than Harry had ever seen him, “as Minister ofMagic, it is my decision whether I wish to bringprotection with me when interviewing a possiblydangerous —”

But Professor McGonagall’s voice drowned Fudge’s.

“The moment that — that thing entered the room,”she screamed, pointing at Fudge, trembling all over,“it swooped down on Crouch and — and —”

Harry felt a chill in his stomach as ProfessorMcGonagall struggled to find words to describe whathad happened. He did not need her to finish hersentence. He knew what the dementor must havedone. It had administered its fatal kiss to BartyCrouch. It had sucked his soul out through hismouth. He was worse than dead.

“By all accounts, he is no loss!” blustered Fudge. “Itseems he has been responsible for several deaths!”

“But he cannot now give testimony, Cornelius,” saidDumbledore. He was staring hard at Fudge, asthough seeing him plainly for the first time. “He

Page | 776

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

cannot give evidence about why he killed thosepeople.”

“Why he killed them? Well, that’s no mystery, is it?”blustered Fudge. “He was a raving lunatic! From whatMinerva and Severus have told me, he seems to havethought he was doing it all on You-Know-Who’sinstructions!”

“Lord Voldemort was giving him instructions,Cornelius,” Dumbledore said. “Those people’s deathswere mere by-products of a plan to restore Voldemortto full strength again. The plan succeeded. Voldemorthas been restored to his body.”

Fudge looked as though someone had just swung aheavy weight into his face. Dazed and blinking, hestared back at Dumbledore as if he couldn’t quitebelieve what he had just heard. He began to sputter,still goggling at Dumbledore.

“You-Know-Who ... returned? Preposterous. Comenow, Dumbledore ...”

“As Minerva and Severus have doubtless told you,”said Dumbledore, “we heard Barry Crouch confess.Under the influence of Veritaserum, he told us howhe was smuggled out of Azkaban, and how Voldemort— learning of his continued existence from BerthaJorkins — went to free him from his father and usedhim to capture Harry. The plan worked, I tell you.Crouch has helped Voldemort to return.”

“See here, Dumbledore,” said Fudge, and Harry wasastonished to see a slight smile dawning on his face,“you — you can’t seriously believe that. You-Know-Who — back? Come now, come now ... certainly,Crouch may have believed himself to be acting upon

Page | 777 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

You-Know-Who’s orders — but to take the word of alunatic like that, Dumbledore ...”

“When Harry touched the Triwizard Cup tonight, hewas transported straight to Voldemort,” saidDumbledore steadily. “He witnessed Lord Voldemort’srebirth. I will explain it all to you if you will step up tomy office.”

Dumbledore glanced around at Harry and saw that hewas awake, but shook his head and said, “I am afraidI cannot permit you to question Harry tonight.”

Fudge’s curious smile lingered. He too glanced atHarry, then looked back at Dumbledore, and said,“You are — er — prepared to take Harry’s word onthis, are you, Dumbledore?”

There was a moment’s silence, which was broken bySirius growling. His hackles were raised, and he wasbaring his teeth at Fudge.

“Certainly, I believe Harry,” said Dumbledore. Hiseyes were blazing now. “I heard Crouch’s confession,and I heard Harry’s account of what happened afterhe touched the Triwizard Cup; the two stories makesense, they explain everything that has happenedsince Bertha Jorkins disappeared last summer.”

Fudge still had that strange smile on his face. Onceagain, he glanced at Harry before answering.

“You are prepared to believe that Lord Voldemort hasreturned, on the word of a lunatic murderer, and aboy who ... well ...”

Fudge shot Harry another look, and Harry suddenlyunderstood.

Page | 778

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“You’ve been reading Rita Skeeter, Mr. Fudge,” hesaid quietly.

Ron, Hermione, Mrs. Weasley, and Bill all jumped.None of them had realized that Harry was awake.

Fudge reddened slightly, but a defiant and obstinatelook came over his face.

“And if I have?” he said, looking at Dumbledore. “If Ihave discovered that you’ve been keeping certain factsabout the boy very quiet? A Parselmouth, eh? Andhaving funny turns all over the place —”

“I assume that you are referring to the pains Harryhas been experiencing in his scar?” said Dumbledorecoolly.

“You admit that he has been having these pains,then?” said Fudge quickly. “Headaches? Nightmares?Possibly — hallucinations?”

“Listen to me, Cornelius,” said Dumbledore, taking astep toward Fudge, and once again, he seemed toradiate that indefinable sense of power that Harryhad felt after Dumbledore had Stunned youngCrouch. “Harry is as sane as you or I. That scar uponhis forehead has not addled his brains. I believe ithurts him when Lord Voldemort is close by, or feelingparticularly murderous.”

Fudge had taken half a step back from Dumbledore,but he looked no less stubborn.

“You’ll forgive me, Dumbledore, but I’ve never heardof a curse scar acting as an alarm bell before. ...”

“Look, I saw Voldemort come back!” Harry shouted.

He tried to get out of bed again, but Mrs. Weasley

Page | 779 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

forced him back. “I saw the Death Eaters! I can giveyou their names! Lucius Malfoy —”

Snape made a sudden movement, but as Harrylooked at him, Snape’s eyes flew back to Fudge.

“Malfoy was cleared!” said Fudge, visibly affronted. “Avery old family — donations to excellent causes —”

“Macnair!” Harry continued.

“Also cleared! Now working for the Ministry!”

“Avery — Nott — Crabbe — Goyle —”

“You are merely repeating the names of those whowere acquitted of being Death Eaters thirteen yearsago!” said Fudge angrily. “You could have found thosenames in old reports of the trials! For heaven’s sake,Dumbledore — the boy was full of some crackpotstory at the end of last year too — his tales are gettingtaller, and you’re still swallowing them — the boy cantalk to snakes, Dumbledore, and you still think he’strustworthy?”

“You fool!” Professor McGonagall cried. “CedricDiggory! Mr. Crouch! These deaths were not therandom work of a lunatic!”

“I see no evidence to the contrary!” shouted Fudge,now matching her anger, his face purpling. “It seemsto me that you are all determined to start a panic thatwill destabilize everything we have worked for theselast thirteen years!”

Harry couldn’t believe what he was hearing. He hadalways thought of Fudge as a kindly figure, a littleblustering, a little pompous, but essentially good-natured. But now a short, angry wizard stood before

Page | 780 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

him, refusing, point-blank, to accept the prospect ofdisruption in his comfortable and ordered world — tobelieve that Voldemort could have risen.

“Voldemort has returned,” Dumbledore repeated. “Ifyou accept that fact straightaway, Fudge, and takethe necessary measures, we may still be able to savethe situation. The first and most essential step is toremove Azkaban from the control of the dementors —”

“Preposterous!” shouted Fudge again. “Remove thedementors? I’d be kicked out of office for suggestingit! Half of us only feel safe in our beds at nightbecause we know the dementors are standing guardat Azkaban!”

“The rest of us sleep less soundly in our beds,Cornelius, knowing that you have put LordVoldemort’s most dangerous supporters in the care ofcreatures who will join him the instant he asks them!”said Dumbledore. “They will not remain loyal to you,Fudge! Voldemort can offer them much more scopefor their powers and their pleasures than you can!With the dementors behind him, and his oldsupporters returned to him, you will be hard-pressedto stop him regaining the sort of power he hadthirteen years ago!”

Fudge was opening and closing his mouth as thoughno words could express his outrage.

“The second step you must take — and at once,”Dumbledore pressed on, “is to send envoys to thegiants.”

“Envoys to the giants?” Fudge shrieked, finding histongue again. “What madness is this?”

Page | 781

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Extend them the hand of friendship, now, before it istoo late,” said Dumbledore, “or Voldemort willpersuade them, as he did before, that he alone amongwizards will give them their rights and their freedom!”

“You — you cannot be serious!” Fudge gasped,shaking his head and retreating further fromDumbledore. “If the magical community got wind thatI had approached the giants — people hate them,Dumbledore — end of my career —”

“You are blinded,” said Dumbledore, his voice risingnow, the aura of power around him palpable, his eyesblazing once more, “by the love of the office you hold,Cornelius! You place too much importance, and youalways have done, on the so-called purity of blood!

You fail to recognize that it matters not what someoneis born, but what they grow to be! Your dementor hasjust destroyed the last remaining member of a pure-blood family as old as any — and see what that manchose to make of his life! I tell you now — take thesteps I have suggested, and you will be remembered,in office or out, as one of the bravest and greatestMinisters of Magic we have ever known. Fail to act —and history will remember you as the man whostepped aside and allowed Voldemort a second chanceto destroy the world we have tried to rebuild!”

“Insane,” whispered Fudge, still backing away. “Mad

And then there was silence. Madam Pomfrey wasstanding frozen at the foot of Harry’s bed, her handsover her mouth. Mrs. Weasley was still standing overHarry, her hand on his shoulder to prevent him fromrising. Bill, Ron, and Hermione were staring at Fudge.

“If your determination to shut your eyes will carry youas far as this, Cornelius,” said Dumbledore, “we have

Page | 782 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

reached a parting of the ways. You must act as yousee fit. And I — I shall act as I see fit.”

Dumbledore’s voice carried no hint of a threat; itsounded like a mere statement, but Fudge bristled asthough Dumbledore were advancing upon him with awand.

“Now, see here, Dumbledore,” he said, waving athreatening finger. “I’ve given you free rein, always.

I’ve had a lot of respect for you. I might not haveagreed with some of your decisions, but I’ve keptquiet. There aren’t many who’d have let you hirewerewolves, or keep Hagrid, or decide what to teachyour students without reference to the Ministry. But ifyou’re going to work against me —”

“The only one against whom I intend to work,” saidDumbledore, “is Lord Voldemort. If you are againsthim, then we remain, Cornelius, on the same side.”

It seemed Fudge could think of no answer to this. Herocked backward and forward on his small feet for amoment and spun his bowler hat in his hands.

Finally, he said, with a hint of a plea in his voice, “Hecan’t be back, Dumbledore, he just can’t be ...”

Snape strode forward, past Dumbledore, pulling upthe left sleeve of his robes as he went. He stuck outhis forearm and showed it to Fudge, who recoiled.

“There,” said Snape harshly. “There. The Dark Mark.

It is not as clear as it was an hour or so ago, when itburned black, but you can still see it. Every DeathEater had the sign burned into him by the Dark Lord.It was a means of distinguishing one another, and hismeans of summoning us to him. When he touchedthe Mark of any Death Eater, we were to Disapparate,and Apparate, instantly, at his side. This Mark hasPage | 783 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

been growing clearer all year. Karkaroff’s too. Why doyou think Karkaroff fled tonight? We both felt theMark burn. We both knew he had returned. Karkarofffears the Dark Lord’s vengeance. He betrayed toomany of his fellow Death Eaters to be sure of awelcome back into the fold.”

Fudge stepped back from Snape too. He was shakinghis head. He did not seem to have taken in a wordSnape had said. He stared, apparently repelled by theugly mark on Snape’s arm, then looked up atDumbledore and whispered, “I don’t know what youand your staff are playing at, Dumbledore, but I haveheard enough. I have no more to add. I will be intouch with you tomorrow, Dumbledore, to discuss therunning of this school. I must return to the Ministry.”

He had almost reached the door when he paused. Heturned around, strode back down the dormitory, andstopped at Harry’s bed.

“Your winnings,” he said shortly, taking a large bag ofgold out of his pocket and dropping it onto Harry’sbedside table. “One thousand Galleons. There shouldhave been a presentation ceremony, but under thecircumstances ...”

He crammed his bowler hat onto his head and walkedout of the room, slamming the door behind him. Themoment he had disappeared, Dumbledore turned tolook at the group around Harry’s bed.

“There is work to be done,” he said. “Molly ... am Iright in thinking that I can count on you andArthur?”

“Of course you can,” said Mrs. Weasley. She waswhite to the lips, but she looked resolute. “We knowwhat Fudge is. It’s Arthur’s fondness for Muggles that

Page | 784 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

has held him back at the Ministry all these years.Fudge thinks he lacks proper wizarding pride.”

“Then I need to send a message to Arthur,” saidDumbledore. “All those that we can persuade of thetruth must be notified immediately, and he is wellplaced to contact those at the Ministry who are not asshortsighted as Cornelius.”

“Ill go to Dad,” said Bill, standing up. “Ill go now.”

“Excellent,” said Dumbledore. “Tell him what hashappened. Tell him I will be in direct contact with himshortly. He will need to be discreet, however. If Fudgethinks I am interfering at the Ministry —”

“Leave it to me,” said Bill.

He clapped a hand on Harry’s shoulder, kissed hismother on the cheek, pulled on his cloak, and strodequickly from the room.

“Minerva,” said Dumbledore, turning to ProfessorMcGonagall, “I want to see Hagrid in my office assoon as possible. Also — if she will consent to come —Madame Maxime.”

Professor McGonagall nodded and left without a word.

“Poppy,” Dumbledore said to Madam Pomfrey, “wouldyou be very kind and go down to Professor Moody’soffice, where I think you will find a house-elf calledWinky in considerable distress? Do what you can forher, and take her back to the kitchens. I think Dobbywill look after her for us.”

“Very — very well,” said Madam Pomfrey, lookingstartled, and she too left.

Page | 785

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore made sure that the door was closed, andthat Madam Pomfrey’s footsteps had died away,before he spoke again.

“And now,” he said, “it is time for two of our numberto recognize each other for what they are. Sirius ... ifyou could resume your usual form.”

The great black dog looked up at Dumbledore, then,in an instant, turned back into a man.

Mrs. Weasley screamed and leapt back from the bed.

“Sirius Black!” she shrieked, pointing at him.

“Mum, shut up!” Ron yelled. “It’s okay!”

Snape had not yelled or jumped backward, but thelook on his face was one of mingled fury and horror.

“Him!” he snarled, staring at Sirius, whose faceshowed equal dislike. “What is he doing here?”

“He is here at my invitation,” said Dumbledore,looking between them, “as are you, Severus. I trustyou both. It is time for you to lay aside your olddifferences and trust each other.”

Harry thought Dumbledore was asking for a nearmiracle. Sirius and Snape were eyeing each otherwith the utmost loathing.

“I will settle, in the short term,” said Dumbledore,with a bite of impatience in his voice, “for a lack ofopen hostility. You will shake hands. You are on thesame side now. Time is short, and unless the few ofus who know the truth do not stand united, there isno hope for any of us.”

Page | 786

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Very slowly — but still glaring at each other asthough each wished the other nothing but ill — Siriusand Snape moved toward each other and shookhands. They let go extremely quickly.

“That will do to be going on with,” said Dumbledore,stepping between them once more. “Now I have workfor each of you. Fudge’s attitude, though notunexpected, changes everything. Sirius, I need you toset off at once. You are to alert Remus Lupin, ArabellaFigg, Mundungus Fletcher — the old crowd. Lie low atLupins for a while; I will contact you there.”

“But —” said Harry.

He wanted Sirius to stay. He did not want to have tosay goodbye again so quickly.

“You’ll see me very soon, Harry,” said Sirius, turningto him. “I promise you. But I must do what I can, youunderstand, don’t you?”

“Yeah,” said Harry. “Yeah ... of course I do.”

Sirius grasped his hand briefly, nodded toDumbledore, transformed again into the black dog,and ran the length of the room to the door, whosehandle he turned with a paw. Then he was gone.

“Severus,” said Dumbledore, turning to Snape, “youknow what I must ask you to do. If you are ready ... ifyou are prepared ...”

“I am,” said Snape.

He looked slightly paler than usual, and his cold,black eyes glittered strangely.

Page | 787

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Then good luck,” said Dumbledore, and he watched,with a trace of apprehension on his face, as Snapeswept wordlessly after Sirius.

It was several minutes before Dumbledore spokeagain.

“I must go downstairs,” he said finally. “I must see theDiggorys. Harry — take the rest of your potion. I willsee all of you later.”

Harry slumped back against his pillows asDumbledore disappeared. Hermione, Ron, and Mrs.Weasley were all looking at him. None of them spokefor a very long time.

“You’ve got to take the rest of your potion, Harry,”

Mrs. Weasley said at last. Her hand nudged the sackof gold on his bedside cabinet as she reached for thebottle and the goblet. “You have a good long sleep. Tryand think about something else for a while ... thinkabout what you’re going to buy with your winnings!”

“I don’t want that gold,” said Harry in anexpressionless voice. “You have it. Anyone can haveit. I shouldn’t have won it. It should’ve been Cedric’s.”

The thing against which he had been fighting on andoff ever since he had come out of the maze wasthreatening to overpower him. He could feel aburning, prickling feeling in the inner corners of hiseyes. He blinked and stared up at the ceiling.

“It wasn’t your fault, Harry,” Mrs. Weasley whispered.

“I told him to take the cup with me,” said Harry.

Now the burning feeling was in his throat too. Hewished Ron would look away.

Page | 788 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Mrs. Weasley set the potion down on the bedsidecabinet, bent down, and put her arms around Harry.He had no memory of ever being hugged like this, asthough by a mother. The full weight of everything hehad seen that night seemed to fall in upon him asMrs. Weasley held him to her. His mother’s face, hisfather’s voice, the sight of Cedric, dead on the groundall started spinning in his head until he could hardlybear it, until he was screwing up his face against thehowl of misery fighting to get out of him.

There was a loud slamming noise, and Mrs. Weasleyand Harry broke apart. Hermione was standing by thewindow. She was holding something tight in herhand.

“Sorry,” she whispered.

“Your potion, Harry,” said Mrs. Weasley quickly,wiping her eyes on the back of her hand.

Harry drank it in one gulp. The effect wasinstantaneous. Heavy, irresistible waves of dreamlesssleep broke over him; he fell back onto his pillows andthought no more.

Page | 789

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





THE BEGINNING

When he looked back, even a month later, Harryfound he had only scattered memories of the next fewdays. It was as though he had been through too muchto take in any more. The recollections he did havewere very painful. The worst, perhaps, was themeeting with the Diggorys that took place thefollowing morning.

They did not blame him for what had happened; onthe contrary, both thanked him for returning Cedric’sbody to them. Mr. Diggory sobbed through most ofthe interview. Mrs. Diggory’s grief seemed to bebeyond tears.

“He suffered very little then,” she said, when Harryhad told her how Cedric had died. “And after all,

Amos ... he died just when he’d won the tournament.He must have been happy.”

When they got to their feet, she looked down at Harryand said, “You look after yourself, now.”

Page | 790 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Harry seized the sack of gold on the bedside table.

“You take this,” he muttered to her. “It should’ve beenCedric’s, he got there first, you take it —”

But she backed away from him.

“Oh no, it’s yours, dear, I couldn’t ... you keep it.”

Harry returned to Gryffindor Tower the followingevening. From what Hermione and Ron told him,Dumbledore had spoken to the school that morningat breakfast. He had merely requested that they leaveHarry alone, that nobody ask him questions or badgerhim to tell the story of what had happened in themaze. Most people, he noticed, were skirting him inthe corridors, avoiding his eyes. Some whisperedbehind their hands as he passed. He guessed thatmany of them had believed Rita Skeeter’s articleabout how disturbed and possibly dangerous he was.Perhaps they were formulating their own theoriesabout how Cedric had died. He found he didn’t carevery much. He liked it best when he was with Ronand Hermione and they were talking about otherthings, or else letting him sit in silence while theyplayed chess. He felt as though all three of them hadreached an understanding they didn’t need to putinto words; that each was waiting for some sign, someword, of what was going on outside Hogwarts — andthat it was useless to speculate about what might becoming until they knew anything for certain. The onlytime they touched upon the subject was when Rontold Harry about a meeting Mrs. Weasley had hadwith Dumbledore before going home.

“She went to ask him if you could come straight to usthis summer,” he said. “But he wants you to go backto the Dursleys, at least at first.”

Page | 791

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Why?” said Harry.

“She said Dumbledore’s got his reasons,” said Ron,shaking his head darkly. “I suppose we’ve got to trusthim, haven’t we?”

The only person apart from Ron and Hermione thatHarry felt able to talk to was Hagrid. As there was nolonger a Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher, theyhad those lessons free. They used the one onThursday afternoon to go down and visit Hagrid in hiscabin. It was a bright and sunny day; Fang boundedout of the open door as they approached, barking andwagging his tail madly.

“Who’s that?” called Hagrid, coming to the door.

“ Harry\”

He strode out to meet them, pulled Harry into a one-armed hug, ruffled his hair, and said, “Good ter seeyeh, mate. Good ter see yeh.”

They saw two bucket-size cups and saucers on thewooden table in front of the fireplace when theyentered Hagrid’s cabin.

“Bin havin’ a cuppa with Olympe,” Hagrid said. “She’sjus’ left.”

“Who?” said Ron curiously.

“Madame Maxime, o’ course!” said Hagrid.

“You two made up, have you?” said Ron.

“Dunno what yeh’re talkin’ about,” said Hagrid airily,fetching more cups from the dresser. When he hadmade tea and offered around a plate of doughy

Page | 792

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

cookies, he leaned back in his chair and surveyedHarry closely through his beetle-black eyes.

“You all righ’?” he said gruffly.

“Yeah,” said Harry.

“No, yeh’re not,” said Hagrid. “ ’Course yeh’re not. Butyeh will be.”

Harry said nothing.

“Knew he was goin’ ter come back,” said Hagrid, andHarry, Ron, and Hermione looked up at him, shocked.“Known it fer years, Harry. Knew he was out there,bidin’ his time. It had ter happen. Well, now it has,an’ we’ll jus’ have ter get on with it. We’ll fight. Migh’be able ter stop him before he gets a good hold. That’sDumbledore’s plan, anyway. Great man, Dumbledore.’S long as we’ve got him, I’m not too worried.”

Hagrid raised his bushy eyebrows at the disbelievingexpressions on their faces.

“No good sittin’ worryin’ abou’ it,” he said. “What’scornin’ will come, an’ we’ll meet it when it does.Dumbledore told me wha’ you did, Harry.”

Hagrid’s chest swelled as he looked at Harry.

“Yeh did as much as yer father would’ve done, an’ Ican’ give yeh no higher praise than that.”

Harry smiled back at him. It was the first time he’dsmiled in days. “What’s Dumbledore asked you to do,Hagrid?” he asked. “He sent Professor McGonagall toask you and Madame Maxime to meet him — thatnight.”

Page | 793

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Got a little job fer me over the summer,” said Hagrid.“Secret, though. I’m not s’pposed ter talk abou’ it, no,not even ter you lot. Olympe — Madame Maxime teryou — might be cornin’ with me. I think she will.Think I got her persuaded.”

“Is it to do with Voldemort?”

Hagrid flinched at the sound of the name.

“Migh’ be,” he said evasively. “Now ... who’d like tercome an’ visit the las’ skrewt with me? I was jokin’ —jokin’!” he added hastily, seeing the looks on theirfaces.

k k k

It was with a heavy heart that Harry packed his trunkup in the dormitory on the night before his return toPrivet Drive. He was dreading the Leaving Feast,which was usually a cause for celebration, when thewinner of the Inter-House Championship would beannounced. He had avoided being in the Great Hallwhen it was full ever since he had left the hospitalwing, preferring to eat when it was nearly empty toavoid the stares of his fellow students.

When he, Ron, and Hermione entered the Hall, theysaw at once that the usual decorations were missing.The Great Hall was normally decorated with thewinning House’s colors for the Leaving Feast. Tonight,however, there were black drapes on the wall behindthe teachers’ table. Harry knew instantly that theywere there as a mark of respect to Cedric.

The real Mad-Eye Moody was at the staff table now,his wooden leg and his magical eye back in place. Hewas extremely twitchy, jumping every time someone

Page | 794

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

spoke to him. Harry couldn’t blame him; Moody’s fearof attack was bound to have been increased by histen-month imprisonment in his own trunk. ProfessorKarkaroff’s chair was empty. Harry wondered, as hesat down with the other Gryffindors, where Karkaroffwas now, and whether Voldemort had caught up withhim.

Madame Maxime was still there. She was sitting nextto Hagrid. They were talking quietly together. Furtheralong the table, sitting next to Professor McGonagall,was Snape. His eyes lingered on Harry for a momentas Harry looked at him. His expression was difficult toread. He looked as sour and unpleasant as ever.

Harry continued to watch him, long after Snape hadlooked away.

What was it that Snape had done on Dumbledore’sorders, the night that Voldemort had returned? Andwhy ... why ... was Dumbledore so convinced thatSnape was truly on their side? He had been their spy,Dumbledore had said so in the Pensieve. Snape hadturned spy against Voldemort, “at great personalrisk.” Was that the job he had taken up again? Hadhe made contact with the Death Eaters, perhaps?Pretended that he had never really gone over toDumbledore, that he had been, like Voldemorthimself, biding his time?

Harry’s musings were ended by ProfessorDumbledore, who stood up at the staff table. TheGreat Hall, which in any case had been less noisythan it usually was at the Leaving Feast, became veryquiet.

“The end,” said Dumbledore, looking around at themall, “of another year.”

Page | 795

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

He paused, and his eyes fell upon the Hufflepufftable. Theirs had been the most subdued table beforehe had gotten to his feet, and theirs were still thesaddest and palest faces in the Hall.

“There is much that I would like to say to you alltonight,” said Dumbledore, “but I must firstacknowledge the loss of a very fine person, whoshould be sitting here,” he gestured toward theHufflepuffs, “enjoying our feast with us. I would likeyou all, please, to stand, and raise your glasses, toCedric Diggory.”

They did it, all of them; the benches scraped aseveryone in the Hall stood, and raised their goblets,and echoed, in one loud, low, rumbling voice, “CedricDiggory.”

Harry caught a glimpse of Cho through the crowd.There were tears pouring silently down her face. Helooked down at the table as they all sat down again.

“Cedric was a person who exemplified many of thequalities that distinguish Hufflepuff house,”Dumbledore continued. “He was a good and loyalfriend, a hard worker, he valued fair play. His deathhas affected you all, whether you knew him well ornot. I think that you have the right, therefore, toknow exactly how it came about.”

Harry raised his head and stared at Dumbledore.

“Cedric Diggory was murdered by Lord Voldemort.”

A panicked whisper swept the Great Hall. People werestaring at Dumbledore in disbelief, in horror. Helooked perfectly calm as he watched them mutterthemselves into silence.

Page | 796

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“The Ministry of Magic,” Dumbledore continued, “doesnot wish me to tell you this. It is possible that some ofyour parents will be horrified that I have done so —either because they will not believe that LordVoldemort has returned, or because they think Ishould not tell you so, young as you are. It is mybelief, however, that the truth is generally preferableto lies, and that any attempt to pretend that Cedricdied as the result of an accident, or some sort ofblunder of his own, is an insult to his memory.”

Stunned and frightened, every face in the Hall wasturned toward Dumbledore now ... or almost everyface. Over at the Slytherin table, Harry saw DracoMalfoy muttering something to Crabbe and Goyle.Harry felt a hot, sick swoop of anger in his stomach.He forced himself to look back at Dumbledore.

“There is somebody else who must be mentioned inconnection with Cedric’s death,” Dumbledore wenton. “I am talking, of course, about Harry Potter.”

A kind of ripple crossed the Great Hall as a few headsturned in Harry’s direction before flicking back to faceDumbledore.

“Harry Potter managed to escape Lord Voldemort,”said Dumbledore. “He risked his own life to returnCedric’s body to Hogwarts. He showed, in everyrespect, the sort of bravery that few wizards have evershown in facing Lord Voldemort, and for this, I honorhim.”

Dumbledore turned gravely to Harry and raised hisgoblet once more. Nearly everyone in the Great Hallfollowed suit. They murmured his name, as they hadmurmured Cedric’s, and drank to him. But through agap in the standing figures, Harry saw that Malfoy,Crabbe, Goyle, and many of the other Slytherins hadPage | 797 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

remained defiantly in their seats, their gobletsuntouched. Dumbledore, who after all possessed nomagical eye, did not see them.

When everyone had once again resumed their seats,Dumbledore continued, “The Triwizard Tournament’saim was to further and promote magicalunderstanding. In the light of what has happened —of Lord Voldemort’s return — such ties are moreimportant than ever before.”

Dumbledore looked from Madame Maxime andHagrid, to Fleur Delacour and her fellow Beauxbatonsstudents, to Viktor Krum and the Durmstrangs at theSlytherin table. Krum, Harry saw, looked wary,almost frightened, as though he expected Dumbledoreto say something harsh.

“Every guest in this Hall,” said Dumbledore, and hiseyes lingered upon the Durmstrang students, “will bewelcomed back here at any time, should they wish tocome. I say to you all, once again — in the light ofLord Voldemort’s return, we are only as strong as weare united, as weak as we are divided. LordVoldemort’s gift for spreading discord and enmity isvery great. We can fight it only by showing an equallystrong bond of friendship and trust. Differences ofhabit and language are nothing at all if our aims areidentical and our hearts are open.

“It is my belief — and never have I so hoped that I ammistaken — that we are all facing dark and difficulttimes. Some of you in this Hall have already suffereddirectly at the hands of Lord Voldemort. Many of yourfamilies have been torn asunder. A week ago, astudent was taken from our midst.

“Remember Cedric. Remember, if the time shouldcome when you have to make a choice between what

Page | 798 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

is right and what is easy, remember what happenedto a boy who was good, and kind, and brave, becausehe strayed across the path of Lord Voldemort.Remember Cedric Diggory.”

Harry’s trunk was packed; Hedwig was back in hercage on top of it. He, Ron, and Hermione were waitingin the crowded entrance hall with the rest of thefourth years for the carriages that would take themback to Hogsmeade station. It was another beautifulsummer’s day. He supposed that Privet Drive wouldbe hot and leafy, its flower beds a riot of color, whenhe arrived there that evening. The thought gave himno pleasure at all.

“ ’Arry!”

He looked around. Fleur Delacour was hurrying upthe stone steps into the castle. Beyond her, far acrossthe grounds, Harry could see Hagrid helping MadameMaxime to back two of the giant horses into theirharness. The Beauxbatons carriage was about to takeoff.

“We will see each uzzer again, I ’ope,” said Fleur asshe reached him, holding out her hand. “I am ’opingto get a job ’ere, to improve my Eenglish.”

“It’s very good already,” said Ron in a strangled sort ofvoice. Fleur smiled at him; Hermione scowled.

“Good-bye, ’Arry,” said Fleur, turning to go. “It ’azbeen a pleasure meeting you!”

Harry’s spirits couldn’t help but lift slightly as hewatched Fleur hurry back across the lawns toMadame Maxime, her silvery hair rippling in thesunlight.

Page | 799

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Wonder how the Durmstrang students are gettingback,” said Ron. “D’you reckon they can steer thatship without Karkaroff?”

“Karkaroff did not steer,” said a gruff voice. “Hestayed in his cabin and let us do the vork.”

Krum had come to say good-bye to Hermione.

“Could I have a vord?” he asked her.

“Oh ... yes ... all right,” said Hermione, lookingslightly flustered, and following Krum through thecrowd and out of sight.

“You’d better hurry up!” Ron called loudly after her.“The carriages’ll be here in a minute!”

He let Harry keep a watch for the carriages, however,and spent the next few minutes craning his neck overthe crowd to try and see what Krum and Hermionemight be up to. They returned quite soon. Ron staredat Hermione, but her face was quite impassive.

“I liked Diggory,” said Krum abruptly to Harry. “Hevos alvays polite to me. Alvays. Even though I vosfrom Durmstrang — with Karkaroff,” he added,scowling.

“Have you got a new headmaster yet?” said Harry.

Krum shrugged. He held out his hand as Fleur haddone, shook Harry’s hand, and then Ron’s. Ronlooked as though he was suffering some sort ofpainful internal struggle. Krum had already startedwalking away when Ron burst out, “Can I have yourautograph?”

Page | 800

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hermione turned away, smiling at the horselesscarriages that were now trundling toward them up thedrive, as Krum, looking surprised but gratified, signeda fragment of parchment for Ron.

The weather could not have been more different onthe journey back to King’s Cross than it had been ontheir way to Hogwarts the previous September. Therewasn’t a single cloud in the sky. Harry, Ron, andHermione had managed to get a compartment tothemselves. Pigwidgeon was once again hidden underRon’s dress robes to stop him from hootingcontinually; Hedwig was dozing, her head under herwing, and Crookshanks was curled up in a spare seatlike a large, furry ginger cushion. Harry, Ron, andHermione talked more fully and freely than they hadall week as the train sped them southward. Harry feltas though Dumbledore’s speech at the Leaving Feasthad unblocked him, somehow. It was less painful todiscuss what had happened now. They broke off theirconversation about what action Dumbledore might betaking, even now, to stop Voldemort only when thelunch trolley arrived.

When Hermione returned from the trolley and put hermoney back into her schoolbag, she dislodged a copyof the Daily Prophet that she had been carrying inthere. Harry looked at it, unsure whether he reallywanted to know what it might say, but Hermione,seeing him looking at it, said calmly, “There’s nothingin there. You can look for yourself, but there’snothing at all. I’ve been checking every day. Just asmall piece the day after the third task saying youwon the tournament. They didn’t even mentionCedric. Nothing about any of it. If you ask me, Fudgeis forcing them to keep quiet.”

Page | 801

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“He’ll never keep Rita quiet,” said Harry. “Not on astory like this.”

“Oh, Rita hasn’t written anything at all since the thirdtask,” said Hermione in an oddly constrained voice.“As a matter of fact,” she added, her voice nowtrembling slightly, “Rita Skeeter isn’t going to bewriting anything at all for a while. Not unless shewants me to spill the beans on her.”

“What are you talking about?” said Ron.

“I found out how she was listening in on privateconversations when she wasn’t supposed to becoming onto the grounds,” said Hermione in a rush.

Harry had the impression that Hermione had beendying to tell them this for days, but that she hadrestrained herself in light of everything else that hadhappened.

“How was she doing it?” said Harry at once.

“How did you find out?” said Ron, staring at her.

“Well, it was you, really, who gave me the idea,

Harry,” she said.

“Did I?” said Harry, perplexed. “How?”

“Bugging,” said Hermione happily.

“But you said they didn’t work —”

“Oh not electronic bugs,” said Hermione. “No, you see... Rita Skeeter” — Hermione’s voice trembled withquiet triumph — “is an unregistered Animagus. Shecan turn —”

Page | 802

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

Hermione pulled a small sealed glass jar out of herbag.

“— into a beetle.”

“You’re kidding,” said Ron. “You haven’t ... she’s not

“Oh yes she is,” said Hermione happily, brandishingthe jar at them.

Inside were a few twigs and leaves and one large, fatbeetle.

“That’s never — you’re kidding —” Ron whispered,lifting the jar to his eyes.

“No, I’m not,” said Hermione, beaming. “I caught heron the windowsill in the hospital wing. Look veryclosely, and you 11 notice the markings around herantennae are exactly like those foul glasses shewears.”

Harry looked and saw that she was quite right. Healso remembered something.

“There was a beetle on the statue the night we heardHagrid telling Madame Maxime about his mum!”

“Exactly,” said Hermione. “And Viktor pulled a beetleout of my hair after we’d had our conversation by thelake. And unless I’m very much mistaken, Rita wasperched on the windowsill of the Divination class theday your scar hurt. She’s been buzzing around forstories all year.”

“When we saw Malfoy under that tree ...” said Ronslowly.

Page | 803

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“He was talking to her, in his hand,” said Hermione.“He knew, of course. That’s how she’s been getting allthose nice little interviews with the Slytherins. Theywouldn’t care that she was doing something illegal, aslong as they were giving her horrible stuff about usand Hagrid.”

Hermione took the glass jar back from Ron andsmiled at the beetle, which buzzed angrily against theglass.

“I’ve told her I’ll let her out when we get back toLondon,” said Hermione. “I’ve put an UnbreakableCharm on the jar, you see, so she can’t transform.

And I’ve told her she’s to keep her quill to herself for awhole year. See if she can’t break the habit of writinghorrible lies about people.”

Smiling serenely, Hermione placed the beetle backinside her schoolbag.

The door of the compartment slid open.

“Very clever, Granger,” said Draco Malfoy.

Crabbe and Goyle were standing behind him. Allthree of them looked more pleased with themselves,more arrogant and more menacing, than Harry hadever seen them.

“So,” said Malfoy slowly, advancing slightly into thecompartment and looking slowly around at them, asmirk quivering on his lips. “You caught somepathetic reporter, and Potter’s Dumbledore’s favoriteboy again. Big deal.”

His smirk widened. Crabbe and Goyle leered.

Page | 804

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Trying not to think about it, are we?” said Malfoysoftly, looking around at all three of them. “Trying topretend it hasn’t happened?”

“Get out,” said Harry.

He had not been this close to Malfoy since he hadwatched him muttering to Crabbe and Goyle duringDumbledore’s speech about Cedric. He could feel akind of ringing in his ears. His hand gripped his wandunder his robes.

“You’ve picked the losing side, Potter! I warned you! Itold you you ought to choose your company morecarefully, remember? When we met on the train, firstday at Hogwarts? I told you not to hang around withriffraff like this!” He jerked his head at Ron andHermione. “Too late now, Potter! They’ll be the first togo, now the Dark Lord’s back! Mudbloods andMuggle-lovers first! Well — second — Diggory was thef—”

It was as though someone had exploded a box offireworks within the compartment. Blinded by theblaze of the spells that had blasted from everydirection, deafened by a series of bangs, Harryblinked and looked down at the floor.

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle were all lying unconsciousin the doorway. He, Ron, and Hermione were on theirfeet, all three of them having used a different hex. Norwere they the only ones to have done so.

“Thought we’d see what those three were up to,” saidFred matter-of-factly, stepping onto Goyle and intothe compartment. He had his wand out, and so didGeorge, who was careful to tread on Malfoy as hefollowed Fred inside.

Page | 805

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Interesting effect,” said George, looking down atCrabbe. “Who used the Furnunculus Curse?”

“Me,” said Harry.

“Odd,” said George lightly. “I used Jelly-Legs. Looksas though those two shouldn’t be mixed. He seems tohave sprouted little tentacles all over his face. Well,let’s not leave them here, they don’t add much to thedecor.”

Ron, Harry, and George kicked, rolled, and pushedthe unconscious Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle — each ofwhom looked distinctly the worse for the jumble ofjinxes with which they had been hit — out into thecorridor, then came back into the compartment androlled the door shut.

“Exploding Snap, anyone?” said Fred, pulling out apack of cards.

They were halfway through their fifth game whenHarry decided to ask them.

“You going to tell us, then?” he said to George. “Whoyou were blackmailing?”

“Oh,” said George darkly. “That

“It doesn’t matter,” said Fred, shaking his headimpatiently. “It wasn’t anything important. Not now,anyway.”

“We’ve given up,” said George, shrugging.

But Harry, Ron, and Hermione kept on asking, andfinally, Fred said, “All right, all right, if you reallywant to know ... it was Ludo Bagman.”

Page | 806

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Bagman?” said Harry sharply. “Are you saying hewas involved in —”

“Nah,” said George gloomily. “Nothing like that.

Stupid git. He wouldn’t have the brains.”

“Well, what, then?” said Ron.

Fred hesitated, then said, “You remember that bet wehad with him at the Quidditch World Cup? About howIreland would win, but Krum would get the Snitch?”

“Yeah,” said Harry and Ron slowly.

“Well, the git paid us in leprechaun gold he’d caughtfrom the Irish mascots.”

“So?”

“So,” said Fred impatiently, “it vanished, didn’t it? Bynext morning, it had gone!”

“But — it must’ve been an accident, mustn’t it?” saidHermione.

George laughed very bitterly.

“Yeah, that’s what we thought, at first. We thought ifwe just wrote to him, and told him he’d made amistake, he’d cough up. But nothing doing. Ignoredour letter. We kept trying to talk to him about it atHogwarts, but he was always making some excuse toget away from us.”

“In the end, he turned pretty nasty,” said Fred. “Toldus we were too young to gamble, and he wasn’t givingus anything.”

Page | 807

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“So we asked for our money back,” said Georgeglowering.

“He didn’t refuse!” gasped Hermione.

“Right in one,” said Fred.

“But that was all your savings!” said Ron.

“Tell me about it,” said George. “ ’Course, we foundout what was going on in the end. Lee Jordan’s dadhad had a bit of trouble getting money off Bagman aswell. Turns out he’s in big trouble with the goblins.Borrowed loads of gold off them. A gang of themcornered him in the woods after the World Cup andtook all the gold he had, and it still wasn’t enough tocover all his debts. They followed him all the way toHogwarts to keep an eye on him. He’s lost everythinggambling. Hasn’t got two Galleons to rub together.And you know how the idiot tried to pay the goblinsback?”

“How?” said Harry.

“He put a bet on you, mate,” said Fred. “Put a big beton you to win the tournament. Bet against thegoblins.”

“So that’s why he kept trying to help me win!” saidHarry. “Well — I did win, didn’t I? So he can pay youyour gold!”

“Nope,” said George, shaking his head. “The goblinsplay as dirty as him. They say you drew with Diggory,and Bagman was betting you’d win outright. SoBagman had to run for it. He did run for it right afterthe third task.”

Page | 808

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

George sighed deeply and started dealing out thecards again.

The rest of the journey passed pleasantly enough;Harry wished it could have gone on all summer, infact, and that he would never arrive at King’s Cross ...but as he had learned the hard way that year, timewill not slow down when something unpleasant liesahead, and all too soon, the Hogwarts Express waspulling in at platform nine and three-quarters. Theusual confusion and noise filled the corridors as thestudents began to disembark. Ron and Hermionestruggled out past Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle,carrying their trunks. Harry, however, stayed put.

“Fred — George — wait a moment.”

The twins turned. Harry pulled open his trunk anddrew out his Triwizard winnings.

“Take it,” he said, and he thrust the sack intoGeorge’s hands.

“What?” said Fred, looking flabbergasted.

“Take it,” Harry repeated firmly. “I don’t want it.”

“You’re mental,” said George, trying to push it back atHarry.

“No, I’m not,” said Harry. “You take it, and getinventing. It’s for the joke shop.”

“He is mental,” Fred said in an almost awed voice.

“Listen,” said Harry firmly. “If you don’t take it, I’mthrowing it down the drain. I don’t want it and I don’tneed it. But I could do with a few laughs. We could all

Page | 809

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

do with a few laughs. I’ve got a feeling we’re going toneed them more than usual before long.”

“Harry,” said George weakly, weighing the money bagin his hands, “there’s got to be a thousand Galleonsin here.”

“Yeah,” said Harry, grinning. “Think how manyCanary Creams that is.”

The twins stared at him.

“Just don’t tell your mum where you got it ...although she might not be so keen for you to join theMinistry anymore, come to think of it. ...”

“Harry,” Fred began, but Harry pulled out his wand.

“Look,” he said flatly, “take it, or I’ll hex you. I knowsome good ones now. Just do me one favor, okay?

Buy Ron some different dress robes and say they’refrom you.”

He left the compartment before they could sayanother word, stepping over Malfoy, Crabbe, andGoyle, who were still lying on the floor, covered in hexmarks.

Uncle Vernon was waiting beyond the barrier. Mrs.Weasley was close by him. She hugged Harry verytightly when she saw him and whispered in his ear, “Ithink Dumbledore will let you come to us later in thesummer. Keep in touch, Harry.”

“See you, Harry,” said Ron, clapping him on the back.

“ ’Bye, Harry!” said Hermione, and she did somethingshe had never done before, and kissed him on thecheek.

Page | 810 Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling

“Harry — thanks,” George muttered, while Frednodded fervently at his side.

Harry winked at them, turned to Uncle Vernon, andfollowed him silently from the station. There was nopoint worrying yet, he told himself, as he got into theback of the Dursleys’ car.

As Hagrid had said, what would come, would come...and he would have to meet it when it did.

Page | 811

Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire - J.K. Rowling





