Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


Harry Potter Series (PDFs)





Harry Potter Series (PDFs)


J.K. Rowling

This book was produced in EPUB format by the Internet Archive.

The book pages were scanned and converted to EPUB format automatically. This process relies on optical character recognition, and is somewhat susceptible to errors. The book may not offer the correct reading sequence, and there may be weird characters, non-words, and incorrect guesses at structure. Some page numbers and headers or footers may remain from the scanned page. The process which identifies images might have found stray marks on the page which are not actually images from the book. The hidden page numbering which may be available to your ereader corresponds to the numbered pages in the print edition, but is not an exact match; page numbers will increment at the same rate as the corresponding print edition, but we may have started numbering before the print book's visible page numbers. The Internet Archive is working to improve the scanning process and resulting books, but in the meantime, we hope that this book will be useful to you.

The Internet Archive was founded in 1996 to build an Internet library and to promote universal access to all knowledge. The Archive's purposes include offering permanent access for researchers, historians, scholars, people with disabilities, and the general public to historical collections that exist in digital format. The Internet Archive includes texts, audio, moving images, and software as well as archived web pages, and provides specialized services for information access for the blind and other persons with disabilities.

Created with abbyy2epub (v.1.6.1)



/



OWL POST

Harry Potter was a highly unusual boy in many ways.For one thing, he hated the summer holidays morethan any other time of year. For another, he reallywanted to do his homework but was forced to do it insecret, in the dead of night. And he also happened tobe a wizard.

It was nearly midnight, and he was lying on hisstomach in bed, the blankets drawn right over hishead like a tent, a flashlight in one hand and a largeleather-bound book (A History of Magic by BathildaBagshot) propped open against the pillow. Harrymoved the tip of his eagle-feather quill down the page,frowning as he looked for something that would helphim write his essay, “Witch Burning in the FourteenthCentury Was Completely Pointless — discuss.”

The quill paused at the top of a likely-lookingparagraph. Harry pushed his round glasses up thebridge of his nose, moved his flashlight closer to thebook, and read:

Page | 2 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Non-magic people (more commonly known asMuggles) were particularly afraid of magic in medievaltimes, but not very good at recognizing it. On the rareoccasion that they did catch a real witch or wizard,burning had no effect whatsoever. The witch or wizardwould perform a basic Flame Freezing Charm andthen pretend to shriek with pain while enjoying agentle, tickling sensation. Indeed, Wendelin the Weirdenjoyed being burned so much that she allowedherself to be caught no less than forty-seven times invarious disguises.

Harry put his quill between his teeth and reachedunderneath his pillow for his ink bottle and a roll ofparchment. Slowly and very carefully he unscrewedthe ink bottle, dipped his quill into it, and began towrite, pausing every now and then to listen, becauseif any of the Dursleys heard the scratching of his quillon their way to the bathroom, he’d probably findhimself locked in the cupboard under the stairs forthe rest of the summer.

The Dursley family of number four, Privet Drive, wasthe reason that Harry never enjoyed his summerholidays. Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, and their son,Dudley, were Harry’s only living relatives. They wereMuggles, and they had a very medieval attitudetoward magic. Harry’s dead parents, who had been awitch and wizard themselves, were never mentionedunder the Dursleys’ roof. For years, Aunt Petunia andUncle Vernon had hoped that if they kept Harry asdowntrodden as possible, they would be able tosquash the magic out of him. To their fury, they hadbeen unsuccessful. These days they lived in terror ofanyone finding out that Harry had spent most of thelast two years at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft andWizardry. The most they could do, however, was tolock away Harry’s spellbooks, wand, cauldron, and

Page | 3 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

broomstick at the start of the summer break, andforbid him to talk to the neighbors.

This separation from his spellbooks had been a realproblem for Harry, because his teachers at Hogwartshad given him a lot of holiday work. One of theessays, a particularly nasty one about shrinkingpotions, was for Harry’s least favorite teacher,Professor Snape, who would be delighted to have anexcuse to give Harry detention for a month. Harry hadtherefore seized his chance in the first week of theholidays. While Uncle Vernon, Aunt Petunia, andDudley had gone out into the front garden to admireUncle Vernon’s new company car (in very loud voices,so that the rest of the street would notice it too),

Harry had crept downstairs, picked the lock on thecupboard under the stairs, grabbed some of hisbooks, and hidden them in his bedroom. As long ashe didn’t leave spots of ink on the sheets, theDursleys need never know that he was studyingmagic by night.

Harry was particularly keen to avoid trouble with hisaunt and uncle at the moment, as they were alreadyin an especially bad mood with him, all because he’dreceived a telephone call from a fellow wizard oneweek into the school vacation.

Ron Weasley, who was one of Harry’s best friends atHogwarts, came from a whole family of wizards. Thismeant that he knew a lot of things Harry didn’t, buthad never used a telephone before. Most unluckily ithad been Uncle Vernon who had answered the call.

“Vernon Dursley speaking.”

Harry, who happened to be in the room at the time,froze as he heard Ron’s voice answer.

Page | 4 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“HELLO? HELLO? CAN YOU HEAR ME? I — WANT —TO — TALK — TO — HARRY — POTTER!”

Ron was yelling so loudly that Uncle Vernon jumpedand held the receiver a foot away from his ear, staringat it with an expression of mingled fury and alarm.

“WHO IS THIS?” he roared in the direction of themouthpiece. “WHO ARE YOU?”

“RON — WEASLEY!” Ron bellowed back, as though heand Uncle Vernon were speaking from opposite endsof a football field. “I’M — A — FRIEND — OF —HARRY’S — FROM — SCHOOL —”

Uncle Vernon’s small eyes swiveled around to Harry,who was rooted to the spot.

“THERE IS NO HARRY POTTER HERE!” he roared,now holding the receiver at arm’s length, as thoughfrightened it might explode. “I DONT KNOW WHATSCHOOL YOU’RE TALKING ABOUT! NEVERCONTACT ME AGAIN! DONT YOU COME NEAR MYFAMILY!”

And he threw the receiver back onto the telephone asif dropping a poisonous spider.

The fight that had followed had been one of the worstever.

“HOW DARE YOU GIVE THIS NUMBER TO PEOPLELIKE — PEOPLE LIKE YOU!” Uncle Vernon hadroared, spraying Harry with spit.

Ron obviously realized that he’d gotten Harry intotrouble, because he hadn’t called again. Harry’s otherbest friend from Hogwarts, Hermione Granger, hadn’tbeen in touch either. Harry suspected that Ron had

Page | 5 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

warned Hermione not to call, which was a pity,because Hermione, the cleverest witch in Harry’syear, had Muggle parents, knew perfectly well how touse a telephone, and would probably have hadenough sense not to say that she went to Hogwarts.

So Harry had had no word from any of his wizardingfriends for five long weeks, and this summer wasturning out to be almost as bad as the last one. Therewas just one very small improvement — afterswearing that he wouldn’t use her to send letters toany of his friends, Harry had been allowed to let hisowl, Hedwig, out at night. Uncle Vernon had given inbecause of the racket Hedwig made if she was lockedin her cage all the time.

Harry finished writing about Wendelin the Weird andpaused to listen again. The silence in the dark housewas broken only by the distant, grunting snores of hisenormous cousin, Dudley. It must be very late, Harrythought. His eyes were itching with tiredness.

Perhaps he’d finish this essay tomorrow night. ...

He replaced the top of the ink bottle; pulled an oldpillowcase from under his bed; put the flashlight, AHistory of Magic, his essay, quill, and ink inside it; gotout of bed; and hid the lot under a loose floorboardunder his bed. Then he stood up, stretched, andchecked the time on the luminous alarm clock on hisbedside table.

It was one o’clock in the morning. Harry’s stomachgave a funny jolt. He had been thirteen years old,without realizing it, for a whole hour.

Yet another unusual thing about Harry was how littlehe looked forward to his birthdays. He had neverreceived a birthday card in his life. The Dursleys had

Page | 6 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

completely ignored his last two birthdays, and he hadno reason to suppose they would remember this one.

Harry walked across the dark room, past Hedwig’slarge, empty cage, to the open window. He leaned onthe sill, the cool night air pleasant on his face after along time under the blankets. Hedwig had beenabsent for two nights now. Harry wasn’t worriedabout her: she’d been gone this long before. But hehoped she’d be back soon — she was the only livingcreature in this house who didn’t flinch at the sight ofhim.

Harry, though still rather small and skinny for hisage, had grown a few inches over the last year. Hisjet-black hair, however, was just as it always hadbeen — stubbornly untidy, whatever he did to it. Theeyes behind his glasses were bright green, and on hisforehead, clearly visible through his hair, was a thinscar, shaped like a bolt of lightning.

Of all the unusual things about Harry, this scar wasthe most extraordinary of all. It was not, as theDursleys had pretended for ten years, a souvenir ofthe car crash that had killed Harry’s parents, becauseLily and James Potter had not died in a car crash.They had been murdered, murdered by the mostfeared Dark wizard for a hundred years, LordVoldemort. Harry had escaped from the same attackwith nothing more than a scar on his forehead, whereVoldemort’s curse, instead of killing him, hadrebounded upon its originator. Barely alive,

Voldemort had fled. ...

But Harry had come face-to-face with him atHogwarts. Remembering their last meeting as hestood at the dark window, Harry had to admit he waslucky even to have reached his thirteenth birthday.

Page | 7 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He scanned the starry sky for a sign of Hedwig,perhaps soaring back to him with a dead mousedangling from her beak, expecting praise. Gazingabsently over the rooftops, it was a few seconds beforeHarry realized what he was seeing.

Silhouetted against the golden moon, and growinglarger every moment, was a large, strangely lopsidedcreature, and it was flapping in Harry’s direction. Hestood quite still, watching it sink lower and lower. Fora split second he hesitated, his hand on the windowlatch, wondering whether to slam it shut. But thenthe bizarre creature soared over one of the streetlamps of Privet Drive, and Harry, realizing what itwas, leapt aside.

Through the window soared three owls, two of themholding up the third, which appeared to beunconscious. They landed with a soft flump onHarry’s bed, and the middle owl, which was large andgray, keeled right over and lay motionless. There wasa large package tied to its legs.

Harry recognized the unconscious owl at once — hisname was Errol, and he belonged to the Weasleyfamily. Harry dashed to the bed, untied the cordsaround Errol’s legs, took off the parcel, and thencarried Errol to Hedwig’s cage. Errol opened onebleary eye, gave a feeble hoot of thanks, and began togulp some water.

Harry turned back to the remaining owls. One ofthem, the large snowy female, was his own Hedwig.She, too, was carrying a parcel and looked extremelypleased with herself. She gave Harry an affectionatenip with her beak as he removed her burden, thenflew across the room to join Errol.

Page | 8 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry didn’t recognize the third owl, a handsometawny one, but he knew at once where it had comefrom, because in addition to a third package, it wascarrying a letter bearing the Hogwarts crest. WhenHarry relieved this owl of its burden, it ruffled itsfeathers importantly, stretched its wings, and took offthrough the window into the night.

Harry sat down on his bed and grabbed Errol’spackage, ripped off the brown paper, and discovered apresent wrapped in gold, and his first ever birthdaycard. Fingers trembling slightly, he opened theenvelope. Two pieces of paper fell out — a letter and anewspaper clipping.

The clipping had clearly come out of the wizardingnewspaper, the Daily Prophet, because the people inthe black-and-white picture were moving. Harrypicked up the clipping, smoothed it out, and read:

MINISTRY OF MAGIC EMPLOYEE

SCOOPS GRAND PRIZE

Arthur Weasley, Head of the Misuse of Muggle ArtifactsOffice at the Ministry of Magic, has won the annualDaily Prophet Grand Prize Galleon Draw.

A delighted Mr. Weasley told the Daily Prophet, “Wewill be spending the gold on a summer holiday inEgypt, where our eldest son, Bill, works as a cursebreaker for Gringotts Wizarding Bank. ”

The Weasley family will be spending a month inEgypt, returning for the start of the new school yearat Hogwarts, which five of the Weasley childrencurrently attend.

Page | 9 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry scanned the moving photograph, and a grinspread across his face as he saw all nine of theWeasleys waving furiously at him, standing in front ofa large pyramid. Plump little Mrs. Weasley; tall,balding Mr. Weasley; six sons; and one daughter, all(though the black-and-white picture didn’t show it)with flaming-red hair. Right in the middle of thepicture was Ron, tall and gangling, with his pet rat,Scabbers, on his shoulder and his arm around hislittle sister, Ginny.

Harry couldn’t think of anyone who deserved to win alarge pile of gold more than the Weasleys, who werevery nice and extremely poor. He picked up Ron’sletter and unfolded it.

Dear Harry,

Happy birthday!

Look, I’m really sorry about that telephone call. I hopethe Muggles didn’t give you a hard time. I asked Dad,and he reckons I shouldn’t have shouted.

It’s amazing here in Egypt. Bill’s taken us around allthe tombs and you wouldn’t believe the curses thoseold Egyptian wizards put on them. Mum wouldn’t letGinny come in the last one. There were all thesemutant skeletons in there, of Muggles who’d broken inand grown extra heads and stuff.

I couldn’t believe it when Dad won the Daily ProphetDraw. Seven hundred galleons! Most of it’s gone onthis trip, but they’re going to buy me a new wand fornext year.

Harry remembered only too well the occasion whenRon’s old wand had snapped. It had happened when

Page | 10 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

the car the two of them had been flying to Hogwartshad crashed into a tree on the school grounds.

We’ll be back about a week before term starts andwe’ll be going up to London to get my wand and ournew books. Any chance of meeting you there?

Don’t let the Muggles get you down!

Try and come to London,

Ron

PS. Percy’s Head Boy. He got the letter last week.

Harry glanced back at the photograph. Percy, whowas in his seventh and final year at Hogwarts, waslooking particularly smug. He had pinned his HeadBoy badge to the fez perched jauntily on top of hisneat hair, his horn-rimmed glasses flashing in theEgyptian sun.

Harry now turned to his present and unwrapped it.Inside was what looked like a miniature glassspinning top. There was another note from Ronbeneath it.

Harry — this is a Pocket Sneakoscope. If there’ssomeone untrustworthy around, it’s supposed to lightup and spin. Bill says it’s rubbish sold for wizardtourists and isn’t reliable, because it kept lighting up atdinner last night. But he didn’t realize Fred and Georgehad put beetles in his soup.

Bye —

Ron

Page | 11 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry put the Pocket Sneakoscope on his bedsidetable, where it stood quite still, balanced on its point,reflecting the luminous hands of his clock. He lookedat it happily for a few seconds, then picked up theparcel Hedwig had brought.

Inside this, too, there was a wrapped present, a card,and a letter, this time from Hermione.

Dear Harry,

Ron wrote to me and told me about his phone call toyour Uncle Vernon. I do hope you’re all right.

I’m on holiday in France at the moment and I didn’tknow how I was going to send this to you — what ifthey’d opened it at customs? — but then Hedwigturned up! I think she wanted to make sure you gotsomething for your birthday for a change. I bought yourpresent by owl-order; there was an advertisement inthe Daily Prophet (I’ve been getting it delivered; it’s sogood to keep up with what’s going on in the wizardingworld). Did you see that picture of Ron and his family aweek ago? I bet he’s learning loads. I’m really jealous— the ancient Egyptian wizards were fascinating.

There’s some interesting local history of witchcrafthere, too. I’ve rewritten my whole History of Magicessay to include some of the things I’ve found out. Ihope it’s not too long — it’s two rolls of parchment morethan Professor Binns asked for.

Ron says he’s going to be in London in the last week ofthe holidays. Can you make it? Will your aunt anduncle let you come? I really hope you can. If not, I’ll seeyou on the Hogwarts Express on September first!

Love from

Page | 12 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione

PS. Ron says Percy’s Head Boy. I’ll bet Percy’s reallypleased.

Ron doesn’t seem too happy about it.

Harry laughed as he put Hermione’s letter aside andpicked up her present. It was very heavy. KnowingHermione, he was sure it would be a large book full ofvery difficult spells — but it wasn’t. His heart gave ahuge bound as he ripped back the paper and saw asleek black leather case, with silver words stampedacross it, reading Broomstick Servicing Kit.

“Wow, Hermione!” Harry whispered, unzipping thecase to look inside.

There was a large jar of Fleetwood’s High-FinishHandle Polish, a pair of gleaming silver Tail-TwigClippers, a tiny brass compass to clip on your broomfor long journeys, and a Handbook of Do-It-YourselfBroomcare.

Apart from his friends, the thing that Harry missedmost about Hogwarts was Quidditch, the mostpopular sport in the magical world — highlydangerous, very exciting, and played on broomsticks.Harry happened to be a very good Quidditch player;he had been the youngest person in a century to bepicked for one of the Hogwarts House teams. One ofHarry’s most prized possessions was his Nimbus TwoThousand racing broom.

Harry put the leather case aside and picked up hislast parcel. He recognized the untidy scrawl on thebrown paper at once: this was from Hagrid, theHogwarts gamekeeper. He tore off the top layer ofpaper and glimpsed something green and leathery,Page | 13 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

but before he could unwrap it properly, the parcelgave a strange quiver, and whatever was inside itsnapped loudly — as though it had jaws.

Harry froze. He knew that Hagrid would never sendhim anything dangerous on purpose, but then,

Hagrid didn’t have a normal person’s view of whatwas dangerous. Hagrid had been known to befriendgiant spiders, buy vicious, three-headed dogs frommen in pubs, and sneak illegal dragon eggs into hiscabin.

Harry poked the parcel nervously. It snapped loudlyagain. Harry reached for the lamp on his bedsidetable, gripped it firmly in one hand, and raised it overhis head, ready to strike. Then he seized the rest ofthe wrapping paper in his other hand and pulled.

And out fell — a book. Harry just had time to registerits handsome green cover, emblazoned with thegolden title The Monster Book of Monsters, before itflipped onto its edge and scuttled sideways along thebed like some weird crab.

“Uh-oh,” Harry muttered.

The book toppled off the bed with a loud clunk andshuffled rapidly across the room. Harry followed itstealthily. The book was hiding in the dark spaceunder his desk. Praying that the Dursleys were stillfast asleep, Harry got down on his hands and kneesand reached toward it.

“Ouch!”

The book snapped shut on his hand and then flappedpast him, still scuttling on its covers. Harryscrambled around, threw himself forward, and

Page | 14 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

managed to flatten it. Uncle Vernon gave a loud,sleepy grunt in the room next door.

Hedwig and Errol watched interestedly as Harryclamped the struggling book tightly in his arms,hurried to his chest of drawers, and pulled out a belt,which he buckled tightly around it. The Monster Bookshuddered angrily, but could no longer flap and snap,so Harry threw it down on the bed and reached forHagrid’s card.

Dear Harry,

Happy birthday!

Think you might find this useful for next year.

Won’t say no more here. Tell you when I see you.

Hope the Muggles are treating you right.

All the best,

Hagrid

It struck Harry as ominous that Hagrid thought abiting book would come in useful, but he put Hagrid’scard up next to Ron’s and Hermione’s, grinning morebroadly than ever. Now there was only the letter fromHogwarts left.

Noticing that it was rather thicker than usual, Harryslit open the envelope, pulled out the first page ofparchment within, and read:

Dear Mr. Potter,

Please note that the new school year will begin onSeptember the first. The Hogwarts Express will leave

Page | 15 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

from King’s Cross station, platform nine and three-quarters, at eleven o’clock.

Third years are permitted to visit the village ofHogsmeade on certain weekends. Please give theenclosed permission form to your parent or guardian tosign.

A list of books for next year is enclosed.

Yours sincerely,

Professor M. McGonagallDeputy Headmistress

Harry pulled out the Hogsmeade permission form andlooked at it, no longer grinning. It would be wonderfulto visit Hogsmeade on weekends; he knew it was anentirely wizarding village, and he had never set footthere. But how on earth was he going to persuadeUncle Vernon or Aunt Petunia to sign the form?

He looked over at the alarm clock. It was now twoo’clock in the morning.

Deciding that he’d worry about the Hogsmeade formwhen he woke up, Harry got back into bed andreached up to cross off another day on the chart he’dmade for himself, counting down the days left untilhis return to Hogwarts. Then he took off his glassesand lay down, eyes open, facing his three birthdaycards.

Extremely unusual though he was, at that momentHarry Potter felt just like everyone else — glad, for thefirst time in his life, that it was his birthday.

Page | 16 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



AUNT MARGE’S BIG MISTAKE

Harry went down to breakfast the next morning tofind the three Dursleys already sitting around thekitchen table. They were watching a brand-newtelevision, a welcome-home-for-the-summer presentfor Dudley, who had been complaining loudly aboutthe long walk between the fridge and the television inthe living room. Dudley had spent most of thesummer in the kitchen, his piggy little eyes fixed onthe screen and his five chins wobbling as he atecontinually.

Harry sat down between Dudley and Uncle Vernon, alarge, beefy man with very little neck and a lot ofmustache. Far from wishing Harry a happy birthday,none of the Dursleys made any sign that they hadnoticed Harry enter the room, but Harry was far tooused to this to care. He helped himself to a piece oftoast and then looked up at the reporter on thetelevision, who was halfway through a report on anescaped convict:

Page | 17 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

"... The public is warned that Black is armed andextremely dangerous. A special hot line has been setup, and any sighting of Black should be reportedimmediately.”

“No need to tell us he’s no good,” snorted UncleVernon, staring over the top of his newspaper at theprisoner. “Look at the state of him, the filthylayabout! Look at his hair!”

He shot a nasty look sideways at Harry, whose untidyhair had always been a source of great annoyance toUncle Vernon. Compared to the man on thetelevision, however, whose gaunt face wassurrounded by a matted, elbow-length tangle, Harryfelt very well groomed indeed.

The reporter had reappeared.

“The Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries willannounce today —”

“Hang on!” barked Uncle Vernon, staring furiously atthe reporter. “You didn’t tell us where that maniac’sescaped from! What use is that? Lunatic could becoming up the street right now!”

Aunt Petunia, who was bony and horse-faced,whipped around and peered intently out of thekitchen window. Harry knew Aunt Petunia wouldsimply love to be the one to call the hot line number.She was the nosiest woman in the world and spentmost of her life spying on the boring, law-abidingneighbors.

“When will they learn,” said Uncle Vernon, poundingthe table with his large purple fist, “that hanging’s theonly way to deal with these people?”

Page | 18 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Very true,” said Aunt Petunia, who was stillsquinting into next door’s runner beans.

Uncle Vernon drained his teacup, glanced at hiswatch, and added, “I’d better be off in a minute,Petunia. Marge’s train gets in at ten.”

Harry, whose thoughts had been upstairs with theBroomstick Servicing Kit, was brought back to earthwith an unpleasant bump.

“Aunt Marge?” he blurted out. “Sh — she’s notcoming here, is she?”

Aunt Marge was Uncle Vernon’s sister. Even thoughshe was not a blood relative of Harry’s (whose motherhad been Aunt Petunia’s sister), he had been forced tocall her “Aunt” all his life. Aunt Marge lived in thecountry, in a house with a large garden, where shebred bulldogs. She didn’t often stay at Privet Drive,because she couldn’t bear to leave her precious dogs,but each of her visits stood out horribly vividly inHarry’s mind.

At Dudley’s fifth birthday party, Aunt Marge hadwhacked Harry around the shins with her walkingstick to stop him from beating Dudley at musicalstatues. A few years later, she had turned up atChristmas with a computerized robot for Dudley anda box of dog biscuits for Harry. On her last visit, theyear before Harry started at Hogwarts, Harry hadaccidentally trodden on the tail of her favorite dog.Ripper had chased Harry out into the garden and upa tree, and Aunt Marge had refused to call him offuntil past midnight. The memory of this incident stillbrought tears of laughter to Dudley’s eyes.

“Marge’ll be here for a week,” Uncle Vernon snarled,“and while we’re on the subject” — he pointed a fat

Page | 19 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

finger threateningly at Harry — “we need to get a fewthings straight before I go and collect her.”

Dudley smirked and withdrew his gaze from thetelevision. Watching Harry being bullied by UncleVernon was Dudley’s favorite form of entertainment.

“Firstly,” growled Uncle Vernon, “you’ll keep a civiltongue in your head when you’re talking to Marge.”

“All right,” said Harry bitterly, “if she does when she’stalking to me.”

“Secondly,” said Uncle Vernon, acting as though hehad not heard Harry’s reply, “as Marge doesn’t knowanything about your abnormality, I don’t want any —any funny stuff while she’s here. You behave yourself,got me?”

“I will if she does,” said Harry through gritted teeth.

“And thirdly,” said Uncle Vernon, his mean little eyesnow slits in his great purple face, “we’ve told Margeyou attend St. Brutus’s Secure Center for IncurablyCriminal Boys.”

“What?” Harry yelled.

“And you’ll be sticking to that story, boy, or there’ll betrouble,” spat Uncle Vernon.

Harry sat there, white-faced and furious, staring atUncle Vernon, hardly able to believe it. Aunt Margecoming for a week-long visit — it was the worstbirthday present the Dursleys had ever given him,including that pair of Uncle Vernon’s old socks.

Page | 20 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Well, Petunia,” said Uncle Vernon, getting heavily tohis feet, “111 be off to the station, then. Want to comealong for the ride, Dudders?”

“No,” said Dudley, whose attention had returned tothe television now that Uncle Vernon had finishedthreatening Harry.

“Duddy’s got to make himself smart for his auntie,”said Aunt Petunia, smoothing Dudley’s thick blondhair. “Mummy’s bought him a lovely new bow tie.”

Uncle Vernon clapped Dudley on his porky shoulder.

“See you in a bit, then,” he said, and he left thekitchen.

Harry, who had been sitting in a kind of horrifiedtrance, had a sudden idea. Abandoning his toast, hegot quickly to his feet and followed Uncle Vernon tothe front door.

Uncle Vernon was pulling on his car coat.

“I’m not taking you,” he snarled as he turned to seeHarry watching him.

“Like I wanted to come,” said Harry coldly. “I want toask you something.”

Uncle Vernon eyed him suspiciously.

“Third years at Hog — at my school are allowed tovisit the village sometimes,” said Harry.

“So?” snapped Uncle Vernon, taking his car keys froma hook next to the door.

Page | 21 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I need you to sign the permission form,” said Harryin a rush.

“And why should I do that?” sneered Uncle Vernon.

“Well,” said Harry, choosing his words carefully, “it’llbe hard work, pretending to Aunt Marge I go to thatSt. Whatsits —”

“St. Brutus’s Secure Center for Incurably CriminalBoys!” bellowed Uncle Vernon, and Harry was pleasedto hear a definite note of panic in Uncle Vernon’svoice.

“Exactly,” said Harry, looking calmly up into UncleVernon’s large, purple face. “It’s a lot to remember. I’llhave to make it sound convincing, won’t I? What if Iaccidentally let something slip?”

“You’ll get the stuffing knocked out of you, won’t you?”roared Uncle Vernon, advancing on Harry with his fistraised. But Harry stood his ground.

“Knocking the stuffing out of me won’t make AuntMarge forget what I could tell her,” he said grimly.

Uncle Vernon stopped, his fist still raised, his face anugly puce.

“But if you sign my permission form,” Harry went onquickly, “I swear I’ll remember where I’m supposed togo to school, and I’ll act like a Mug — like I’m normaland everything.”

Harry could tell that Uncle Vernon was thinking itover, even if his teeth were bared and a vein wasthrobbing in his temple.

Page | 22 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Right,” he snapped finally. “I shall monitor yourbehavior carefully during Marge’s visit. If, at the endof it, you’ve toed the line and kept to the story, I’llsign your ruddy form.”

He wheeled around, pulled open the front door, andslammed it so hard that one of the little panes ofglass at the top fell out.

Harry didn’t return to the kitchen. He went backupstairs to his bedroom. If he was going to act like areal Muggle, he’d better start now. Slowly and sadlyhe gathered up all his presents and his birthdaycards and hid them under the loose floorboard withhis homework. Then he went to Hedwig’s cage. Errolseemed to have recovered; he and Hedwig were bothasleep, heads under their wings. Harry sighed, thenpoked them both awake.

“Hedwig,” he said gloomily, “you’re going to have toclear off for a week. Go with Errol. Ron’ll look afteryou. I’ll write him a note, explaining. And don’t look atme like that” — Hedwig’s large amber eyes werereproachful — “it’s not my fault. It’s the only way I’llbe allowed to visit Hogsmeade with Ron andHermione.”

Ten minutes later, Errol and Hedwig (who had a noteto Ron bound to her leg) soared out of the windowand out of sight. Harry, now feeling thoroughlymiserable, put the empty cage away inside thewardrobe.

But Harry didn’t have long to brood. In next to notime, Aunt Petunia was shrieking up the stairs forHarry to come down and get ready to welcome theirguest.

Page | 23 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Do something about your hair!” Aunt Petuniasnapped as he reached the hall.

Harry couldn’t see the point of trying to make his hairlie flat. Aunt Marge loved criticizing him, so theuntidier he looked, the happier she would be.

All too soon, there was a crunch of gravel outside asUncle Vernon’s car pulled back into the driveway,then the clunk of the car doors and footsteps on thegarden path.

“Get the door!” Aunt Petunia hissed at Harry.

A feeling of great gloom in his stomach, Harry pulledthe door open.

On the threshold stood Aunt Marge. She was very likeUncle Vernon: large, beefy, and purple-faced, sheeven had a mustache, though not as bushy as his. Inone hand she held an enormous suitcase, and tuckedunder the other was an old and evil-temperedbulldog.

“Where’s my Dudders?” roared Aunt Marge. “Where’smy neffy-poo?”

Dudley came waddling down the hall, his blond hairplastered flat to his fat head, a bow tie just visibleunder his many chins. Aunt Marge thrust thesuitcase into Harry’s stomach, knocking the wind outof him, seized Dudley in a tight one-armed hug, andplanted a large kiss on his cheek.

Harry knew perfectly well that Dudley only put upwith Aunt Marge’s hugs because he was well paid forit, and sure enough, when they broke apart, Dudleyhad a crisp twenty-pound note clutched in his fat fist.

Page | 24 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Petunia!” shouted Aunt Marge, striding past Harry asthough he was a hat stand. Aunt Marge and AuntPetunia kissed, or rather, Aunt Marge bumped herlarge jaw against Aunt Petunia’s bony cheekbone.

Uncle Vernon now came in, smiling jovially as he shutthe door.

“Tea, Marge?” he said. “And what will Ripper take?”

“Ripper can have some tea out of my saucer,” saidAunt Marge as they all proceeded into the kitchen,leaving Harry alone in the hall with the suitcase. ButHarry wasn’t complaining; any excuse not to be withAunt Marge was fine by him, so he began to heave thecase upstairs into the spare bedroom, taking as longas he could.

By the time he got back to the kitchen, Aunt Margehad been supplied with tea and fruitcake, and Ripperwas lapping noisily in the corner. Harry saw AuntPetunia wince slightly as specks of tea and droolflecked her clean floor. Aunt Petunia hated animals.

“Who’s looking after the other dogs, Marge?” UncleVernon asked.

“Oh, I’ve got Colonel Fubster managing them,”boomed Aunt Marge. “He’s retired now, good for himto have something to do. But I couldn’t leave poor oldRipper. He pines if he’s away from me.”

Ripper began to growl again as Harry sat down. Thisdirected Aunt Marge’s attention to Harry for the firsttime.

“So!” she barked. “Still here, are you?”

“Yes,” said Harry.

Page | 25 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t you say ‘yes’ in that ungrateful tone,” AuntMarge growled. “It’s damn good of Vernon andPetunia to keep you. Wouldn’t have done it myself.You’d have gone straight to an orphanage if you’dbeen dumped on my doorstep.”

Harry was bursting to say that he’d rather live in anorphanage than with the Dursleys, but the thought ofthe Hogsmeade form stopped him. He forced his faceinto a painful smile.

“Don’t you smirk at me!” boomed Aunt Marge. “I cansee you haven’t improved since I last saw you. I hopedschool would knock some manners into you.” Shetook a large gulp of tea, wiped her mustache, andsaid, “Where is it that you send him, again, Vernon?”

“St. Brutus’s,” said Uncle Vernon promptly. “It’s afirst-rate institution for hopeless cases.”

“I see,” said Aunt Marge. “Do they use the cane at St.Brutus’s, boy?” she barked across the table.

“Er —”

Uncle Vernon nodded curtly behind Aunt Marge’sback.

“Yes,” said Harry. Then, feeling he might as well dothe thing properly, he added, “all the time.”

“Excellent,” said Aunt Marge. “I won’t have thisnamby-pamby, wishy-washy nonsense about nothitting people who deserve it. A good thrashing iswhat’s needed in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred.Have you been beaten often?”

“Oh, yeah,” said Harry, “loads of times.”

Page | 26 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Aunt Marge narrowed her eyes.

“I still don’t like your tone, boy,” she said. “If you canspeak of your beatings in that casual way, theyclearly aren’t hitting you hard enough. Petunia, I’dwrite if I were you. Make it clear that you approve theuse of extreme force in this boy’s case.”

Perhaps Uncle Vernon was worried that Harry mightforget their bargain; in any case, he changed thesubject abruptly.

“Heard the news this morning, Marge? What aboutthat escaped prisoner, eh?”

As Aunt Marge started to make herself at home, Harrycaught himself thinking almost longingly of life atnumber four without her. Uncle Vernon and AuntPetunia usually encouraged Harry to stay out of theirway, which Harry was only too happy to do. AuntMarge, on the other hand, wanted Harry under hereye at all times, so that she could boom outsuggestions for his improvement. She delighted incomparing Harry with Dudley, and took hugepleasure in buying Dudley expensive presents whileglaring at Harry, as though daring him to ask why hehadn’t got a present too. She also kept throwing outdark hints about what made Harry such anunsatisfactory person.

“You mustn’t blame yourself for the way the boy’sturned out, Vernon,” she said over lunch on the thirdday. “If there’s something rotten on the inside, there’snothing anyone can do about it.”

Harry tried to concentrate on his food, but his handsshook and his face was starting to burn with anger.Remember the form, he told himself. Think aboutHogsmeade. Don’t say anything. Don’t rise —

Page | 27 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Aunt Marge reached for her glass of wine.

“It’s one of the basic rules of breeding,” she said. “Yousee it all the time with dogs. If there’s somethingwrong with the bitch, there’ll be something wrongwith the pup —”

At that moment, the wineglass Aunt Marge washolding exploded in her hand. Shards of glass flew inevery direction and Aunt Marge sputtered andblinked, her great ruddy face dripping.

“Marge!” squealed Aunt Petunia. “Marge, are you allright?”

“Not to worry,” grunted Aunt Marge, mopping her facewith her napkin. “Must have squeezed it too hard. Didthe same thing at Colonel Fubster’s the other day. Noneed to fuss, Petunia, I have a very firm grip ...”

But Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon were bothlooking at Harry suspiciously, so he decided he’dbetter skip dessert and escape from the table as soonas he could.

Outside in the hall, he leaned against the wall,breathing deeply. It had been a long time since he’dlost control and made something explode. He couldn’tafford to let it happen again. The Hogsmeade formwasn’t the only thing at stake — if he carried on likethat, he’d be in trouble with the Ministry of Magic.

Harry was still an underage wizard, and he wasforbidden by wizard law to do magic outside school.His record wasn’t exactly clean either. Only lastsummer he’d gotten an official warning that hadstated quite clearly that if the Ministry got wind ofany more magic in Privet Drive, Harry would faceexpulsion from Hogwarts.

Page | 28 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He heard the Dursleys leaving the table and hurriedupstairs out of the way.

Harry got through the next three days by forcinghimself to think about his Handbook of Do-It-YourselfBroomcare whenever Aunt Marge started on him. Thisworked quite well, though it seemed to give him aglazed look, because Aunt Marge started voicing theopinion that he was mentally subnormal.

At last, at long last, the final evening of Marge’s stayarrived. Aunt Petunia cooked a fancy dinner andUncle Vernon uncorked several bottles of wine. Theygot all the way through the soup and the salmonwithout a single mention of Harry’s faults; during thelemon meringue pie, Uncle Vernon bored them allwith a long talk about Grunnings, his drill-makingcompany; then Aunt Petunia made coffee and UncleVernon brought out a bottle of brandy.

“Can I tempt you, Marge?”

Aunt Marge had already had quite a lot of wine. Herhuge face was very red.

“Just a small one, then,” she chuckled. “A bit morethan that ... and a bit more ... that’s the ticket.”

Dudley was eating his fourth slice of pie. AuntPetunia was sipping coffee with her little fingersticking out. Harry really wanted to disappear into hisbedroom, but he met Uncle Vernon’s angry little eyesand knew he would have to sit it out.

“Aah,” said Aunt Marge, smacking her lips andputting the empty brandy glass back down. “Excellentnosh, Petunia. It’s normally just a fry-up for me of anevening, with twelve dogs to look after. ...” Sheburped richly and patted her great tweed stomach.Page | 29 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Pardon me. But I do like to see a healthy-sized boy,”she went on, winking at Dudley. “You’ll be a proper-sized man, Dudders, like your father. Yes, I’ll have aspot more brandy, Vernon. ...”

“Now, this one here —”

She jerked her head at Harry, who felt his stomachclench. The Handbook, he thought quickly.

“This one’s got a mean, runty look about him. You getthat with dogs. I had Colonel Fubster drown one lastyear. Ratty little thing it was. Weak. Underbred.”

Harry was trying to remember page twelve of hisbook: A Charm to Cure Reluctant Reversers.

“It all comes down to blood, as I was saying the otherday. Bad blood will out. Now, I’m saying nothingagainst your family, Petunia” — she patted AuntPetunia’s bony hand with her shovellike one — “butyour sister was a bad egg. They turn up in the bestfamilies. Then she ran off with a wastrel and here’sthe result right in front of us.”

Harry was staring at his plate, a funny ringing in hisears. Grasp your broom firmly by the tail, he thought.But he couldn’t remember what came next. AuntMarge’s voice seemed to be boring into him like one ofUncle Vernon’s drills.

“This Potter,” said Aunt Marge loudly, seizing thebrandy bottle and splashing more into her glass andover the tablecloth, “you never told me what he did?”

Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petunia were lookingextremely tense. Dudley had even looked up from hispie to gape at his parents.

Page | 30 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“He — didn’t work,” said Uncle Vernon, with half aglance at Harry. “Unemployed.”

“As I expected!” said Aunt Marge, taking a huge swigof brandy and wiping her chin on her sleeve. “A no-account, good-for-nothing, lazy scrounger who —”

“He was not,” said Harry suddenly. The table wentvery quiet. Harry was shaking all over. He had neverfelt so angry in his life.

“MORE BRANDY!” yelled Uncle Vernon, who had gonevery white. He emptied the bottle into Aunt Marge’sglass. “You, boy,” he snarled at Harry. “Go to bed, goon —”

“No, Vernon,” hiccuped Aunt Marge, holding up ahand, her tiny bloodshot eyes fixed on Harry’s. “Goon, boy, go on. Proud of your parents, are you? Theygo and get themselves killed in a car crash (drunk, Iexpect) —”

“They didn’t die in a car crash!” said Harry, whofound himself on his feet.

“They died in a car crash, you nasty little liar, and leftyou to be a burden on their decent, hardworkingrelatives!” screamed Aunt Marge, swelling with fury.“You are an insolent, ungrateful little —”

But Aunt Marge suddenly stopped speaking. For amoment, it looked as though words had failed her.

She seemed to be swelling with inexpressible anger —but the swelling didn’t stop. Her great red face startedto expand, her tiny eyes bulged, and her mouthstretched too tightly for speech — next second,several buttons had just burst from her tweed jacketand pinged off the walls — she was inflating like amonstrous balloon, her stomach bursting free of herPage | 31 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

tweed waistband, each of her fingers blowing up like asalami —

“MARGE!” yelled Uncle Vernon and Aunt Petuniatogether as Aunt Marge’s whole body began to rise offher chair toward the ceiling. She was entirely round,now, like a vast life buoy with piggy eyes, and herhands and feet stuck out weirdly as she drifted upinto the air, making apoplectic popping noises. Rippercame skidding into the room, barking madly.

“NOOOOOOO!”

Uncle Vernon seized one of Marge’s feet and tried topull her down again, but was almost lifted from thefloor himself. A second later, Ripper leapt forward andsank his teeth into Uncle Vernon’s leg.

Harry tore from the dining room before anyone couldstop him, heading for the cupboard under the stairs.The cupboard door burst magically open as hereached it. In seconds, he had heaved his trunk to thefront door. He sprinted upstairs and threw himselfunder the bed, wrenching up the loose floorboard,and grabbed the pillowcase full of his books andbirthday presents. He wriggled out, seized Hedwig’sempty cage, and dashed back downstairs to histrunk, just as Uncle Vernon burst out of the diningroom, his trouser leg in bloody tatters.

“COME BACK IN HERE!” he bellowed. “COME BACKAND PUT HER RIGHT!”

But a reckless rage had come over Harry. He kickedhis trunk open, pulled out his wand, and pointed it atUncle Vernon.

“She deserved it,” Harry said, breathing very fast.

“She deserved what she got. You keep away from me.”

Page | 32 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He fumbled behind him for the latch on the door.

“I’m going,” Harry said. “I’ve had enough.”

And in the next moment, he was out in the dark,quiet street, heaving his heavy trunk behind him,Hedwig’s cage under his arm.

Page | 33 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



THE KNIGHT BUS

Harry was several streets away before he collapsedonto a low wall in Magnolia Crescent, panting fromthe effort of dragging his trunk. He sat quite still,anger still surging through him, listening to thefrantic thumping of his heart.

But after ten minutes alone in the dark street, a newemotion overtook him: panic. Whichever way helooked at it, he had never been in a worse fix. He wasstranded, quite alone, in the dark Muggle world, withabsolutely nowhere to go. And the worst of it was, hehad just done serious magic, which meant that hewas almost certainly expelled from Hogwarts. He hadbroken the Decree for the Restriction of UnderageWizardry so badly, he was surprised Ministry of Magicrepresentatives weren’t swooping down on him wherehe sat.

Harry shivered and looked up and down MagnoliaCrescent. What was going to happen to him? Wouldhe be arrested, or would he simply be outlawed fromthe wizarding world? He thought of Ron and

Page | 34 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione, and his heart sank even lower. Harry wassure that, criminal or not, Ron and Hermione wouldwant to help him now, but they were both abroad,and with Hedwig gone, he had no means of contactingthem.

He didn’t have any Muggle money, either. There was alittle wizard gold in the money bag at the bottom ofhis trunk, but the rest of the fortune his parents hadleft him was stored in a vault at Gringotts WizardingBank in London. He’d never be able to drag his trunkall the way to London. Unless ...

He looked down at his wand, which he was stillclutching in his hand. If he was already expelled (hisheart was now thumping painfully fast), a bit moremagic couldn’t hurt. He had the Invisibility Cloak hehad inherited from his father — what if he bewitchedthe trunk to make it feather-light, tied it to hisbroomstick, covered himself in the cloak, and flew toLondon? Then he could get the rest of his money outof his vault and ... begin his life as an outcast. It wasa horrible prospect, but he couldn’t sit on this wallforever, or he’d find himself trying to explain toMuggle police why he was out in the dead of nightwith a trunkful of spellbooks and a broomstick.

Harry opened his trunk again and pushed thecontents aside, looking for the Invisibility Cloak —but before he had found it, he straightened upsuddenly, looking around him once more.

A funny prickling on the back of his neck had madeHarry feel he was being watched, but the streetappeared to be deserted, and no lights shone fromany of the large square houses.

He bent over his trunk again, but almost immediatelystood up once more, his hand clenched on his wand.

Page | 35 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He had sensed rather than heard it: someone orsomething was standing in the narrow gap betweenthe garage and the fence behind him. Harry squintedat the black alleyway. If only it would move, then he’dknow whether it was just a stray cat or — somethingelse.

“Lumos,” Harry muttered, and a light appeared at theend of his wand, almost dazzling him. He held it highover his head, and the pebble-dashed walls of numbertwo suddenly sparkled; the garage door gleamed, andbetween them Harry saw, quite distinctly, the hulkingoutline of something very big, with wide, gleamingeyes.

Harry stepped backward. His legs hit his trunk andhe tripped. His wand flew out of his hand as he flungout an arm to break his fall, and he landed, hard, inthe gutter —

There was a deafening BANG, and Harry threw up hishands to shield his eyes against a sudden blindinglight —

With a yell, he rolled back onto the pavement, just intime. A second later, a gigantic pair of wheels andheadlights screeched to a halt exactly where Harryhad just been lying. They belonged, as Harry sawwhen he raised his head, to a triple-decker, violentlypurple bus, which had appeared out of thin air. Goldlettering over the windshield spelled The Knight Bus.

For a split second, Harry wondered if he had beenknocked silly by his fall. Then a conductor in a purpleuniform leapt out of the bus and began to speakloudly to the night.

“Welcome to the Knight Bus, emergency transport forthe stranded witch or wizard. Just stick out your

Page | 36 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

wand hand, step on board, and we can take youanywhere you want to go. My name is Stan Shunpike,and I will be your conductor this eve —”

The conductor stopped abruptly. He had just caughtsight of Harry, who was still sitting on the ground.Harry snatched up his wand again and scrambled tohis feet. Close up, he saw that Stan Shunpike wasonly a few years older than he was, eighteen ornineteen at most, with large, protruding ears andquite a few pimples.

“What were you doin’ down there?” said Stan,dropping his professional manner.

“Fell over,” said Harry.

“ ’Choo fall over for?” sniggered Stan.

“I didn’t do it on purpose,” said Harry, annoyed. Oneof the knees in his jeans was torn, and the hand hehad thrown out to break his fall was bleeding. Hesuddenly remembered why he had fallen over andturned around quickly to stare at the alleywaybetween the garage and fence. The Knight Bus’sheadlamps were flooding it with light, and it wasempty.

“ ’Choo lookin’ at?” said Stan.

“There was a big black thing,” said Harry, pointinguncertainly into the gap. “Like a dog ... but massive

He looked around at Stan, whose mouth was slightlyopen. With a feeling of unease, Harry saw Stan’s eyesmove to the scar on Harry’s forehead.

“Woss that on your ’ead?” said Stan abruptly.

Page | 37 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Nothing,” said Harry quickly, flattening his hair overhis scar. If the Ministry of Magic was looking for him,he didn’t want to make it too easy for them.

“Woss your name?” Stan persisted.

“Neville Longbottom,” said Harry, saying the firstname that came into his head. “So — so this bus,” hewent on quickly, hoping to distract Stan, “did you sayit goes anywhere?”

“Yep,” said Stan proudly, “anywhere you like, long’sit’s on land. Can’t do nuffink underwater. ’Ere,” hesaid, looking suspicious again, “you did flag us down,dincha? Stuck out your wand ’and, dincha?”

“Yes,” said Harry quickly. “Listen, how much would itbe to get to London?”

“Eleven Sickles,” said Stan, “but for firteen you get ’otchocolate, and for fifteen you get an ’ot water bottlean’ a toofbrush in the color of your choice.”

Harry rummaged once more in his trunk, extractedhis money bag, and shoved some gold into Stan’shand. He and Stan then lifted his trunk, withHedwig’s cage balanced on top, up the steps of thebus.

There were no seats; instead, half a dozen brassbedsteads stood beside the curtained windows.Candles were burning in brackets beside each bed,illuminating the wood-paneled walls. A tiny wizard ina nightcap at the rear of the bus muttered, “Not now,thanks, I’m pickling some slugs” and rolled over in hissleep.

“You ’ave this one,” Stan whispered, shoving Harry’strunk under the bed right behind the driver, who was

Page | 38 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

sitting in an armchair in front of the steering wheel.“This is our driver, Ernie Prang. This is NevilleLongbottom, Ern.”

Ernie Prang, an elderly wizard wearing very thickglasses, nodded to Harry, who nervously flattened hisbangs again and sat down on his bed.

“Take ’er away, Ern,” said Stan, sitting down in thearmchair next to Ernie’s.

There was another tremendous BANG, and the nextmoment Harry found himself flat on his bed, thrownbackward by the speed of the Knight Bus. Pullinghimself up, Harry stared out of the dark window andsaw that they were now bowling along a completelydifferent street. Stan was watching Harry’s stunnedface with great enjoyment.

“This is where we was before you flagged us down,” hesaid. “Where are we, Ern? Somewhere in Wales?”

“Ar,” said Ernie.

“How come the Muggles don’t hear the bus?” saidHarry.

“Them!” said Stan contemptuously. “Don’ listenproperly, do they? Don’ look properly either. Nevernotice nuffink, they don’.”

“Best go wake up Madam Marsh, Stan,” said Ern.“Well be in Abergavenny in a minute.”

Stan passed Harry’s bed and disappeared up anarrow wooden staircase. Harry was still looking outof the window, feeling increasingly nervous. Erniedidn’t seem to have mastered the use of a steeringwheel. The Knight Bus kept mounting the pavement,Page | 39 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

but it didn’t hit anything; lines of lampposts,mailboxes, and trash cans jumped out of its way as itapproached and back into position once it hadpassed.

Stan came back downstairs, followed by a faintlygreen witch wrapped in a traveling cloak.

“ ’Ere you go, Madam Marsh,” said Stan happily asErn stamped on the brake and the beds slid a foot orso toward the front of the bus. Madam Marshclamped a handkerchief to her mouth and tottereddown the steps. Stan threw her bag out after her andrammed the doors shut; there was another loudBANG, and they were thundering down a narrowcountry lane, trees leaping out of the way.

Harry wouldn’t have been able to sleep even if he hadbeen traveling on a bus that didn’t keep bangingloudly and jumping a hundred miles at a time. Hisstomach churned as he fell back to wondering whatwas going to happen to him, and whether theDursleys had managed to get Aunt Marge off theceiling yet.

Stan had unfurled a copy of the Daily Prophet andwas now reading with his tongue between his teeth. Alarge photograph of a sunken-faced man with long,matted hair blinked slowly at Harry from the frontpage. He looked strangely familiar.

“That man!” Harry said, forgetting his troubles for amoment. “He was on the Muggle news!”

Stanley turned to the front page and chuckled.

“Sirius Black,” he said, nodding. “ ’Course ’e was onthe Muggle news, Neville, where you been?”

Page | 40 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He gave a superior sort of chuckle at the blank lookon Harry’s face, removed the front page, and handedit to Harry.

“You oughta read the papers more, Neville.”

Harry held the paper up to the candlelight and read:BLACK STILL AT LARGE

Sirius Black, possibly the most infamous prisonerever to be held in Azkaban fortress, is still eludingcapture, the Ministry of Magic confirmed today.

“We are doing all we can to recapture Black,” said theMinister of Magic, Cornelius Fudge, this morning,

“and we beg the magical community to remain calm.”

Fudge has been criticized by some members of theInternational Federation of Warlocks for informing theMuggle Prime Minister of the crisis.

“Well, really, I had to, don’t you know,” said anirritable Fudge. “Black is mad. He’s a danger toanyone who crosses him, magic or Muggle. I have thePrime Minister’s assurance that he will not breathe aword of Black’s true identity to anyone. And let’s faceit— who’d believe him if he did?”

While Muggles have been told that Black is carrying agun (a kind of metal wand that Muggles use to killeach other), the magical community lives in fear of amassacre like that of twelve years ago, when Blackmurdered thirteen people with a single curse.

Harry looked into the shadowed eyes of Sirius Black,the only part of the sunken face that seemed alive.

Page | 41 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry had never met a vampire, but he had seenpictures of them in his Defense Against the Dark Artsclasses, and Black, with his waxy white skin, lookedjust like one.

“Scary-lookin’ fing, inee?” said Stan, who had beenwatching Harry read.

“He murdered thirteen people?” said Harry, handingthe page back to Stan, “with one curse?”

“Yep,” said Stan, “in front of witnesses an’ all. Broaddaylight. Big trouble it caused, dinnit, Ern?”

“Ar,” said Ern darkly.

Stan swiveled in his armchair, his hands on the back,the better to look at Harry.

“Black woz a big supporter of You-Know-’Oo,” he said.

“What, Voldemort?” said Harry, without thinking.

Even Stan’s pimples went white; Ern jerked thesteering wheel so hard that a whole farmhouse had tojump aside to avoid the bus.

“You outta your tree?” yelped Stan. “ ’Choo say ’isname for?”

“Sorry,” said Harry hastily. “Sorry, I — I forgot —”

“Forgot!” said Stan weakly. “Blimey, my ’eart’s goin’that fast...”

“So — so Black was a supporter of You-Know-Who?”Harry prompted apologetically.

Page | 42 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah,” said Stan, still rubbing his chest. “Yeah,that’s right. Very close to You-Know-’Oo, they say.Anyway, when little ’Arry Potter got the better of You-Know-’Oo —”

Harry nervously flattened his bangs down again.

“— all You-Know-’Oo’s supporters was tracked down,wasn’t they, Ern? Most of ’em knew it was all over,wiv You-Know-’Oo gone, and they came quiet. But notSirius Black. I ’eard he thought ’e’d be second-in-command once You-Know-’Oo ’ad taken over.

“Anyway, they cornered Black in the middle of a streetfull of Muggles an’ Black took out ’is wand and ’eblasted ’alf the street apart, an’ a wizard got it, an’ sodid a dozen Muggles what got in the way. ’Orrible, eh?An’ you know what Black did then?” Stan continuedin a dramatic whisper.

“What?” said Harry.

“Laughed,” said Stan. “Jus’ stood there an’ laughed.An’ when reinforcements from the Ministry of Magicgot there, ’e went wiv ’em quiet as anyfink, stilllaughing ’is ’ead off. ’Cos ’e’s mad, inee, Ern? Ineemad?”

“If he weren’t when he went to Azkaban, he will benow,” said Ern in his slow voice. “I’d blow meself upbefore I set foot in that place. Serves him right, mindyou ... after what he did. ...”

“They ’ad a job coverin’ it up, din’ they, Ern?” Stansaid. “ ’Ole street blown up an’ all them Mugglesdead. What was it they said ’ad ’appened, Ern?”

“Gas explosion,” grunted Ernie.

Page | 43 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“An’ now ’e’s out,” said Stan, examining thenewspaper picture of Black’s gaunt face again. “Neverbeen a breakout from Azkaban before, ’as there, Ern?Beats me ’ow ’e did it. Frightenin’, eh? Mind, I don’tfancy ’is chances against them Azkaban guards, eh,Ern?”

Ernie suddenly shivered.

“Talk about summat else, Stan, there’s a good lad.Them Azkaban guards give me the collywobbles.”

Stan put the paper away reluctantly, and Harryleaned against the window of the Knight Bus, feelingworse than ever. He couldn’t help imagining whatStan might be telling his passengers in a few nights’time.

“ ’Ear about that ’Arry Potter? Blew up ’is aunt! We’ad ’im ’ere on the Knight Bus, di’n’t we, Ern? ’E wastryin’ to run for it. ...”

He, Harry, had broken wizard law just like SiriusBlack. Was inflating Aunt Marge bad enough to landhim in Azkaban? Harry didn’t know anything aboutthe wizard prison, though everyone he’d ever heardspeak of it did so in the same fearful tone. Hagrid, theHogwarts gamekeeper, had spent two months thereonly last year. Harry wouldn’t soon forget the look ofterror on Hagrid’s face when he had been told wherehe was going, and Hagrid was one of the bravestpeople Harry knew.

The Knight Bus rolled through the darkness,scattering bushes and wastebaskets, telephonebooths and trees, and Harry lay, restless andmiserable, on his feather bed. After a while, Stanremembered that Harry had paid for hot chocolate,but poured it all over Harry’s pillow when the busPage | 44 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

moved abruptly from Anglesey to Aberdeen. One byone, wizards and witches in dressing gowns andslippers descended from the upper floors to leave thebus. They all looked very pleased to go.

Finally, Harry was the only passenger left.

“Right then, Neville,” said Stan, clapping his hands,“whereabouts in London?”

“Diagon Alley,” said Harry.

“Righto,” said Stan. “ ’Old tight, then ...”

BANG!

They were thundering along Charing Cross Road.Harry sat up and watched buildings and benchessqueezing themselves out of the Knight Bus’s way.

The sky was getting a little lighter. He would lie lowfor a couple of hours, go to Gringotts the moment itopened, then set off— where, he didn’t know.

Ern slammed on the brakes and the Knight Busskidded to a halt in front of a small and shabby-looking pub, the Leaky Cauldron, behind which laythe magical entrance to Diagon Alley.

“Thanks,” Harry said to Ern.

He jumped down the steps and helped Stan lower histrunk and Hedwig’s cage onto the pavement.

“Well,” said Harry. “ ’Bye then!”

But Stan wasn’t paying attention. Still standing in thedoorway to the bus, he was goggling at the shadowyentrance to the Leaky Cauldron.

Page | 45 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“There you are, Harry,” said a voice.

Before Harry could turn, he felt a hand on hisshoulder. At the same time, Stan shouted, “Blimey!Ern, come ’ere! Come ’ere!”

Harry looked up at the owner of the hand on hisshoulder and felt a bucketful of ice cascade into hisstomach — he had walked right into Cornelius Fudge,the Minister of Magic himself.

Stan leapt onto the pavement beside them.

“What didja call Neville, Minister?” he said excitedly.

Fudge, a portly little man in a long, pinstriped cloak,looked cold and exhausted.

“Neville?” he repeated, frowning. “This is HarryPotter.”

“I knew it!” Stan shouted gleefully. “Ern! Ern! Guess’oo Neville is, Ern! ’E’s ’Arry Potter! I can see ’is scar!”

“Yes,” said Fudge testily, “well, I’m very glad theKnight Bus picked Harry up, but he and I need tostep inside the Leaky Cauldron now ...”

Fudge increased the pressure on Harry’s shoulder,and Harry found himself being steered inside the pub.A stooping figure bearing a lantern appeared throughthe door behind the bar. It was Tom, the wizened,toothless landlord.

“You’ve got him, Minister!” said Tom. “Will you bewanting anything? Beer? Brandy?”

“Perhaps a pot of tea,” said Fudge, who still hadn’t letgo of Harry.

Page | 46 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

There was a loud scraping and puffing from behindthem, and Stan and Ern appeared, carrying Harry’strunk and Hedwig’s cage and looking aroundexcitedly.

“ ’Ow come you di’n’t tell us ’oo you are, eh, Neville?”said Stan, beaming at Harry, while Ernie’s owlish facepeered interestedly over Stan’s shoulder.

“And a private parlor, please, Tom,” said Fudgepointedly.

“ ’Bye,” Harry said miserably to Stan and Ern as Tombeckoned Fudge toward the passage that led from thebar.

“ ’Bye, Neville!” called Stan.

Fudge marched Harry along the narrow passage afterTom’s lantern, and then into a small parlor. Tomclicked his fingers, a fire burst into life in the grate,and he bowed himself out of the room.

“Sit down, Harry,” said Fudge, indicating a chair bythe fire.

Harry sat down, feeling goose bumps rising up hisarms despite the glow of the fire. Fudge took off hispinstriped cloak and tossed it aside, then hitched upthe trousers of his bottle-green suit and sat downopposite Harry.

“I am Cornelius Fudge, Harry. The Minister of Magic.”

Harry already knew this, of course; he had seenFudge once before, but as he had been wearing hisfather’s Invisibility Cloak at the time, Fudge wasn’t toknow that.

Page | 47 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Tom the innkeeper reappeared, wearing an apron overhis nightshirt and bearing a tray of tea and crumpets.He placed the tray on a table between Fudge andHarry and left the parlor, closing the door behindhim.

“Well, Harry,” said Fudge, pouring out tea, “you’vehad us all in a right flap, I don’t mind telling you.Running away from your aunt and uncle’s house likethat! I’d started to think ... but you’re safe, and that’swhat matters.”

Fudge buttered himself a crumpet and pushed theplate toward Harry.

“Eat, Harry, you look dead on your feet. Now then ...You will be pleased to hear that we have dealt withthe unfortunate blowing-up of Miss Marjorie Dursley.Two members of the Accidental Magic Reversal Squadwere dispatched to Privet Drive a few hours ago. MissDursley has been punctured and her memory hasbeen modified. She has no recollection of the incidentat all. So that’s that, and no harm done.”

Fudge smiled at Harry over the rim of his teacup,rather like an uncle surveying a favorite nephew.Harry, who couldn’t believe his ears, opened hismouth to speak, couldn’t think of anything to say,and closed it again.

“Ah, you’re worrying about the reaction of your auntand uncle?” said Fudge. “Well, I won’t deny that theyare extremely angry, Harry, but they are prepared totake you back next summer as long as you stay atHogwarts for the Christmas and Easter holidays.”

Harry unstuck his throat.

Page | 48 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I always stay at Hogwarts for the Christmas andEaster holidays,” he said, “and I don’t ever want to goback to Privet Drive.”

“Now, now, I’m sure you’ll feel differently once you’vecalmed down,” said Fudge in a worried tone. “Theyare your family, after all, and I’m sure you are fond ofeach other — er — very deep down.”

It didn’t occur to Harry to put Fudge right. He wasstill waiting to hear what was going to happen to himnow.

“So all that remains,” said Fudge, now butteringhimself a second crumpet, “is to decide where you’regoing to spend the last three weeks of your vacation. Isuggest you take a room here at the Leaky Cauldronand —”

“Hang on,” blurted Harry. “What about mypunishment?”

Fudge blinked.

“Punishment?”

“I broke the law!” Harry said. “The Decree for theRestriction of Underage Wizardry!”

“Oh, my dear boy, we’re not going to punish you for alittle thing like that!” cried Fudge, waving his crumpetimpatiently. “It was an accident! We don’t send peopleto Azkaban just for blowing up their aunts!”

But this didn’t tally at all with Harry’s past dealingswith the Ministry of Magic.

“Last year, I got an official warning just because ahouse-elf smashed a pudding in my uncle’s house!”

Page | 49 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

he told Fudge, frowning. “The Ministry of Magic saidI’d be expelled from Hogwarts if there was any moremagic there!”

Unless Harry’s eyes were deceiving him, Fudge wassuddenly looking awkward.

“Circumstances change, Harry. ... We have to takeinto account ... in the present climate ... Surely youdon’t want to be expelled?”

“Of course I don’t,” said Harry.

“Well then, what’s all the fuss about?” laughed Fudge.“Now, have a crumpet, Harry, while I go and see ifTom’s got a room for you.”

Fudge strode out of the parlor and Harry stared afterhim. There was something extremely odd going on.Why had Fudge been waiting for him at the LeakyCauldron, if not to punish him for what he’d done?And now Harry came to think of it, surely it wasn’tusual for the Minister of Magic himself to get involvedin matters of underage magic?

Fudge came back, accompanied by Tom theinnkeeper.

“Room eleven’s free, Harry,” said Fudge. “I think you’llbe very comfortable. Just one thing, and I’m sureyou’ll understand ... I don’t want you wandering offinto Muggle London, all right? Keep to Diagon Alley.And you’re to be back here before dark each night.Sure you’ll understand. Tom will be keeping an eye onyou for me.”

“Okay,” said Harry slowly, “but why — ?”

Page | 50 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t want to lose you again, do we?” said Fudgewith a hearty laugh. “No, no ... best we know whereyou are. ... I mean ...”

Fudge cleared his throat loudly and picked up hispinstriped cloak.

“Well, I’ll be off, plenty to do, you know. ...”

“Have you had any luck with Black yet?” Harry asked.

Fudge’s finger slipped on the silver fastenings of hiscloak.

“What’s that? Oh, you’ve heard — well, no, not yet,but it’s only a matter of time. The Azkaban guardshave never yet failed ... and they are angrier than I’veever seen them.”

Fudge shuddered slightly.

“So, I’ll say good-bye.”

He held out his hand and Harry, shaking it, had asudden idea.

“Er — Minister? Can I ask you something?”

“Certainly,” said Fudge with a smile.

“Well, third years at Hogwarts are allowed to visitHogsmeade, but my aunt and uncle didn’t sign thepermission form. D’you think you could — ?”

Fudge was looking uncomfortable.

“Ah,” he said. “No, no, I’m very sorry, Harry, but asI’m not your parent or guardian —”

Page | 51 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“But you’re the Minister of Magic,” said Harry eagerly.“If you gave me permission —”

“No, I’m sorry, Harry, but rules are rules,” said Fudgeflatly. “Perhaps you’ll be able to visit Hogsmeade nextyear. In fact, I think it’s best if you don’t ... yes ...well, I’ll be off. Enjoy your stay, Harry.”

And with a last smile and shake of Harry’s hand,Fudge left the room. Tom now moved forward,beaming at Harry.

“If you’ll follow me, Mr. Potter,” he said, “I’ve alreadytaken your things up. ...”

Harry followed Tom up a handsome wooden staircaseto a door with a brass number eleven on it, whichTom unlocked and opened for him.

Inside was a very comfortable-looking bed, somehighly polished oak furniture, a cheerfully cracklingfire and, perched on top of the wardrobe —

“Hedwig!” Harry gasped.

The snowy owl clicked her beak and fluttered downonto Harry’s arm.

“Very smart owl you’ve got there,” chuckled Tom.“Arrived about five minutes after you did. If there’sanything you need, Mr. Potter, don’t hesitate to ask.”

He gave another bow and left.

Harry sat on his bed for a long time, absentmindedlystroking Hedwig. The sky outside the window waschanging rapidly from deep, velvety blue to cold,steely gray and then, slowly, to pink shot with gold.Harry could hardly believe that he’d left Privet DrivePage | 52 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

only a few hours ago, that he wasn’t expelled, andthat he was now facing three Dursley-free weeks.

“It’s been a very weird night, Hedwig,” he yawned.

And without even removing his glasses, he slumpedback onto his pillows and fell asleep.

Page | 53 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





THE LEAKY CAULDRON

It took Harry several days to get used to his strangenew freedom. Never before had he been able to get upwhenever he wanted or eat whatever he fancied. Hecould even go wherever he pleased, as long as it wasin Diagon Alley, and as this long cobbled street waspacked with the most fascinating wizarding shops inthe world, Harry felt no desire to break his word toFudge and stray back into the Muggle world.

Harry ate breakfast each morning in the LeakyCauldron, where he liked watching the other guests:funny little witches from the country, up for a day’sshopping; venerable-looking wizards arguing over thelatest article in Transfiguration Today; wild-lookingwarlocks; raucous dwarfs; and once, what lookedsuspiciously like a hag, who ordered a plate of rawliver from behind a thick woollen balaclava.

After breakfast Harry would go out into the backyard,take out his wand, tap the third brick from the leftabove the trash bin, and stand back as the archwayinto Diagon Alley opened in the wall.

Page | 54 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry spent the long sunny days exploring the shopsand eating under the brightly colored umbrellasoutside cafes, where his fellow diners were showingone another their purchases (“it’s a lunascope, oldboy — no more messing around with moon charts,see?”) or else discussing the case of Sirius Black(“personally, I won’t let any of the children out aloneuntil he’s back in Azkaban”). Harry didn’t have to dohis homework under the blankets by flashlightanymore; now he could sit in the bright sunshineoutside Florean Fortescue’s Ice Cream Parlor,finishing all his essays with occasional help fromFlorean Fortescue himself, who, apart from knowing agreat deal about medieval witch burnings, gave Harryfree sundaes every half an hour.

Once Harry had refilled his money bag with goldGalleons, silver Sickles, and bronze Knuts from hisvault at Gringotts, he had to exercise a lot of self-control not to spend the whole lot at once. He had tokeep reminding himself that he had five years to go atHogwarts, and how it would feel to ask the Dursleysfor money for spellbooks, to stop himself from buyinga handsome set of solid gold Gobstones (a wizardinggame rather like marbles, in which the stones squirt anasty-smelling liquid into the other player’s face whenthey lose a point). He was sorely tempted, too, by theperfect, moving model of the galaxy in a large glassball, which would have meant he never had to takeanother Astronomy lesson. But the thing that testedHarry’s resolution most appeared in his favorite shop,Quality Quidditch Supplies, a week after he’d arrivedat the Leaky Cauldron.

Curious to know what the crowd in the shop wasstaring at, Harry edged his way inside and squeezedin among the excited witches and wizards until heglimpsed a newly erected podium, on which was

Page | 55 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

mounted the most magnificent broom he had everseen in his life.

“Just come out — prototype —” a square-jawedwizard was telling his companion.

“It’s the fastest broom in the world, isn’t it, Dad?”squeaked a boy younger than Harry, who wasswinging off his father’s arm.

“Irish International Side’s just put in an order forseven of these beauties!” the proprietor of the shoptold the crowd. “And they’re favorites for the WorldCup!”

A large witch in front of Harry moved, and he wasable to read the sign next to the broom:

THE FIREBOLT

This state-of-the-art racing broom sports a stream-lined, superfine handle of ash, treated with adiamond-hard polish and hand-numbered with itsown registration number. Each individually selectedbirch twig in the broomtail has been honed toaerodynamic perfection, giving the Fireboltunsurpassable balance and pinpoint precision. TheFirebolt has an acceleration of 150 miles an hour inten seconds and incorporates an unbreakableBraking Charm. Price on request.

Price on request ... Harry didn’t like to think howmuch gold the Firebolt would cost. He had neverwanted anything as much in his whole life — but hehad never lost a Quidditch match on his Nimbus TwoThousand, and what was the point in emptying hisGringotts vault for the Firebolt, when he had a verygood broom already? Harry didn’t ask for the price,

Page | 56 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

but he returned, almost every day after that, just tolook at the Firebolt.

There were, however, things that Harry needed tobuy. He went to the Apothecary to replenish his storeof potions ingredients, and as his school robes werenow several inches too short in the arm and leg, hevisited Madam Malkin’s Robes for All Occasions andbought new ones. Most important of all, he had tobuy his new schoolbooks, which would include thosefor his two new subjects, Care of Magical Creaturesand Divination.

Harry got a surprise as he looked in at the bookshopwindow. Instead of the usual display of gold-embossed spellbooks the size of paving slabs, therewas a large iron cage behind the glass that held abouta hundred copies of The Monster Book of Monsters.Torn pages were flying everywhere as the booksgrappled with each other, locked together in furiouswrestling matches and snapping aggressively.

Harry pulled his booklist out of his pocket andconsulted it for the first time. The Monster Book ofMonsters was listed as the required book for Care ofMagical Creatures. Now Harry understood why Hagridhad said it would come in useful. He felt relieved; hehad been wondering whether Hagrid wanted help withsome terrifying new pet.

As Harry entered Flourish and Blotts, the managercame hurrying toward him.

“Hogwarts?” he said abruptly. “Come to get your newbooks?”

“Yes,” said Harry, “I need —”

Page | 57 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Get out of the way,” said the manager impatiently,brushing Harry aside. He drew on a pair of very thickgloves, picked up a large, knobbly walking stick, andproceeded toward the door of the Monster Books’ cage.

“Hang on,” said Harry quickly, “I’ve already got one ofthose.”

“Have you?” A look of enormous relief spread over themanager’s face. “Thank heavens for that. I’ve beenbitten five times already this morning —”

A loud ripping noise rent the air; two of the MonsterBooks had seized a third and were pulling it apart.

“Stop it! Stop it!” cried the manager, poking thewalking stick through the bars and knocking thebooks apart. “I’m never stocking them again, never!

It’s been bedlam! I thought we’d seen the worst whenwe bought two hundred copies of the Invisible Book ofInvisibility — cost a fortune, and we never foundthem. ... Well ... is there anything else I can help youwith?”

“Yes,” said Harry, looking down his booklist, “I needUnfogging the Future by Cassandra Vablatsky.”

“Ah, starting Divination, are you?” said the manager,stripping off his gloves and leading Harry into theback of the shop, where there was a corner devoted tofortune-telling. A small table was stacked withvolumes such as Predicting the Unpredictable: InsulateYourself Against Shocks and Broken Balls: WhenFortunes Turn Foul.

“Here you are,” said the manager, who had climbed aset of steps to take down a thick, black-bound book.“Unfogging the Future. Very good guide to all your

Page | 58 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

basic fortune-telling methods — palmistry, crystalballs, bird entrails —”

But Harry wasn’t listening. His eyes had fallen onanother book, which was among a display on a smalltable: Death Omens: What to Do When You Know theWorst Is Coming.

“Oh, I wouldn’t read that if I were you,” said themanager lightly, looking to see what Harry wasstaring at. “You’ll start seeing death omenseverywhere. It’s enough to frighten anyone to death.”

But Harry continued to stare at the front cover of thebook; it showed a black dog large as a bear, withgleaming eyes. It looked oddly familiar. ...

The manager pressed Unfogging the Future intoHarry’s hands.

“Anything else?” he said.

“Yes,” said Harry, tearing his eyes away from thedog’s and dazedly consulting his booklist. “Er — Ineed Intermediate Transfiguration and The StandardBook of Spells, Grade Three.”

Harry emerged from Flourish and Blotts ten minuteslater with his new books under his arms and madehis way back to the Leaky Cauldron, hardly noticingwhere he was going and bumping into several people.

He tramped up the stairs to his room, went inside,and tipped his books onto his bed. Somebody hadbeen in to tidy; the windows were open and sun waspouring inside. Harry could hear the buses rolling byin the unseen Muggle street behind him and thesound of the invisible crowd below in Diagon Alley. Hecaught sight of himself in the mirror over the basin.Page | 59 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It can’t have been a death omen,” he told hisreflection defiantly. “I was panicking when I saw thatthing in Magnolia Crescent. ... It was probably just astray dog. ...”

He raised his hand automatically and tried to makehis hair lie flat.

“You’re fighting a losing battle there, dear,” said hismirror in a wheezy voice.

As the days slipped by, Harry started lookingwherever he went for a sign of Ron or Hermione.

Plenty of Hogwarts students were arriving in DiagonAlley now, with the start of term so near. Harry metSeamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, his fellowGryffindors, in Quality Quidditch Supplies, wherethey too were ogling the Firebolt; he also ran into thereal Neville Longbottom, a round-faced, forgetful boy,outside Flourish and Blotts. Harry didn’t stop to chat;Neville appeared to have mislaid his booklist and wasbeing told off by his very formidable-lookinggrandmother. Harry hoped she never found out thathe’d pretended to be Neville while on the run from theMinistry of Magic.

Harry woke on the last day of the holidays, thinkingthat he would at least meet Ron and Hermionetomorrow, on the Hogwarts Express. He got up,dressed, went for a last look at the Firebolt, and wasjust wondering where he’d have lunch, when someoneyelled his name and he turned.

“Harry! HARRY!”

They were there, both of them, sitting outside FloreanFortescue’s Ice Cream Parlor — Ron lookingincredibly freckly, Hermione very brown, both wavingfrantically at him.

Page | 60 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Finally!” said Ron, grinning at Harry as he sat down.“We went to the Leaky Cauldron, but they said you’dleft, and we went to Flourish and Blotts, and MadamMalkin’s, and —”

“I got all my school stuff last week,” Harry explained.“And how come you knew I’m staying at the LeakyCauldron?”

“Dad,” said Ron simply.

Mr. Weasley, who worked at the Ministry of Magic,would of course have heard the whole story of whathad happened to Aunt Marge.

“Did you really blow up your aunt, Harry?” saidHermione in a very serious voice.

“I didn’t mean to,” said Harry while Ron roared withlaughter. “I just — lost control.”

“It’s not funny, Ron,” said Hermione sharply.“Honestly, I’m amazed Harry wasn’t expelled.”

“So am I,” admitted Harry. “Forget expelled, I thoughtI was going to be arrested.” He looked at Ron. “Yourdad doesn’t know why Fudge let me off, does he?”

“Probably ’cause it’s you, isn’t it?” shrugged Ron, stillchuckling. “Famous Harry Potter and all that. I’d hateto see what the Ministry’d do to me if I blew up anaunt. Mind you, they’d have to dig me up first,because Mum would’ve killed me. Anyway, you canask Dad yourself this evening. We’re staying at theLeaky Cauldron tonight too! So you can come toKing’s Cross with us tomorrow! Hermione’s there aswell!”

Page | 61 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione nodded, beaming. “Mum and Dad droppedme off this morning with all my Hogwarts things.”

“Excellent!” said Harry happily. “So, have you got allyour new books and stuff?”

“Look at this,” said Ron, pulling a long thin box out ofa bag and opening it. “Brand-new wand. Fourteeninches, willow, containing one unicorn tail-hair. Andwe’ve got all our books —” He pointed at a large bagunder his chair. “What about those Monster Books,eh? The assistant nearly cried when we said wewanted two.”

“What’s all that, Hermione?” Harry asked, pointing atnot one but three bulging bags in the chair next toher.

“Well, I’m taking more new subjects than you, aren’tI?” said Hermione. “Those are my books forArithmancy, Care of Magical Creatures, Divination,Study of Ancient Runes, Muggle Studies —”

“What are you doing Muggle Studies for?” said Ron,rolling his eyes at Harry. “You’re Muggle-born! Yourmum and dad are Muggles! You already know allabout Muggles!”

“But it’ll be fascinating to study them from thewizarding point of view,” said Hermione earnestly.

“Are you planning to eat or sleep at all this year,Hermione?” asked Harry, while Ron sniggered.Hermione ignored them.

“I’ve still got ten Galleons,” she said, checking herpurse. “It’s my birthday in September, and Mum andDad gave me some money to get myself an earlybirthday present.”

Page | 62 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“How about a nice book?” said Ron innocently.

“No, I don’t think so,” said Hermione composedly. “Ireally want an owl. I mean, Harry’s got Hedwig andyou’ve got Errol —”

“I haven’t,” said Ron. “Errol’s a family owl. All I’ve gotis Scabbers.” He pulled his pet rat out of his pocket.“And I want to get him checked over,” he added,placing Scabbers on the table in front of them. “Idon’t think Egypt agreed with him.”

Scabbers was looking thinner than usual, and therewas a definite droop to his whiskers.

“There’s a magical creature shop just over there,” saidHarry, who knew Diagon Alley very well by now. “Youcould see if they’ve got anything for Scabbers, andHermione can get her owl.”

So they paid for their ice cream and crossed the streetto the Magical Menagerie.

There wasn’t much room inside. Every inch of wallwas hidden by cages. It was smelly and very noisybecause the occupants of these cages were allsqueaking, squawking, jabbering, or hissing. Thewitch behind the counter was already advising awizard on the care of double-ended newts, so Harry,Ron, and Hermione waited, examining the cages.

A pair of enormous purple toads sat gulping wetlyand feasting on dead blowflies. A gigantic tortoisewith a jewel-encrusted shell was glittering near thewindow. Poisonous orange snails were oozing slowlyup the side of their glass tank, and a fat white rabbitkept changing into a silk top hat and back again witha loud popping noise. Then there were cats of everycolor, a noisy cage of ravens, a basket of funnyPage | 63 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

custard-colored furballs that were humming loudly,and on the counter, a vast cage of sleek black ratsthat were playing some sort of skipping game usingtheir long, bald tails.

The double-ended newt wizard left, and Ronapproached the counter.

“It’s my rat,” he told the witch. “He been a bit off-colorever since I brought him back from Egypt.”

“Bang him on the counter,” said the witch, pulling apair of heavy black spectacles out of her pocket.

Ron lifted Scabbers out of his inside pocket andplaced him next to the cage of his fellow rats, whostopped their skipping tricks and scuffled to the wirefor a better look.

Like nearly everything Ron owned, Scabbers the ratwas secondhand (he had once belonged to Ron’sbrother Percy) and a bit battered. Next to the glossyrats in the cage, he looked especially woebegone.

“Hm,” said the witch, picking up Scabbers. “How oldis this rat?”

“Dunno,” said Ron. “Quite old. He used to belong tomy brother.”

“What powers does he have?” said the witch,examining Scabbers closely.

“Er —” The truth was that Scabbers had never shownthe faintest trace of interesting powers. The witch’seyes moved from Scabbers’s tattered left ear to hisfront paw, which had a toe missing, and tuttedloudly.

Page | 64 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“He’s been through the mill, this one,” she said.

“He was like that when Percy gave him to me,” saidRon defensively.

“An ordinary common or garden rat like this can’t beexpected to live longer than three years or so,” saidthe witch. “Now, if you were looking for something abit more hard-wearing, you might like one of these —”

She indicated the black rats, who promptly startedskipping again. Ron muttered, “Show-offs.”

“Well, if you don’t want a replacement, you can trythis rat tonic,” said the witch, reaching under thecounter and bringing out a small red bottle.

“Okay,” said Ron. “How much — OUCH!”

Ron buckled as something huge and orange camesoaring from the top of the highest cage, landed onhis head, and then propelled itself, spitting madly, atScabbers.

“NO, CROOKSHANKS, NO!” cried the witch, butScabbers shot from between her hands like a bar ofsoap, landed splay-legged on the floor, and thenscampered for the door.

“Scabbers!” Ron shouted, racing out of the shop afterhim; Harry followed.

It took them nearly ten minutes to catch Scabbers,who had taken refuge under a wastepaper bin outsideQuality Quidditch Supplies. Ron stuffed the tremblingrat back into his pocket and straightened up,massaging his head.

“What was that?”

Page | 65 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It was either a very big cat or quite a small tiger,”said Harry.

“Where’s Hermione?”

“Probably getting her owl —”

They made their way back up the crowded street tothe Magical Menagerie. As they reached it, Hermionecame out, but she wasn’t carrying an owl. Her armswere clamped tightly around the enormous ginger cat.

“You bought that monster?” said Ron, his mouthhanging open.

“He’s gorgeous, isn’t he?” said Hermione, glowing.

That was a matter of opinion, thought Harry. Thecat’s ginger fur was thick and fluffy, but it wasdefinitely a bit bowlegged and its face looked grumpyand oddly squashed, as though it had run headlonginto a brick wall. Now that Scabbers was out of sight,however, the cat was purring contentedly inHermione’s arms.

“Hermione, that thing nearly scalped me!” said Ron.

“He didn’t mean to, did you, Crookshanks?” saidHermione.

“And what about Scabbers?” said Ron, pointing at thelump in his chest pocket. “He needs rest andrelaxation! How’s he going to get it with that thingaround?”

“That reminds me, you forgot your rat tonic,” saidHermione, slapping the small red bottle into Ron’shand. “And stop worrying, Crookshanks will besleeping in my dormitory and Scabbers in yours,

Page | 66 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

what’s the problem? Poor Crookshanks, that witchsaid he’d been in there for ages; no one wanted him.”

“I wonder why,” said Ron sarcastically as they set offtoward the Leaky Cauldron.

They found Mr. Weasley sitting in the bar, reading theDaily Prophet.

“Harry!” he said, smiling as he looked up. “How areyou?”

“Fine, thanks,” said Harry as he, Ron, and Hermionejoined Mr. Weasley with all their shopping.

Mr. Weasley put down his paper, and Harry saw thenow familiar picture of Sirius Black staring up at him.

“They still haven’t caught him, then?” he asked.

“No,” said Mr. Weasley, looking extremely grave.“They’ve pulled us all off our regular jobs at theMinistry to try and find him, but no luck so far.”

“Would we get a reward if we caught him?” askedRon. “It’d be good to get some more money —”

“Don’t be ridiculous, Ron,” said Mr. Weasley, who oncloser inspection looked very strained. “Black’s notgoing to be caught by a thirteen-year-old wizard. It’sthe Azkaban guards who’ll get him back, you markmy words.”

At that moment Mrs. Weasley entered the bar, ladenwith shopping bags and followed by the twins, Fredand George, who were about to start their fifth year atHogwarts; the newly elected Head Boy, Percy; and theWeasleys’ youngest child and only girl, Ginny.

Page | 67 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Ginny, who had always been very taken with Harry,seemed even more heartily embarrassed than usualwhen she saw him, perhaps because he had savedher life during their previous year at Hogwarts. Shewent very red and muttered “hello” without looking athim. Percy, however, held out his hand solemnly asthough he and Harry had never met and said, “Harry.How nice to see you.”

“Hello, Percy,” said Harry, trying not to laugh.

“I hope you’re well?” said Percy pompously, shakinghands. It was rather like being introduced to themayor.

“Very well, thanks —”

“Harry!” said Fred, elbowing Percy out of the way andbowing deeply. “Simply splendid to see you, old boy —

“Marvelous,” said George, pushing Fred aside andseizing Harry’s hand in turn. “Absolutely spiffing.”

Percy scowled.

“That’s enough, now,” said Mrs. Weasley.

“Mum!” said Fred as though he’d only just spotted herand seizing her hand too. “How really corking to seeyou —”

“I said, that’s enough,” said Mrs. Weasley, depositingher shopping in an empty chair. “Hello, Harry, dear. Isuppose you’ve heard our exciting news?” She pointedto the brand-new silver badge on Percy’s chest.“Second Head Boy in the family!” she said, swellingwith pride.

Page | 68 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“And last,” Fred muttered under his breath.

“I don’t doubt that,” said Mrs. Weasley, frowningsuddenly. “I notice they haven’t made you twoprefects.”

“What do we want to be prefects for?” said George,looking revolted at the very idea. “It’d take all the funout of life.”

Ginny giggled.

“You want to set a better example for your sister!”snapped Mrs. Weasley.

“Ginny’s got other brothers to set her an example,Mother,” said Percy loftily. “I’m going up to change fordinner. ...”

He disappeared and George heaved a sigh.

“We tried to shut him in a pyramid,” he told Harry.“But Mum spotted us.”

Dinner that night was a very enjoyable affair. Tom theinnkeeper put three tables together in the parlor, andthe seven Weasleys, Harry, and Hermione ate theirway through five delicious courses.

“How’re we getting to King’s Cross tomorrow, Dad?”asked Fred as they dug into a sumptuous chocolatepudding.

“The Ministry’s providing a couple of cars,” said Mr.Weasley.

Everyone looked up at him.

“Why?” said Percy curiously.

Page | 69 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It’s because of you, Perce,” said George seriously.“And there’ll be little flags on the hoods, with HB onthem —”

“— for Humongous Bighead,” said Fred.

Everyone except Percy and Mrs. Weasley snorted intotheir pudding.

“Why are the Ministry providing cars, Father?” Percyasked again, in a dignified voice.

“Well, as we haven’t got one anymore,” said Mr.Weasley, “— and as I work there, they’re doing me afavor —”

His voice was casual, but Harry couldn’t help noticingthat Mr. Weasley’s ears had gone red, just like Ron’sdid when he was under pressure.

“Good thing, too,” said Mrs. Weasley briskly. “Do yourealize how much luggage you’ve all got between you?A nice sight you’d be on the Muggle Underground. ...You are all packed, aren’t you?”

“Ron hasn’t put all his new things in his trunk yet,”said Percy, in a long-suffering voice. “He’s dumpedthem on my bed.”

“You’d better go and pack properly, Ron, because wewon’t have much time in the morning,” Mrs. Weasleycalled down the table. Ron scowled at Percy.

After dinner everyone felt very full and sleepy. One byone they made their way upstairs to their rooms tocheck their things for the next day. Ron and Percywere next door to Harry. He had just closed andlocked his own trunk when he heard angry voicesthrough the wall, and went to see what was going on.Page | 70 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The door of number twelve was ajar and Percy wasshouting.

“It was here, on the bedside table, I took it off forpolishing —”

“I haven’t touched it, all right?” Ron roared back.“What’s up?” said Harry.

“My Head Boy badge is gone,” said Percy, rounding onHarry.

“So’s Scabbers’s rat tonic,” said Ron, throwing thingsout of his trunk to look. “I think I might’ve left it inthe bar —”

“You’re not going anywhere till you’ve found mybadge!” yelled Percy.

“I’ll get Scabbers’s stuff, I’m packed,” Harry said toRon, and he went downstairs.

Harry was halfway along the passage to the bar,which was now very dark, when he heard anotherpair of angry voices coming from the parlor. A secondlater, he recognized them as Mr. and Mrs. Weasleys’.He hesitated, not wanting them to know he’d heardthem arguing, when the sound of his own name madehim stop, then move closer to the parlor door.

“... makes no sense not to tell him,” Mr. Weasley wassaying heatedly. “Harry’s got a right to know. I’ve triedto tell Fudge, but he insists on treating Harry like achild. He’s thirteen years old and —”

“Arthur, the truth would terrify him!” said Mrs.Weasley shrilly. “Do you really want to send Harry

Page | 71 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

back to school with that hanging over him? Forheaven’s sake, he’s happy not knowing!”

“I don’t want to make him miserable, I want to puthim on his guard!” retorted Mr. Weasley. “You knowwhat Harry and Ron are like, wandering off bythemselves — they’ve even ended up in the ForbiddenForest! But Harry mustn’t do that this year! When Ithink what could have happened to him that night heran away from home! If the Knight Bus hadn’t pickedhim up, I’m prepared to bet he would have been deadbefore the Ministry found him.”

“But he’s not dead, he’s fine, so what’s the point —”

“Molly, they say Sirius Black’s mad, and maybe he is,but he was clever enough to escape from Azkaban,and that’s supposed to be impossible. It’s been amonth, and no one’s seen hide nor hair of him, and Idon’t care what Fudge keeps telling the Daily Prophet,we’re no nearer catching Black than inventing self-spelling wands. The only thing we know for sure iswhat Black’s after —”

“But Harry will be perfectly safe at Hogwarts.”

“We thought Azkaban was perfectly safe. If Black canbreak out of Azkaban, he can break into Hogwarts.”

“But no one’s really sure that Black’s after Harry —”

There was a thud on wood, and Harry was sure Mr.Weasley had banged his fist on the table.

“Molly, how many times do I have to tell you? Theydidn’t report it in the press because Fudge wanted itkept quiet, but Fudge went out to Azkaban the nightBlack escaped. The guards told Fudge that Black’sbeen talking in his sleep for a while now. Always thePage | 72 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

same words: ‘He’s at Hogwarts ... he’s at Hogwarts.’Black is deranged, Molly, and he wants Harry dead. Ifyou ask me, he thinks murdering Harry will bringYou-Know-Who back to power. Black lost everythingthe night Harry stopped You-Know-Who, and he’s hadtwelve years alone in Azkaban to brood on that. ...”

There was a silence. Harry leaned still closer to thedoor, desperate to hear more.

“Well, Arthur, you must do what you think is right.But you’re forgetting Albus Dumbledore. I don’t thinkanything could hurt Harry at Hogwarts whileDumbledore’s headmaster. I suppose he knows aboutall this?”

“Of course he knows. We had to ask him if he mindsthe Azkaban guards stationing themselves around theentrances to the school grounds. He wasn’t happyabout it, but he agreed.”

“Not happy? Why shouldn’t he be happy, if they’rethere to catch Black?”

“Dumbledore isn’t fond of the Azkaban guards,” saidMr. Weasley heavily. “Nor am I, if it comes to that ...but when you’re dealing with a wizard like Black, yousometimes have to join forces with those you’d ratheravoid.”

“If they save Harry —”

“— then I will never say another word against them,”said Mr. Weasley wearily. “It’s late, Molly, we’d bettergo up. ...”

Harry heard chairs move. As quietly as he could, hehurried down the passage to the bar and out of sight.The parlor door opened, and a few seconds later

Page | 73 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

footsteps told him that Mr. and Mrs. Weasley wereclimbing the stairs.

The bottle of rat tonic was lying under the table theyhad sat at earlier. Harry waited until he heard Mr.and Mrs. Weasley’s bedroom door close, then headedback upstairs with the bottle.

Fred and George were crouching in the shadows onthe landing, heaving with laughter as they listened toPercy dismantling his and Ron’s room in search of hisbadge.

“We’ve got it,” Fred whispered to Harry. “We’ve beenimproving it.”

The badge now read BigheacL Boy.

Harry forced a laugh, went to give Ron the rat tonic,then shut himself in his room and lay down on hisbed.

So Sirius Black was after him. This explainedeverything. Fudge had been lenient with him becausehe was so relieved to find him alive. He’d made Harrypromise to stay in Diagon Alley where there wereplenty of wizards to keep an eye on him. And he wassending two Ministry cars to take them all to thestation tomorrow, so that the Weasleys could lookafter Harry until he was on the train.

Harry lay listening to the muffled shouting next doorand wondered why he didn’t feel more scared. SiriusBlack had murdered thirteen people with one curse;Mr. and Mrs. Weasley obviously thought Harry wouldbe panic-stricken if he knew the truth. But Harryhappened to agree wholeheartedly with Mrs. Weasleythat the safest place on earth was wherever AlbusDumbledore happened to be. Didn’t people always sayPage | 74 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

that Dumbledore was the only person Lord Voldemorthad ever been afraid of? Surely Black, as Voldemort’sright-hand man, would be just as frightened of him?

And then there were these Azkaban guards everyonekept talking about. They seemed to scare most peoplesenseless, and if they were stationed all around theschool, Black’s chances of getting inside seemed veryremote.

No, all in all, the thing that bothered Harry most wasthe fact that his chances of visiting Hogsmeade nowlooked like zero. Nobody would want Harry to leavethe safety of the castle until Black was caught; infact, Harry suspected his every move would becarefully watched until the danger had passed.

He scowled at the dark ceiling. Did they think hecouldn’t look after himself? He’d escaped LordVoldemort three times; he wasn’t completely useless.

Unbidden, the image of the beast in the shadows ofMagnolia Crescent crossed his mind. What to do whenyou know the worst is coming. ...

“I’m not going to be murdered,” Harry said out loud.

“That’s the spirit, dear,” said his mirror sleepily.

Page | 75 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



THE DEMENTOR

Tom woke Harry the next morning with his usualtoothless grin and a cup of tea. Harry got dressed andwas just persuading a disgruntled Hedwig to get backinto her cage when Ron banged his way into theroom, pulling a sweatshirt over his head and lookingirritable.

“The sooner we get on the train, the better,” he said.“At least I can get away from Percy at Hogwarts. Nowhe’s accusing me of dripping tea on his photo ofPenelope Clearwater. You know,” Ron grimaced, “hisgirlfriend. She’s hidden her face under the framebecause her nose has gone all blotchy. ...”

“I’ve got something to tell you,” Harry began, but theywere interrupted by Fred and George, who had lookedin to congratulate Ron on infuriating Percy again.

They headed down to breakfast, where Mr. Weasleywas reading the front page of the Daily Prophet with afurrowed brow and Mrs. Weasley was telling

Page | 76 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione and Ginny about a love potion she’d madeas a young girl. All three of them were rather giggly.

“What were you saying?” Ron asked Harry as they satdown.

“Later,” Harry muttered as Percy stormed in.

Harry had no chance to speak to Ron or Hermione inthe chaos of leaving; they were too busy heaving alltheir trunks down the Leaky Cauldron’s narrowstaircase and piling them up near the door, withHedwig and Hermes, Percy’s screech owl, perched ontop in their cages. A small wickerwork basket stoodbeside the heap of trunks, spitting loudly.

“It’s all right, Crookshanks,” Hermione cooed throughthe wickerwork. “I’ll let you out on the train.”

“You won’t,” snapped Ron. “What about poorScabbers, eh?”

He pointed at his chest, where a large lump indicatedthat Scabbers was curled up in his pocket.

Mr. Weasley, who had been outside waiting for theMinistry cars, stuck his head inside.

“They’re here,” he said. “Harry, come on.”

Mr. Weasley marched Harry across the short stretchof pavement toward the first of two old-fashioned darkgreen cars, each of which was driven by a furtive-looking wizard wearing a suit of emerald velvet.

“In you get, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, glancing up anddown the crowded street.

Page | 77 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry got into the back of the car and was shortlyjoined by Hermione, Ron, and, to Ron’s disgust,

Percy.

The journey to King’s Cross was very uneventfulcompared with Harry’s trip on the Knight Bus. TheMinistry of Magic cars seemed almost ordinary,though Harry noticed that they could slide throughgaps that Uncle Vernon’s new company car certainlycouldn’t have managed. They reached King’s Crosswith twenty minutes to spare; the Ministry driversfound them trolleys, unloaded their trunks, touchedtheir hats in salute to Mr. Weasley, and drove away,somehow managing to jump to the head of anunmoving line at the traffic lights.

Mr. Weasley kept close to Harry’s elbow all the wayinto the station.

“Right then,” he said, glancing around them. “Let’s dothis in pairs, as there are so many of us. I’ll gothrough first with Harry.”

Mr. Weasley strolled toward the barrier betweenplatforms nine and ten, pushing Harry’s trolley andapparently very interested in the Intercity 125 thathad just arrived at platform nine. With a meaningfullook at Harry, he leaned casually against the barrier.Harry imitated him.

In a moment, they had fallen sideways through thesolid metal onto platform nine and three-quarters andlooked up to see the Hogwarts Express, a scarletsteam engine, puffing smoke over a platform packedwith witches and wizards seeing their children ontothe train.

Page | 78 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Percy and Ginny suddenly appeared behind Harry.They were panting and had apparently taken thebarrier at a run.

“Ah, there’s Penelope!” said Percy, smoothing his hairand going pink again. Ginny caught Harry’s eye, andthey both turned away to hide their laughter as Percystrode over to a girl with long, curly hair, walking withhis chest thrown out so that she couldn’t miss hisshiny badge.

Once the remaining Weasleys and Hermione hadjoined them, Harry and Ron led the way to the end ofthe train, past packed compartments, to a carriagethat looked quite empty. They loaded the trunks ontoit, stowed Hedwig and Crookshanks in the luggagerack, then went back outside to say good-bye to Mr.and Mrs. Weasley.

Mrs. Weasley kissed all her children, then Hermione,and finally, Harry. He was embarrassed, but reallyquite pleased, when she gave him an extra hug.

“Do take care, won’t you, Harry?” she said as shestraightened up, her eyes oddly bright. Then sheopened her enormous handbag and said, “I’ve madeyou all sandwiches. ... Here you are, Ron ... no,they’re not corned beef. ... Fred? Where’s Fred? Hereyou are, dear. ...”

“Harry,” said Mr. Weasley quietly, “come over here amoment.”

He jerked his head toward a pillar, and Harry followedhim behind it, leaving the others crowded aroundMrs. Weasley.

“There’s something I’ve got to tell you before you leave—” said Mr. Weasley, in a tense voice.

Page | 79 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It’s all right, Mr. Weasley,” said Harry. “I alreadyknow.”

“You know? How could you know?”

“I — er — I heard you and Mrs. Weasley talking lastnight. I couldn’t help hearing,” Harry added quickly.“Sorry —”

“That’s not the way I’d have chosen for you to findout,” said Mr. Weasley, looking anxious.

“No — honestly, it’s okay. This way, you haven’tbroken your word to Fudge and I know what’s goingon.”

“Harry, you must be very scared —”

“I’m not,” said Harry sincerely. “Really” he added,because Mr. Weasley was looking disbelieving. “I’mnot trying to be a hero, but seriously, Sirius Blackcan’t be worse than Voldemort, can he?”

Mr. Weasley flinched at the sound of the name butoverlooked it.

“Harry, I knew you were, well, made of stronger stuffthan Fudge seems to think, and I’m obviously pleasedthat you’re not scared, but —”

“Arthur!” called Mrs. Weasley, who was nowshepherding the rest onto the train. “Arthur, what areyou doing? It’s about to go!”

“He’s coming, Molly!” said Mr. Weasley but he turnedback to Harry and kept talking in a lower and morehurried voice. “Listen, I want you to give me yourword —”

Page | 80 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“— that I’ll be a good boy and stay in the castle?” saidHarry gloomily.

“Not entirely,” said Mr. Weasley, who looked moreserious than Harry had ever seen him. “Harry, swearto me you won’t go looking for Black.”

Harry stared. “What?”

There was a loud whistle. Guards were walking alongthe train, slamming all the doors shut.

“Promise me, Harry,” said Mr. Weasley, talking morequickly still, “that whatever happens —”

“Why would I go looking for someone I know wants tokill me?” said Harry blankly.

“Swear to me that whatever you might hear —”

“Arthur, quickly!” cried Mrs. Weasley.

Steam was billowing from the train; it had started tomove. Harry ran to the compartment door and Ronthrew it open and stood back to let him on. Theyleaned out of the window and waved at Mr. and Mrs.Weasley until the train turned a corner and blockedthem from view.

“I need to talk to you in private,” Harry muttered toRon and Hermione as the train picked up speed.

“Go away, Ginny,” said Ron.

“Oh, that’s nice,” said Ginny huffily, and she stalkedoff.

Page | 81 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry, Ron, and Hermione set off down the corridor,looking for an empty compartment, but all were fullexcept for the one at the very end of the train.

This had only one occupant, a man sitting fast asleepnext to the window. Harry, Ron, and Hermionechecked on the threshold. The Hogwarts Express wasusually reserved for students and they had never seenan adult there before, except for the witch whopushed the food cart.

The stranger was wearing an extremely shabby set ofwizard’s robes that had been darned in several places.He looked ill and exhausted. Though quite young, hislight brown hair was flecked with gray.

“Who d’you reckon he is?” Ron hissed as they satdown and slid the door shut, taking the seats farthestaway from the window.

“Professor R. J. Lupin,” whispered Hermione at once.“How d’you know that?”

“It’s on his case,” she replied, pointing at the luggagerack over the man’s head, where there was a small,battered case held together with a large quantity ofneatly knotted string. The name Professor R. J. Lupinwas stamped across one corner in peeling letters.

“Wonder what he teaches?” said Ron, frowning atProfessor Lupin’s pallid profile.

“That’s obvious,” whispered Hermione. “There’s onlyone vacancy, isn’t there? Defense Against the DarkArts.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione had already had twoDefense Against the Dark Arts teachers, both of

Page | 82 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

whom had lasted only one year. There were rumorsthat the job was jinxed.

“Well, I hope he’s up to it,” said Ron doubtfully. “Helooks like one good hex would finish him off, doesn’the? Anyway ...” He turned to Harry. “What were yougoing to tell us?”

Harry explained all about Mr. and Mrs. Weasley’sargument and the warning Mr. Weasley had justgiven him. When he’d finished, Ron lookedthunderstruck, and Hermione had her hands over hermouth. She finally lowered them to say, “Sirius Blackescaped to come after you? Oh, Harry ... you’ll have tobe really, really careful. Don’t go looking for trouble,Harry —”

“I don’t go looking for trouble,” said Harry, nettled.“Trouble usually finds me.”

“How thick would Harry have to be, to go looking for anutter who wants to kill him?” said Ron shakily.

They were taking the news worse than Harry hadexpected. Both Ron and Hermione seemed to be muchmore frightened of Black than he was.

“No one knows how he got out of Azkaban,” said Ronuncomfortably. “No one’s ever done it before. And hewas a top-security prisoner too.”

“But they’ll catch him, won’t they?” said Hermioneearnestly. “I mean, they’ve got all the Muggles lookingout for him too. ...”

“What’s that noise?” said Ron suddenly.

A faint, tinny sort of whistle was coming fromsomewhere. They looked all around the compartment.

Page | 83 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It’s coming from your trunk, Harry,” said Ron,standing up and reaching into the luggage rack. Amoment later he had pulled the Pocket Sneakoscopeout from between Harry’s robes. It was spinning veryfast in the palm of Ron’s hand and glowing brilliantly.

“Is that a Sneakoscope?” said Hermione interestedly,standing up for a better look.

“Yeah ... mind you, it’s a very cheap one,” Ron said.

“It went haywire just as I was tying it to Errol’s leg tosend it to Harry.”

“Were you doing anything untrustworthy at the time?”said Hermione shrewdly.

“No! Well ... I wasn’t supposed to be using Errol. Youknow he’s not really up to long journeys ... but howelse was I supposed to get Harry’s present to him?”

“Stick it back in the trunk,” Harry advised as theSneakoscope whistled piercingly, “or it’ll wake himup.”

He nodded toward Professor Lupin. Ron stuffed theSneakoscope into a particularly horrible pair of UncleVernon’s old socks, which deadened the sound, thenclosed the lid of the trunk on it.

“We could get it checked in Hogsmeade,” said Ron,sitting back down. “They sell that sort of thing inDervish and Banges, magical instruments and stuff.Fred and George told me.”

“Do you know much about Hogsmeade?” askedHermione keenly. “I’ve read it’s the only entirely non-Muggle settlement in Britain —”

Page | 84 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Yeah, I think it is,” said Ron in an offhand sort ofway, “but that’s not why I want to go. I just want toget inside Honeydukes!”

“What’s that?” said Hermione.

“It’s this sweetshop,” said Ron, a dreamy look comingover his face, “where they’ve got everything. ... PepperImps — they make you smoke at the mouth — andgreat fat Chocoballs full of strawberry mousse andclotted cream, and really excellent sugar quills, whichyou can suck in class and just look like you’rethinking what to write next —”

“But Hogsmeade’s a very interesting place, isn’t it?”Hermione pressed on eagerly. “In Sites of HistoricalSorcery it says the inn was the headquarters for the1612 goblin rebellion, and the Shrieking Shack’ssupposed to be the most severely haunted building inBritain —”

“— and massive sherbet balls that make you levitate afew inches off the ground while you’re sucking them,”said Ron, who was plainly not listening to a wordHermione was saying.

Hermione looked around at Harry.

“Won’t it be nice to get out of school for a bit andexplore Hogsmeade?”

“ ’Spect it will,” said Harry heavily. “You’ll have to tellme when you’ve found out.”

“What d’you mean?” said Ron.

“I can’t go. The Dursleys didn’t sign my permissionform, and Fudge wouldn’t either.”

Page | 85 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Ron looked horrified.

“You’re not allowed to come? But — no way —McGonagall or someone will give you permission —”

Harry gave a hollow laugh. Professor McGonagall,head of Gryffindor House, was very strict.

“— or we can ask Fred and George, they know everysecret passage out of the castle —”

“Ron!” said Hermione sharply. “I don’t think Harryshould be sneaking out of school with Black on theloose —”

“Yeah, I expect that’s what McGonagall will say whenI ask for permission,” said Harry bitterly.

“But if we’re with him,” said Ron spiritedly toHermione, “Black wouldn’t dare —”

“Oh, Ron, don’t talk rubbish,” snapped Hermione.“Black’s already murdered a whole bunch of people inthe middle of a crowded street. Do you really thinkhe’s going to worry about attacking Harry justbecause we’re there?”

She was fumbling with the straps of Crookshanks’sbasket as she spoke.

“Don’t let that thing out!” Ron said, but too late;Crookshanks leapt lightly from the basket, stretched,yawned, and sprang onto Ron’s knees; the lump inRon’s pocket trembled and he shoved Crookshanksangrily away.

“Get out of here!”

“Ron, don’t!” said Hermione angrily.

Page | 86 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Ron was about to answer back when Professor Lupinstirred. They watched him apprehensively, but hesimply turned his head the other way, mouth slightlyopen, and slept on.

The Hogwarts Express moved steadily north and thescenery outside the window became wilder and darkerwhile the clouds overhead thickened. People werechasing backward and forward past the door of theircompartment. Crookshanks had now settled in anempty seat, his squashed face turned toward Ron, hisyellow eyes on Ron’s top pocket.

At one o’clock, the plump witch with the food cartarrived at the compartment door.

“D’you think we should wake him up?” Ron askedawkwardly, nodding toward Professor Lupin. “Helooks like he could do with some food.”

Hermione approached Professor Lupin cautiously.

“Er — Professor?” she said. “Excuse me — Professor?”

He didn’t move.

“Don’t worry, dear,” said the witch as she handedHarry a large stack of Cauldron Cakes. “If he’s hungrywhen he wakes, I’ll be up front with the driver.”

“I suppose he is asleep?” said Ron quietly as the witchslid the compartment door closed. “I mean — hehasn’t died, has he?”

“No, no, he’s breathing,” whispered Hermione, takingthe Cauldron Cake Harry passed her.

He might not be very good company, but ProfessorLupin’s presence in their compartment had its uses.

Page | 87 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Midafternoon, just as it had started to rain, blurringthe rolling hills outside the window, they heardfootsteps in the corridor again, and their three leastfavorite people appeared at the door: Draco Malfoy,flanked by his cronies, Vincent Crabbe and GregoryGoyle.

Draco Malfoy and Harry had been enemies ever sincethey had met on their very first train journey toHogwarts. Malfoy, who had a pale, pointed, sneeringface, was in Slytherin House; he played Seeker on theSlytherin Quidditch team, the same position thatHarry played on the Gryffindor team. Crabbe andGoyle seemed to exist to do Malfoy’s bidding. Theywere both wide and musclely; Crabbe was taller, witha pudding-bowl haircut and a very thick neck; Goylehad short, bristly hair and long, gorilla-ish arms.

“Well, look who it is,” said Malfoy in his usual lazydrawl, pulling open the compartment door. “Potty andthe Weasel.”

Crabbe and Goyle chuckled trollishly.

“I heard your father finally got his hands on somegold this summer, Weasley,” said Malfoy. “Did yourmother die of shock?”

Ron stood up so quickly he knocked Crookshanks’sbasket to the floor. Professor Lupin gave a snort.

“Who’s that?” said Malfoy, taking an automatic stepbackward as he spotted Lupin.

“New teacher,” said Harry, who got to his feet, too, incase he needed to hold Ron back. “What were yousaying, Malfoy?”

Page | 88 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy’s pale eyes narrowed; he wasn’t fool enough topick a fight right under a teacher’s nose.

“C’mon,” he muttered resentfully to Crabbe andGoyle, and they disappeared.

Harry and Ron sat down again, Ron massaging hisknuckles.

“I’m not going to take any crap from Malfoy this year,”he said angrily. “I mean it. If he makes one morecrack about my family, I’m going to get hold of hishead and —”

Ron made a violent gesture in midair.

“Ron,” hissed Hermione, pointing at Professor Lupin,“be careful...”

But Professor Lupin was still fast asleep.

The rain thickened as the train sped yet farther north;the windows were now a solid, shimmering gray,which gradually darkened until lanterns flickered intolife all along the corridors and over the luggage racks.The train rattled, the rain hammered, the windroared, but still, Professor Lupin slept.

“We must be nearly there,” said Ron, leaning forwardto look past Professor Lupin at the now completelyblack window.

The words had hardly left him when the train startedto slow down.

“Great,” said Ron, getting up and walking carefullypast Professor Lupin to try and see outside. “I’mstarving. I want to get to the feast. ...”

Page | 89 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“We can’t be there yet,” said Hermione, checking herwatch.

“So why’re we stopping?”

The train was getting slower and slower. As the noiseof the pistons fell away, the wind and rain soundedlouder than ever against the windows.

Harry, who was nearest the door, got up to look intothe corridor. All along the carriage, heads weresticking curiously out of their compartments.

The train came to a stop with a jolt, and distant thudsand bangs told them that luggage had fallen out ofthe racks. Then, without warning, all the lamps wentout and they were plunged into total darkness.

“What’s going on?” said Ron’s voice from behindHarry.

“Ouch!” gasped Hermione. “Ron, that was my foot!”Harry felt his way back to his seat.

“D’you think we’ve broken down?”

“Dunno ...”

There was a squeaking sound, and Harry saw the dimblack outline of Ron, wiping a patch clean on thewindow and peering out.

“There’s something moving out there,” Ron said. “Ithink people are coming aboard. ...”

The compartment door suddenly opened and someonefell painfully over Harry’s legs.

Page | 90 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Sorry — d’you know what’s going on? — Ouch —sorry —”

“Hullo, Neville,” said Harry, feeling around in the darkand pulling Neville up by his cloak.

“Harry? Is that you? What’s happening?”

“No idea — sit down —”

There was a loud hissing and a yelp of pain; Nevillehad tried to sit on Crookshanks.

“I’m going to go and ask the driver what’s going on,”came Hermione’s voice. Harry felt her pass him, heardthe door slide open again, and then a thud and twoloud squeals of pain.

“Who’s that?”

“Who’s that?”

“Ginny?”

“Hermione?”

“What are you doing?”

“I was looking for Ron —”

“Come in and sit down —”

“Not here!” said Harry hurriedly. “I’m here!”

“Ouch!” said Neville.

“Quiet!” said a hoarse voice suddenly.

Page | 91 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Professor Lupin appeared to have woken up at last.Harry could hear movements in his corner. None ofthem spoke.

There was a soft, crackling noise, and a shiveringlight filled the compartment. Professor Lupinappeared to be holding a handful of flames. Theyilluminated his tired, gray face, but his eyes lookedalert and wary.

“Stay where you are,” he said in the same hoarsevoice, and he got slowly to his feet with his handful offire held out in front of him.

But the door slid slowly open before Lupin couldreach it.

Standing in the doorway, illuminated by the shiveringflames in Lupin’s hand, was a cloaked figure thattowered to the ceiling. Its face was completely hiddenbeneath its hood. Harry’s eyes darted downward, andwhat he saw made his stomach contract. There was ahand protruding from the cloak and it was glistening,grayish, slimy-looking, and scabbed, like somethingdead that had decayed in water. ...

But it was visible only for a split second. As thoughthe creature beneath the cloak sensed Harry’s gaze,the hand was suddenly withdrawn into the folds of itsblack cloak.

And then the thing beneath the hood, whatever itwas, drew a long, slow, rattling breath, as though itwere trying to suck something more than air from itssurroundings.

An intense cold swept over them all. Harry felt hisown breath catch in his chest. The cold went deeper

Page | 92 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

than his skin. It was inside his chest, it was insidehis very heart. ...

Harry’s eyes rolled up into his head. He couldn’t see.He was drowning in cold. There was a rushing in hisears as though of water. He was being draggeddownward, the roaring growing louder ...

And then, from far away, he heard screaming,terrible, terrified, pleading screams. He wanted tohelp whoever it was, he tried to move his arms, butcouldn’t ... a thick white fog was swirling around him,inside him —

“Harry! Harry! Are you all right?”

Someone was slapping his face.

“W — what?”

Harry opened his eyes; there were lanterns abovehim, and the floor was shaking — the HogwartsExpress was moving again and the lights had comeback on. He seemed to have slid out of his seat ontothe floor. Ron and Hermione were kneeling next tohim, and above them he could see Neville andProfessor Lupin watching. Harry felt very sick; whenhe put up his hand to push his glasses back on, hefelt cold sweat on his face.

Ron and Hermione heaved him back onto his seat.

“Are you okay?” Ron asked nervously.

“Yeah,” said Harry, looking quickly toward the door.The hooded creature had vanished. “What happened?Where’s that — that thing? Who screamed?”

“No one screamed,” said Ron, more nervously still.

Page | 93 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked around the bright compartment. Ginnyand Neville looked back at him, both very pale.

“But I heard screaming —”

A loud snap made them all jump. Professor Lupin wasbreaking an enormous slab of chocolate into pieces.

“Here,” he said to Harry, handing him a particularlylarge piece. “Eat it. It’ll help.”

Harry took the chocolate but didn’t eat it.

“What was that thing?” he asked Lupin.

“A dementor,” said Lupin, who was now givingchocolate to everyone else. “One of the dementors ofAzkaban.”

Everyone stared at him. Professor Lupin crumpled upthe empty chocolate wrapper and put it in his pocket.

“Eat,” he repeated. “It’ll help. I need to speak to thedriver, excuse me ...”

He strolled past Harry and disappeared into thecorridor.

“Are you sure you’re okay, Harry?” said Hermione,watching Harry anxiously.

“I don’t get it. ... What happened?” said Harry, wipingmore sweat off his face.

“Well — that thing — the dementor — stood there andlooked around (I mean, I think it did, I couldn’t see itsface) — and you — you —”

Page | 94 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I thought you were having a fit or something,” saidRon, who still looked scared. “You went sort of rigidand fell out of your seat and started twitching —”

“And Professor Lupin stepped over you, and walkedtoward the dementor, and pulled out his wand,” saidHermione, “and he said, ‘None of us is hiding SiriusBlack under our cloaks. Go.’ But the dementor didn’tmove, so Lupin muttered something, and a silverything shot out of his wand at it, and it turned aroundand sort of glided away. ...”

“It was horrible,” said Neville, in a higher voice thanusual. “Did you feel how cold it got when it came in?”

“I felt weird,” said Ron, shifting his shouldersuncomfortably. “Like I’d never be cheerful again. ...”

Ginny, who was huddled in her corner looking nearlyas bad as Harry felt, gave a small sob; Hermione wentover and put a comforting arm around her.

“But didn’t any of you — fall off your seats?” saidHarry awkwardly.

“No,” said Ron, looking anxiously at Harry again.“Ginny was shaking like mad, though. ...”

Harry didn’t understand. He felt weak and shivery, asthough he were recovering from a bad bout of flu; healso felt the beginnings of shame. Why had he gone topieces like that, when no one else had?

Professor Lupin had come back. He paused as heentered, looked around, and said, with a small smile,“I haven’t poisoned that chocolate, you know. ...”

Page | 95 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry took a bite and to his great surprise feltwarmth spread suddenly to the tips of his fingers andtoes.

“Well be at Hogwarts in ten minutes,” said ProfessorLupin. “Are you all right, Harry?”

Harry didn’t ask how Professor Lupin knew his name.

“Fine,” he muttered, embarrassed.

They didn’t talk much during the remainder of thejourney. At long last, the train stopped at Hogsmeadestation, and there was a great scramble to getoutside; owls hooted, cats meowed, and Neville’s pettoad croaked loudly from under his hat. It wasfreezing on the tiny platform; rain was driving downin icy sheets.

“Firs’years this way!” called a familiar voice. Harry,Ron, and Hermione turned and saw the giganticoutline of Hagrid at the other end of the platform,beckoning the terrified-looking new students forwardfor their traditional journey across the lake.

“All righ’, you three?” Hagrid yelled over the heads ofthe crowd. They waved at him, but had no chance tospeak to him because the mass of people aroundthem was shunting them away along the platform.Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed the rest of theschool along the platform and out onto a rough mudtrack, where at least a hundred stagecoaches awaitedthe remaining students, each pulled, Harry could onlyassume, by an invisible horse, because when theyclimbed inside and shut the door, the coach set off allby itself, bumping and swaying in procession.

The coach smelled faintly of mold and straw. Harryfelt better since the chocolate, but still weak. Ron and

Page | 96 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione kept looking at him sideways, as thoughfrightened he might collapse again.

As the carriage trundled toward a pair of magnificentwrought iron gates, flanked with stone columnstopped with winged boars, Harry saw two moretowering, hooded dementors, standing guard oneither side. A wave of cold sickness threatened toengulf him again; he leaned back into the lumpy seatand closed his eyes until they had passed the gates.The carriage picked up speed on the long, slopingdrive up to the castle; Hermione was leaning out ofthe tiny window, watching the many turrets andtowers draw nearer. At last, the carriage swayed to ahalt, and Hermione and Ron got out.

As Harry stepped down, a drawling, delighted voicesounded in his ear.

“You fainted, Potter? Is Longbottom telling the truth?You actually fainted?”

Malfoy elbowed past Hermione to block Harry’s wayup the stone steps to the castle, his face gleeful andhis pale eyes glinting maliciously.

“Shove off, Malfoy,” said Ron, whose jaw wasclenched.

“Did you faint as well, Weasley?” said Malfoy loudly.“Did the scary old dementor frighten you too,Weasley?”

“Is there a problem?” said a mild voice. ProfessorLupin had just gotten out of the next carriage.

Malfoy gave Professor Lupin an insolent stare, whichtook in the patches on his robes and the delapidatedsuitcase. With a tiny hint of sarcasm in his voice, he

Page | 97 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

said, “Oh, no — er — Professor,” then he smirked atCrabbe and Goyle and led them up the steps into thecastle.

Hermione prodded Ron in the back to make himhurry, and the three of them joined the crowdswarming up the steps, through the giant oak frontdoors, into the cavernous entrance hall, which was litwith flaming torches, and housed a magnificentmarble staircase that led to the upper floors.

The door into the Great Hall stood open at the right;Harry followed the crowd toward it, but had barelyglimpsed the enchanted ceiling, which was black andcloudy tonight, when a voice called, “Potter! Granger!

I want to see you both!”

Harry and Hermione turned around, surprised.Professor McGonagall, Transfiguration teacher andhead of Gryffindor House, was calling over the headsof the crowd. She was a stern-looking witch who woreher hair in a tight bun; her sharp eyes were framedwith square spectacles. Harry fought his way over toher with a feeling of foreboding: Professor McGonagallhad a way of making him feel he must have donesomething wrong.

“There’s no need to look so worried — I just want aword in my office,” she told them. “Move along there,Weasley.”

Ron stared as Professor McGonagall usheredHarry and Hermione away from the chattering crowd;they accompanied her across the entrance hall, upthe marble staircase, and along a corridor.

Once they were in her office, a small room with alarge, welcoming fire, Professor McGonagall motionedHarry and Hermione to sit down. She settled herself

Page | 98 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

behind her desk and said abruptly, “Professor Lupinsent an owl ahead to say that you were taken ill onthe train, Potter.”

Before Harry could reply, there was a soft knock onthe door and Madam Pomfrey, the nurse, camebustling in.

Harry felt himself going red in the face. It was badenough that he’d passed out, or whatever he haddone, without everyone making all this fuss.

“I’m fine,” he said, “I don’t need anything —”

“Oh, it’s you, is it?” said Madam Pomfrey, ignoringthis and bending down to stare closely at him. “Isuppose you’ve been doing something dangerousagain?”

“It was a dementor, Poppy,” said ProfessorMcGonagall.

They exchanged a dark look, and Madam Pomfreyclucked disapprovingly.

“Setting dementors around a school,” she muttered,pushing back Harry’s hair and feeling his forehead.“He won’t be the last one who collapses. Yes, he’s allclammy. Terrible things, they are, and the effect theyhave on people who are already delicate —”

“I’m not delicate!” said Harry crossly.

“Of course you’re not,” said Madam Pomfreyabsentmindedly, now taking his pulse.

“What does he need?” said Professor McGonagallcrisply. “Bed rest? Should he perhaps spend tonightin the hospital wing?”

Page | 99 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

‘Tm /ine!” said Harry, jumping up. The thought ofwhat Draco Malfoy would say if he had to go to thehospital wing was torture.

“Well, he should have some chocolate, at the veryleast,” said Madam Pomfrey, who was now trying topeer into Harry’s eyes.

“I’ve already had some,” said Harry. “Professor Lupingave me some. He gave it to all of us.”

“Did he, now?” said Madam Pomfrey approvingly. “Sowe’ve finally got a Defense Against the Dark Artsteacher who knows his remedies?”

“Are you sure you feel all right, Potter?” ProfessorMcGonagall said sharply.

“Yes,” said Harry.

“Very well. Kindly wait outside while I have a quickword with Miss Granger about her course schedule,then we can go down to the feast together.”

Harry went back into the corridor with MadamPomfrey, who left for the hospital wing, muttering toherself. He had to wait only a few minutes; thenHermione emerged looking very happy aboutsomething, followed by Professor McGonagall, and thethree of them made their way back down the marblestaircase to the Great Hall.

It was a sea of pointed black hats; each of the longHouse tables was lined with students, their facesglimmering by the light of thousands of candles,which were floating over the tables in midair.

Professor Flitwick, who was a tiny little wizard with ashock of white hair, was carrying an ancient hat anda three-legged stool out of the hall.

Page | 100 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Oh,” said Hermione softly, “we’ve missed theSorting!”

New students at Hogwarts were sorted into Houses bytrying on the Sorting Hat, which shouted out theHouse they were best suited to (Gryffindor,

Ravenclaw, Hufflepuff, or Slytherin). ProfessorMcGonagall strode off toward her empty seat at thestaff table, and Harry and Hermione set off in theother direction, as quietly as possible, toward theGryffindor table. People looked around at them asthey passed along the back of the hall, and a few ofthem pointed at Harry. Had the story of his collapsingin front of the dementor traveled that fast?

He and Hermione sat down on either side of Ron, whohad saved them seats.

“What was all that about?” he muttered to Harry.

Harry started to explain in a whisper, but at thatmoment the headmaster stood up to speak, and hebroke off.

Professor Dumbledore, though very old, always gavean impression of great energy. He had several feet oflong silver hair and beard, half-moon spectacles, andan extremely crooked nose. He was often described asthe greatest wizard of the age, but that wasn’t whyHarry respected him. You couldn’t help trusting AlbusDumbledore, and as Harry watched him beamingaround at the students, he felt really calm for the firsttime since the dementor had entered the traincompartment.

“Welcome!” said Dumbledore, the candlelightshimmering on his beard. “Welcome to another yearat Hogwarts! I have a few things to say to you all, andas one of them is very serious, I think it best to get it

Page | 101 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

out of the way before you become befuddled by ourexcellent feast. ...”

Dumbledore cleared his throat and continued, “Asyou will all be aware after their search of theHogwarts Express, our school is presently playinghost to some of the dementors of Azkaban, who arehere on Ministry of Magic business.”

He paused, and Harry remembered what Mr. Weasleyhad said about Dumbledore not being happy with thedementors guarding the school.

“They are stationed at every entrance to the grounds,”Dumbledore continued, “and while they are with us, Imust make it plain that nobody is to leave schoolwithout permission. Dementors are not to be fooledby tricks or disguises — or even Invisibility Cloaks,”he added blandly, and Harry and Ron glanced at eachother. “It is not in the nature of a dementor tounderstand pleading or excuses. I therefore warneach and every one of you to give them no reason toharm you. I look to the prefects, and our new HeadBoy and Girl, to make sure that no student runs afoulof the dementors,” he said.

Percy, who was sitting a few seats down from Harry,puffed out his chest again and stared aroundimpressively. Dumbledore paused again; he lookedvery seriously around the hall, and nobody moved ormade a sound.

“On a happier note,” he continued, “I am pleased towelcome two new teachers to our ranks this year.

“First, Professor Lupin, who has kindly consented tofill the post of Defense Against the Dark Arts teacher.”

Page | 102 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

There was some scattered, rather unenthusiasticapplause. Only those who had been in thecompartment on the train with Professor Lupinclapped hard, Harry among them. Professor Lupinlooked particularly shabby next to all the otherteachers in their best robes.

“Look at Snape!” Ron hissed in Harry’s ear.

Professor Snape, the Potions master, was staringalong the staff table at Professor Lupin. It wascommon knowledge that Snape wanted the DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts job, but even Harry, who hatedSnape, was startled at the expression twisting histhin, sallow face. It was beyond anger: it was loathing.Harry knew that expression only too well; it was thelook Snape wore every time he set eyes on Harry.

“As to our second new appointment,” Dumbledorecontinued as the lukewarm applause for ProfessorLupin died away. “Well, I am sorry to tell you thatProfessor Kettleburn, our Care of Magical Creaturesteacher, retired at the end of last year in order toenjoy more time with his remaining limbs. However, Iam delighted to say that his place will be filled bynone other than Rubeus Hagrid, who has agreed totake on this teaching job in addition to hisgamekeeping duties.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione stared at one another,stunned. Then they joined in with the applause,which was tumultuous at the Gryffindor table inparticular. Harry leaned forward to see Hagrid, whowas ruby-red in the face and staring down at hisenormous hands, his wide grin hidden in the tangle ofhis black beard.

Page | 103 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“We should’ve known!” Ron roared, pounding thetable. “Who else would have assigned us a bitingbook?”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione were the last to stopclapping, and as Professor Dumbledore startedspeaking again, they saw that Hagrid was wiping hiseyes on the tablecloth.

“Well, I think that’s everything of importance,” saidDumbledore. “Let the feast begin!”

The golden plates and goblets before them filledsuddenly with food and drink. Harry, suddenlyravenous, helped himself to everything he could reachand began to eat.

It was a delicious feast; the hall echoed with talk,laughter, and the clatter of knives and forks. Harry,Ron, and Hermione, however, were eager for it tofinish so that they could talk to Hagrid. They knewhow much being made a teacher would mean to him.Hagrid wasn’t a fully qualified wizard; he had beenexpelled from Hogwarts in his third year for a crimehe had not committed. It had been Harry, Ron, andHermione who had cleared Hagrid’s name last year.

At long last, when the last morsels of pumpkin tarthad melted from the golden platters, Dumbledoregave the word that it was time for them all to go tobed, and they got their chance.

“Congratulations, Hagrid!” Hermione squealed as theyreached the teachers’ table.

“All down ter you three,” said Hagrid, wiping hisshining face on his napkin as he looked up at them.“Can’ believe it ... great man, Dumbledore ... camestraight down to me hut after Professor Kettleburn

Page | 104 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

said he’d had enough. ... It’s what I always wanted.

Overcome with emotion, he buried his face in hisnapkin, and Professor McGonagall shooed them away.

Harry, Ron, and Hermione joined the Gryffindorsstreaming up the marble staircase and, very tirednow, along more corridors, up more and more stairs,to the hidden entrance to Gryffindor Tower. A largeportrait of a fat lady in a pink dress asked them,“Password?”

“Coming through, coming through!” Percy called frombehind the crowd. “The new password’s ‘FortunaMajor’!”

“Oh no,” said Neville Longbottom sadly. He alwayshad trouble remembering the passwords.

Through the portrait hole and across the commonroom, the girls and boys divided toward their separatestaircases. Harry climbed the spiral stair with nothought in his head except how glad he was to beback. They reached their familiar, circular dormitorywith its five four-poster beds, and Harry, lookingaround, felt he was home at last.

Page | 105 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





TALONS AND TEA LEAVES

When Harry, Ron, and Hermione entered the GreatHall for breakfast the next day, the first thing theysaw was Draco Malfoy, who seemed to be entertaininga large group of Slytherins with a very funny story. Asthey passed, Malfoy did a ridiculous impression of aswooning fit and there was a roar of laughter.

“Ignore him,” said Hermione, who was right behindHarry. “Just ignore him, it’s not worth it. ...”

“Hey, Potter!” shrieked Pansy Parkinson, a Slytheringirl with a face like a pug. “Potter! The dementors arecoming, Potter! Woooooooo!”

Harry dropped into a seat at the Gryffindor table, nextto George Weasley.

“New third-year course schedules,” said George,passing them over. “What’s up with you, Harry?”

“Malfoy,” said Ron, sitting down on George’s otherside and glaring over at the Slytherin table.

Page | 106 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

George looked up in time to see Malfoy pretending tofaint with terror again.

“That little git,” he said calmly. “He wasn’t so cockylast night when the dementors were down at our endof the train. Came running into our compartment,didn’t he, Fred?”

“Nearly wet himself,” said Fred, with a contemptuousglance at Malfoy.

“I wasn’t too happy myself,” said George. “They’rehorrible things, those dementors. ...”

“Sort of freeze your insides, don’t they?” said Fred.

“You didn’t pass out, though, did you?” said Harry ina low voice.

“Forget it, Harry,” said George bracingly. “Dad had togo out to Azkaban one time, remember, Fred? And hesaid it was the worst place he’d ever been, he cameback all weak and shaking. ... They suck thehappiness out of a place, dementors. Most of theprisoners go mad in there.”

“Anyway, we’ll see how happy Malfoy looks after ourfirst Quidditch match,” said Fred. “Gryffindor versusSlytherin, first game of the season, remember?”

The only time Harry and Malfoy had faced each otherin a Quidditch match, Malfoy had definitely come offworse. Feeling slightly more cheerful, Harry helpedhimself to sausages and fried tomatoes.

Hermione was examining her new schedule.

“Ooh, good, we’re starting some new subjects today,”she said happily.

Page | 107 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Hermione,” said Ron, frowning as he looked over hershoulder, “they’ve messed up your schedule. Look —they’ve got you down for about ten subjects a day.There isn’t enough time.”

“I’ll manage. I’ve fixed it all with ProfessorMcGonagall.”

“But look,” said Ron, laughing, “see this morning?Nine o’clock, Divination. And underneath, nineo’clock, Muggle Studies. And” — Ron leaned closer tothe schedule, disbelieving — “look — underneaththat, Arithmancy, nine o’clock. I mean, I know you’regood, Hermione, but no one’s that good. How’re yousupposed to be in three classes at once?”

“Don’t be silly,” said Hermione shortly. “Of course Iwon’t be in three classes at once.”

“Well, then —”

“Pass the marmalade,” said Hermione.

“But —”

“Oh, Ron, what’s it to you if my schedule’s a bit full?”Hermione snapped. “I told you, I’ve fixed it all withProfessor McGonagall.”

Just then, Hagrid entered the Great Hall. He waswearing his long moleskin overcoat and wasabsentmindedly swinging a dead polecat from oneenormous hand.

“All righ’?” he said eagerly, pausing on the way to thestaff table. “Yer in my firs’ ever lesson! Right afterlunch! Bin up since five gettin’ everythin’ ready. ...Hope it’s okay. ... Me, a teacher ... hones’ly. ...”

Page | 108 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He grinned broadly at them and headed off to thestaff table, still swinging the polecat.

“Wonder what he’s been getting ready?” said Ron, anote of anxiety in his voice.

The hall was starting to empty as people headed offtoward their first lesson. Ron checked his courseschedule.

“We’d better go, look, Divination’s at the top of NorthTower. It’ll take us ten minutes to get there. ...”

They finished their breakfasts hastily, said good-byeto Fred and George, and walked back through thehall. As they passed the Slytherin table, Malfoy didyet another impression of a fainting fit. The shouts oflaughter followed Harry into the entrance hall.

The journey through the castle to North Tower was along one. Two years at Hogwarts hadn’t taught themeverything about the castle, and they had never beeninside North Tower before.

“There’s — got — to — be — a — shortcut,” Ronpanted as they climbed their seventh long staircaseand emerged on an unfamiliar landing, where therewas nothing but a large painting of a bare stretch ofgrass hanging on the stone wall.

“I think it’s this way,” said Hermione, peering downthe empty passage to the right.

“Can’t be,” said Ron. “That’s south, look, you can seea bit of the lake out of the window ...”

Harry was watching the painting. A fat, dapple-graypony had just ambled onto the grass and was grazingnonchalantly. Harry was used to the subjects of

Page | 109 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hogwarts paintings moving around and leaving theirframes to visit one another, but he always enjoyedwatching it. A moment later, a short, squat knight ina suit of armor clanked into the picture after hispony. By the look of the grass stains on his metalknees, he had just fallen off.

“Aha!” he yelled, seeing Harry, Ron, and Hermione.“What villains are these, that trespass upon myprivate lands! Come to scorn at my fall, perchance?Draw, you knaves, you dogs!”

They watched in astonishment as the little knighttugged his sword out of its scabbard and beganbrandishing it violently, hopping up and down inrage. But the sword was too long for him; aparticularly wild swing made him overbalance, and helanded facedown in the grass.

“Are you all right?” said Harry, moving closer to thepicture.

“Get back, you scurvy braggart! Back, you rogue!”

The knight seized his sword again and used it to pushhimself back up, but the blade sank deeply into thegrass and, though he pulled with all his might, hecouldn’t get it out again. Finally, he had to flop backdown onto the grass and push up his visor to mop hissweating face.

“Listen,” said Harry, taking advantage of the knight’sexhaustion, “we’re looking for the North Tower. Youdon’t know the way, do you?”

“A quest!” The knight’s rage seemed to vanishinstantly. He clanked to his feet and shouted, “Comefollow me, dear friends, and we shall find our goal, orelse shall perish bravely in the charge!”

Page | 110 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He gave the sword another fruitless tug, tried andfailed to mount the fat pony, gave up, and cried, “Onfoot then, good sirs and gentle lady! On! On!”

And he ran, clanking loudly, into the left side of theframe and out of sight.

They hurried after him along the corridor, followingthe sound of his armor. Every now and then theyspotted him running through a picture ahead.

“Be of stout heart, the worst is yet to come!” yelled theknight, and they saw him reappear in front of analarmed group of women in crinolines, whose picturehung on the wall of a narrow spiral staircase.

Puffing loudly, Harry, Ron, and Hermione climbed thetightly spiraling steps, getting dizzier and dizzier,until at last they heard the murmur of voices abovethem and knew they had reached the classroom.

“Farewell!” cried the knight, popping his head into apainting of some sinister-looking monks. “Farewell,my comrades-in-arms! If ever you have need of nobleheart and steely sinew, call upon Sir Cadogan!”

“Yeah, well call you,” muttered Ron as the knightdisappeared, “if we ever need someone mental.”

They climbed the last few steps and emerged onto atiny landing, where most of the class was alreadyassembled. There were no doors off this landing, butRon nudged Harry and pointed at the ceiling, wherethere was a circular trapdoor with a brass plaque onit.

“ ‘Sibyll Trelawney, Divination teacher,’ ” Harry read.“How’re we supposed to get up there?”

Page | 111 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

As though in answer to his question, the trapdoorsuddenly opened, and a silvery ladder descendedright at Harry’s feet. Everyone got quiet.

“After you,” said Ron, grinning, so Harry climbed theladder first.

He emerged into the strangest-looking classroom hehad ever seen. In fact, it didn’t look like a classroomat all, more like a cross between someone’s attic andan old-fashioned tea shop. At least twenty small,circular tables were crammed inside it, allsurrounded by chintz armchairs and fat little poufs.Everything was lit with a dim, crimson light; thecurtains at the windows were all closed, and themany lamps were draped with dark red scarves. Itwas stiflingly warm, and the fire that was burningunder the crowded mantelpiece was giving off aheavy, sickly sort of perfume as it heated a largecopper kettle. The shelves running around thecircular walls were crammed with dusty-lookingfeathers, stubs of candles, many packs of tatteredplaying cards, countless silvery crystal balls, and ahuge array of teacups.

Ron appeared at Harry’s shoulder as the classassembled around them, all talking in whispers.

“Where is she?” Ron said.

A voice came suddenly out of the shadows, a soft,misty sort of voice.

“Welcome,” it said. “How nice to see you in thephysical world at last.”

Harry’s immediate impression was of a large,glittering insect. Professor Trelawney moved into thefirelight, and they saw that she was very thin; her

Page | 112 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

large glasses magnified her eyes to several times theirnatural size, and she was draped in a gauzy spangledshawl. Innumerable chains and beads hung aroundher spindly neck, and her arms and hands wereencrusted with bangles and rings.

“Sit, my children, sit,” she said, and they all climbedawkwardly into armchairs or sank onto poufs. Harry,Ron, and Hermione sat themselves around the sameround table.

“Welcome to Divination,” said Professor Trelawney,who had seated herself in a winged armchair in frontof the fire. “My name is Professor Trelawney. You maynot have seen me before. I find that descending toooften into the hustle and bustle of the main schoolclouds my Inner Eye.”

Nobody said anything to this extraordinarypronouncement. Professor Trelawney delicatelyrearranged her shawl and continued, “So you havechosen to study Divination, the most difficult of allmagical arts. I must warn you at the outset that ifyou do not have the Sight, there is very little I will beable to teach you. Books can take you only so far inthis field. ...”

At these words, both Harry and Ron glanced,grinning, at Hermione, who looked startled at thenews that books wouldn’t be much help in thissubject.

“Many witches and wizards, talented though they arein the area of loud bangs and smells and suddendisappearings, are yet unable to penetrate the veiledmysteries of the future,” Professor Trelawney went on,her enormous, gleaming eyes moving from face tonervous face. “It is a Gift granted to few. You, boy,”

Page | 113 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

she said suddenly to Neville, who almost toppled offhis pouf. “Is your grandmother well?”

“I think so,” said Neville tremulously.

“I wouldn’t be so sure if I were you, dear,” saidProfessor Trelawney, the firelight glinting on her longemerald earrings. Neville gulped. Professor Trelawneycontinued placidly. “We will be covering the basicmethods of Divination this year. The first term will bedevoted to reading the tea leaves. Next term we shallprogress to palmistry. By the way, my dear,” she shotsuddenly at Parvati Patil, “beware a red-haired man.”

Parvati gave a startled look at Ron, who was rightbehind her, and edged her chair away from him.

“In the second term,” Professor Trelawney went on,

“we shall progress to the crystal ball — if we havefinished with fire omens, that is. Unfortunately,classes will be disrupted in February by a nasty boutof flu. I myself will lose my voice. And around Easter,one of our number will leave us forever.”

A very tense silence followed this pronouncement, butProfessor Trelawney seemed unaware of it.

“I wonder, dear,” she said to Lavender Brown, whowas nearest and shrank back in her chair, “if youcould pass me the largest silver teapot?”

Lavender, looking relieved, stood up, took anenormous teapot from the shelf, and put it down onthe table in front of Professor Trelawney.

“Thank you, my dear. Incidentally, that thing you aredreading — it will happen on Friday the sixteenth ofOctober.”

Page | 114 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Lavender trembled.

“Now, I want you all to divide into pairs. Collect ateacup from the shelf, come to me, and I will fill it.Then sit down and drink, drink until only the dregsremain. Swill these around the cup three times withthe left hand, then turn the cup upside down on itssaucer, wait for the last of the tea to drain away, thengive your cup to your partner to read. You willinterpret the patterns using pages five and six ofUnfogging the Future. I shall move among you, helpingand instructing. Oh, and dear” — she caught Nevilleby the arm as he made to stand up — “after you’vebroken your first cup, would you be so kind as toselect one of the blue patterned ones? I’m ratherattached to the pink.”

Sure enough, Neville had no sooner reached the shelfof teacups when there was a tinkle of breaking china.Professor Trelawney swept over to him holding adustpan and brush and said, “One of the blue ones,then, dear, if you wouldn’t mind ... thank you. ...”

When Harry and Ron had had their teacups filled,they went back to their table and tried to drink thescalding tea quickly. They swilled the dregs around asProfessor Trelawney had instructed, then drained thecups and swapped over.

“Right,” said Ron as they both opened their books atpages five and six. “What can you see in mine?”

“A load of soggy brown stuff,” said Harry. The heavilyperfumed smoke in the room was making him feelsleepy and stupid.

“Broaden your minds, my dears, and allow your eyesto see past the mundane!” Professor Trelawney criedthrough the gloom.

Page | 115 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry tried to pull himself together.

“Right, you’ve got a crooked sort of cross ...” Heconsulted Unfogging the Future. “That means you’regoing to have ‘trials and suffering’ — sorry about that— but there’s a thing that could be the sun ... hangon ... that means ‘great happiness’ ... so you’re goingto suffer but be very happy. ...”

“You need your Inner Eye tested, if you ask me,” saidRon, and they both had to stifle their laughs asProfessor Trelawney gazed in their direction.

“My turn ...” Ron peered into Harry’s teacup, hisforehead wrinkled with effort. “There’s a blob a bit likea bowler hat,” he said. “Maybe you’re going to workfor the Ministry of Magic. ...”

He turned the teacup the other way up.

“But this way it looks more like an acorn. ... What’sthat?” He scanned his copy of Unfogging the Future. “‘A windfall, unexpected gold.’ Excellent, you can lendme some ... and there’s a thing here,” he turned thecup again, “that looks like an animal ... yeah, if thatwas its head ... it looks like a hippo ... no, a sheep ...”

Professor Trelawney whirled around as Harry let out asnort of laughter.

“Let me see that, my dear,” she said reprovingly toRon, sweeping over and snatching Harry’s cup fromhim. Everyone went quiet to watch.

Professor Trelawney was staring into the teacup,rotating it counterclockwise.

“The falcon ... my dear, you have a deadly enemy.”

Page | 116 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“But everyone knows that,” said Hermione in a loudwhisper. Professor Trelawney stared at her.

“Well, they do,” said Hermione. “Everybody knowsabout Harry and You-Know-Who.”

Harry and Ron stared at her with a mixture ofamazement and admiration. They had never heardHermione speak to a teacher like that before.

Professor Trelawney chose not to reply. She loweredher huge eyes to Harry’s cup again and continued toturn it.

“The club ... an attack. Dear, dear, this is not a happycup. ...”

“I thought that was a bowler hat,” said Ronsheepishly.

“The skull ... danger in your path, my dear. ...”

Everyone was staring, transfixed, at ProfessorTrelawney, who gave the cup a final turn, gasped, andthen screamed.

There was another tinkle of breaking china; Nevillehad smashed his second cup. Professor Trelawneysank into a vacant armchair, her glittering hand ather heart and her eyes closed.

“My dear boy ... my poor, dear boy ... no ... it iskinder not to say ... no ... don’t ask me. ...”

“What is it, Professor?” said Dean Thomas at once.Everyone had got to their feet, and slowly theycrowded around Harry and Ron’s table, pressing closeto Professor Trelawney’s chair to get a good look atHarry’s cup.

Page | 117 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“My dear,” Professor Trelawney’s huge eyes openeddramatically, “you have the Grim.”

“The what?” said Harry.

He could tell that he wasn’t the only one who didn’tunderstand; Dean Thomas shrugged at him andLavender Brown looked puzzled, but nearly everybodyelse clapped their hands to their mouths in horror.

“The Grim, my dear, the Grim!” cried ProfessorTrelawney, who looked shocked that Harry hadn’tunderstood. “The giant, spectral dog that hauntschurchyards! My dear boy, it is an omen — the worstomen — of death.!”

Harry’s stomach lurched. That dog on the cover ofDeath Omens in Flourish and Blotts — the dog in theshadows of Magnolia Crescent ... Lavender Brownclapped her hands to her mouth too. Everyone waslooking at Harry, everyone except Hermione, who hadgotten up and moved around to the back of ProfessorTrelawney’s chair.

“I don’t think it looks like a Grim,” she said flatly.

Professor Trelawney surveyed Hermione withmounting dislike.

“You’ll forgive me for saying so, my dear, but Iperceive very little aura around you. Very littlereceptivity to the resonances of the future.”

Seamus Finnigan was tilting his head from side toside.

“It looks like a Grim if you do this,” he said, with hiseyes almost shut, “but it looks more like a donkeyfrom here,” he said, leaning to the left.

Page | 118 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“When you’ve all finished deciding whether I’m goingto die or not!” said Harry, taking even himself bysurprise. Now nobody seemed to want to look at him.

“I think we will leave the lesson here for today,” saidProfessor Trelawney in her mistiest voice. “Yes ...please pack away your things. ...”

Silently the class took their teacups back to ProfessorTrelawney, packed away their books, and closed theirbags. Even Ron was avoiding Harry’s eyes.

“Until we meet again,” said Professor Trelawneyfaintly, “fair fortune be yours. Oh, and dear” — shepointed at Neville — “you’ll be late next time, so mindyou work extra-hard to catch up.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione descended ProfessorTrelawney’s ladder and the winding stair in silence,then set off for Professor McGonagall’sTransfiguration lesson. It took them so long to findher classroom that, early as they had left Divination,they were only just in time.

Harry chose a seat right at the back of the room,feeling as though he were sitting in a very brightspotlight; the rest of the class kept shooting furtiveglances at him, as though he were about to drop deadat any moment. He hardly heard what ProfessorMcGonagall was telling them about Animagi (wizardswho could transform at will into animals), and wasn’teven watching when she transformed herself in frontof their eyes into a tabby cat with spectacle markingsaround her eyes.

“Really, what has got into you all today?” saidProfessor McGonagall, turning back into herself witha faint pop, and staring around at them all. “Not that

Page | 119 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

it matters, but that’s the first time mytransformation’s not got applause from a class.”

Everybody’s heads turned toward Harry again, butnobody spoke. Then Hermione raised her hand.

“Please, Professor, we’ve just had our first Divinationclass, and we were reading the tea leaves, and —”

“Ah, of course,” said Professor McGonagall, suddenlyfrowning. “There is no need to say any more, MissGranger. Tell me, which of you will be dying thisyear?”

Everyone stared at her.

“Me,” said Harry, finally.

“I see,” said Professor McGonagall, fixing Harry withher beady eyes. “Then you should know, Potter, thatSibyll Trelawney has predicted the death of onestudent a year since she arrived at this school. Noneof them has died yet. Seeing death omens is herfavorite way of greeting a new class. If it were not forthe fact that I never speak ill of my colleagues —”

Professor McGonagall broke off, and they saw that hernostrils had gone white. She went on, more calmly,“Divination is one of the most imprecise branches ofmagic. I shall not conceal from you that I have verylittle patience with it. True Seers are very rare, andProfessor Trelawney —”

She stopped again, and then said, in a very matter-of-fact tone, “You look in excellent health to me, Potter,so you will excuse me if I don’t let you off homeworktoday. I assure you that if you die, you need not handit in.”

Page | 120 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione laughed. Harry felt a bit better. It washarder to feel scared of a lump of tea leaves awayfrom the dim red light and befuddling perfume ofProfessor Trelawney’s classroom. Not everyone wasconvinced, however. Ron still looked worried, andLavender whispered, “But what about Neville’s cup?”

When the Transfiguration class had finished, theyjoined the crowd thundering toward the Great Hall forlunch.

“Ron, cheer up,” said Hermione, pushing a dish ofstew toward him. “You heard what ProfessorMcGonagall said.”

Ron spooned stew onto his plate and picked up hisfork but didn’t start.

“Harry,” he said, in a low, serious voice, “you haven’tseen a great black dog anywhere, have you?”

“Yeah, I have,” said Harry. “I saw one the night I leftthe Dursleys’.”

Ron let his fork fall with a clatter.

“Probably a stray,” said Hermione calmly.

Ron looked at Hermione as though she had gonemad.

“Hermione, if Harry’s seen a Grim, that’s — that’sbad,” he said. “My — my uncle Bilius saw one and —and he died twenty-four hours later!”

“Coincidence,” said Hermione airily, pouring herselfsome pumpkin juice.

Page | 121 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You don’t know what you’re talking about!” said Ron,starting to get angry. “Grims scare the living daylightsout of most wizards!”

“There you are, then,” said Hermione in a superiortone. “They see the Grim and die of fright. The Grim’snot an omen, it’s the cause of death! And Harry’s stillwith us because he’s not stupid enough to see oneand think, right, well, I’d better kick the bucket then!”

Ron mouthed wordlessly at Hermione, who openedher bag, took out her new Arithmancy book, andpropped it open against the juice jug.

“I think Divination seems very woolly,” she said,searching for her page. “A lot of guesswork, if you askme.”

“There was nothing woolly about the Grim in thatcup!” said Ron hotly.

“You didn’t seem quite so confident when you weretelling Harry it was a sheep,” said Hermione coolly.

“Professor Trelawney said you didn’t have the rightaura! You just don’t like being bad at something for achange!”

He had touched a nerve. Hermione slammed herArithmancy book down on the table so hard that bitsof meat and carrot flew everywhere.

“If being good at Divination means I have to pretendto see death omens in a lump of tea leaves, I’m notsure I’ll be studying it much longer! That lesson wasabsolute rubbish compared with my Arithmancyclass!”

She snatched up her bag and stalked away.

Page | 122 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Ron frowned after her.

“What’s she talking about?” he said to Harry. “Shehasn’t been to an Arithmancy class yet.”

Harry was pleased to get out of the castle after lunch.Yesterday’s rain had cleared; the sky was a clear, palegray, and the grass was springy and damp underfootas they set off for their first ever Care of MagicalCreatures class.

Ron and Hermione weren’t speaking to each other.Harry walked beside them in silence as they wentdown the sloping lawns to Hagrid’s hut on the edge ofthe Forbidden Forest. It was only when he spottedthree only-too-familiar backs ahead of them that herealized they must be having these lessons with theSlytherins. Malfoy was talking animatedly to Crabbeand Goyle, who were chortling. Harry was quite surehe knew what they were talking about.

Hagrid was waiting for his class at the door of his hut.He stood in his moleskin overcoat, with Fang theboarhound at his heels, looking impatient to start.

“C’mon, now, get a move on!” he called as the classapproached. “Got a real treat for yeh today! Greatlesson cornin’ up! Everyone here? Right, follow me!”

For one nasty moment, Harry thought that Hagridwas going to lead them into the forest; Harry had hadenough unpleasant experiences in there to last him alifetime. However, Hagrid strolled off around the edgeof the trees, and five minutes later, they foundthemselves outside a kind of paddock. There wasnothing in there.

Page | 123 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Everyone gather ’round the fence here!” he called.“That’s it — make sure yeh can see — now, firs’ thingyeh’ll want ter do is open yer books —”

“How?” said the cold, drawling voice of Draco Malfoy.

“Eh?” said Hagrid.

“How do we open our books?” Malfoy repeated. Hetook out his copy of The Monster Book of Monsters,which he had bound shut with a length of rope. Otherpeople took theirs out too; some, like Harry, hadbelted their book shut; others had crammed theminside tight bags or clamped them together withbinder clips.

“Hasn’ — hasn’ anyone bin able ter open theirbooks?” said Hagrid, looking crestfallen.

The class all shook their heads.

“Yeh’ve got ter stroke ’em,” said Hagrid, as thoughthis was the most obvious thing in the world. “Look —

He took Hermione’s copy and ripped off the Spellotapethat bound it. The book tried to bite, but Hagrid ran agiant forefinger down its spine, and the bookshivered, and then fell open and lay quiet in his hand.

“Oh, how silly we’ve all been!” Malfoy sneered. “Weshould have stroked them! Why didn’t we guess!”

“I — I thought they were funny,” Hagrid saiduncertainly to Hermione.

“Oh, tremendously funny!” said Malfoy. “Really witty,giving us books that try and rip our hands off!”

Page | 124 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Shut up, Malfoy,” said Harry quietly. Hagrid waslooking downcast and Harry wanted Hagrid’s firstlesson to be a success.

“Righ’ then,” said Hagrid, who seemed to have lost histhread, “so — so yeh’ve got yer books an’ — an’ —now yeh need the Magical Creatures. Yeah. So I’ll goan’ get ’em. Hang on ...”

He strode away from them into the forest and out ofsight.

“God, this place is going to the dogs,” said Malfoyloudly. “That oaf teaching classes, my father’ll have afit when I tell him —”

“Shut up, Malfoy,” Harry repeated.

“Careful, Potter, there’s a dementor behind you —”

“Oooooooh!” squealed Lavender Brown, pointingtoward the opposite side of the paddock.

Trotting toward them were a dozen of the most bizarrecreatures Harry had ever seen. They had the bodies,hind legs, and tails of horses, but the front legs,wings, and heads of what seemed to be giant eagles,with cruel, steel-colored beaks and large, brilliantlyorange eyes. The talons on their front legs were half afoot long and deadly looking. Each of the beasts had athick leather collar around its neck, which wasattached to a long chain, and the ends of all of thesewere held in the vast hands of Hagrid, who camejogging into the paddock behind the creatures.

“Gee up, there!” he roared, shaking the chains andurging the creatures toward the fence where the classstood. Everyone drew back slightly as Hagrid reachedthem and tethered the creatures to the fence.

Page | 125 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Hippogriffs!” Hagrid roared happily, waving a hand atthem. “Beau’iful, aren’ they?”

Harry could sort of see what Hagrid meant. Once yougot over the first shock of seeing something that washalf horse, half bird, you started to appreciate thehippogriffs’ gleaming coats, changing smoothly fromfeather to hair, each of them a different color: stormygray, bronze, pinkish roan, gleaming chestnut, andinky black.

“So,” said Hagrid, rubbing his hands together andbeaming around, “if yeh wan’ ter come a bit nearer —”

No one seemed to want to. Harry, Ron, and Hermione,however, approached the fence cautiously.

“Now, firs’ thing yeh gotta know abou’ hippogriffs is,they’re proud,” said Hagrid. “Easily offended,hippogriffs are. Don’t never insult one, ’cause it mightbe the last thing yeh do.”

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle weren’t listening; theywere talking in an undertone and Harry had a nastyfeeling they were plotting how best to disrupt thelesson.

“Yeh always wait fer the hippogriff ter make the firs’move,” Hagrid continued. “It’s polite, see? Yeh walktoward him, and yeh bow, an’ yeh wait. If he bowsback, yeh’re allowed ter touch him. If he doesn’ bow,then get away from him sharpish, ’cause those talonshurt.

“Right — who wants ter go first?”

Most of the class backed farther away in answer.

Even Harry, Ron, and Hermione had misgivings. Thehippogriffs were tossing their fierce heads and flexing

Page | 126 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

their powerful wings; they didn’t seem to like beingtethered like this.

“No one?” said Hagrid, with a pleading look.

“I’ll do it,” said Harry.

There was an intake of breath from behind him, andboth Lavender and Parvati whispered, “Oooh, no,Harry, remember your tea leaves!”

Harry ignored them. He climbed over the paddockfence.

“Good man, Harry!” roared Hagrid. “Right then — let’ssee how yeh get on with Buckbeak.”

He untied one of the chains, pulled the gray hippogriffaway from its fellows, and slipped off its leathercollar. The class on the other side of the paddockseemed to be holding its breath. Malfoy’s eyes werenarrowed maliciously.

“Easy, now, Harry,” said Hagrid quietly. “Yeh’ve goteye contact, now try not ter blink. ... Hippogriffs don’trust yeh if yeh blink too much. ...”

Harry’s eyes immediately began to water, but hedidn’t shut them. Buckbeak had turned his great,sharp head and was staring at Harry with one fierceorange eye.

“Tha’s it,” said Hagrid. “Tha’s it, Harry ... now, bow

Harry didn’t feel much like exposing the back of hisneck to Buckbeak, but he did as he was told. He gavea short bow and then looked up.

Page | 127 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The hippogriff was still staring haughtily at him. Itdidn’t move.

“Ah,” said Hagrid, sounding worried. “Right — backaway, now, Harry, easy does it —”

But then, to Harry’s enormous surprise, the hippogriffsuddenly bent its scaly front knees and sank intowhat was an unmistakable bow.

“Well done, Harry!” said Hagrid, ecstatic. “Right —yeh can touch him! Pat his beak, go on!”

Feeling that a better reward would have been to backaway, Harry moved slowly toward the hippogriff andreached out toward it. He patted the beak severaltimes and the hippogriff closed its eyes lazily, asthough enjoying it.

The class broke into applause, all except for Malfoy,Crabbe, and Goyle, who were looking deeplydisappointed.

“Righ’ then, Harry,” said Hagrid. “I reckon he might’let yeh ride him!”

This was more than Harry had bargained for. He wasused to a broomstick; but he wasn’t sure a hippogriffwould be quite the same.

“Yeh climb up there, jus’ behind the wing joint,” saidHagrid, “an’ mind yeh don’ pull any of his feathersout, he won’ like that. ...”

Harry put his foot on the top of Buckbeak’s wing andhoisted himself onto its back. Buckbeak stood up.Harry wasn’t sure where to hold on; everything infront of him was covered with feathers.

Page | 128 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Go on, then!” roared Hagrid, slapping the hippogriff’shindquarters.

Without warning, twelve-foot wings flapped open oneither side of Harry; he just had time to seize thehippogriff around the neck before he was soaringupward. It was nothing like a broomstick, and Harryknew which one he preferred; the hippogriff’s wingsbeat uncomfortably on either side of him, catchinghim under his legs and making him feel he was aboutto be thrown off; the glossy feathers slipped under hisfingers and he didn’t dare get a stronger grip; insteadof the smooth action of his Nimbus Two Thousand, henow felt himself rocking backward and forward as thehindquarters of the hippogriff rose and fell with itswings.

Buckbeak flew him once around the paddock andthen headed back to the ground; this was the bitHarry had been dreading; he leaned back as thesmooth neck lowered, feeling he was going to slip offover the beak, then felt a heavy thud as the four ill-assorted feet hit the ground. He just managed to holdon and push himself straight again.

“Good work, Harry!” roared Hagrid as everyone exceptMalfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle cheered. “Okay, who elsewants a go?”

Emboldened by Harry’s success, the rest of the classclimbed cautiously into the paddock. Hagrid untiedthe hippogriffs one by one, and soon people werebowing nervously, all over the paddock. Neville ranrepeatedly backward from his, which didn’t seem towant to bend its knees. Ron and Hermione practicedon the chestnut, while Harry watched.

Page | 129 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had taken over Buckbeak.He had bowed to Malfoy, who was now patting hisbeak, looking disdainful.

“This is very easy,” Malfoy drawled, loud enough forHarry to hear him. “I knew it must have been, ifPotter could do it. ... I bet you’re not dangerous at all,are you?” he said to the hippogriff. “Are you, you greatugly brute?”

It happened in a flash of steely talons; Malfoy let out ahigh-pitched scream and next moment, Hagrid waswrestling Buckbeak back into his collar as hestrained to get at Malfoy, who lay curled in the grass,blood blossoming over his robes.

“I’m dying!” Malfoy yelled as the class panicked. “I’mdying, look at me! It’s killed me!”

“Yer not dyin’!” said Hagrid, who had gone very white.“Someone help me — gotta get him outta here —”

Hermione ran to hold open the gate as Hagrid liftedMalfoy easily. As they passed, Harry saw that therewas a long, deep gash on Malfoy’s arm; bloodsplattered the grass and Hagrid ran with him, up theslope toward the castle.

Very shaken, the Care of Magical Creatures classfollowed at a walk. The Slytherins were all shoutingabout Hagrid.

“They should fire him straight away!” said PansyParkinson, who was in tears.

“It was Malfoy’s fault!” snapped Dean Thomas.

Crabbe and Goyle flexed their muscles threateningly.

Page | 130 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

They all climbed the stone steps into the desertedentrance hall.

“I’m going to see if he’s okay!” said Pansy, and they allwatched her run up the marble staircase. TheSlytherins, still muttering about Hagrid, headed awayin the direction of their dungeon common room;

Harry, Ron, and Hermione proceeded upstairs toGryffindor Tower.

“D’you think he’ll be all right?” said Hermionenervously.

“ ’Course he will. Madam Pomfrey can mend cuts inabout a second,” said Harry, who had had far worseinjuries mended magically by the nurse.

“That was a really bad thing to happen in Hagrid’sfirst class, though, wasn’t it?” said Ron, lookingworried. “Trust Malfoy to mess things up for him. ...”

They were among the first to reach the Great Hall atdinnertime, hoping to see Hagrid, but he wasn’t there.

“They wouldn’t fire him, would they?” said Hermioneanxiously, not touching her steak-and-kidneypudding.

“They’d better not,” said Ron, who wasn’t eatingeither.

Harry was watching the Slytherin table. A large groupincluding Crabbe and Goyle was huddled together,deep in conversation. Harry was sure they werecooking up their own version of how Malfoy had beeninjured.

“Well, you can’t say it wasn’t an interesting first dayback,” said Ron gloomily.

Page | 131 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

They went up to the crowded Gryffindor commonroom after dinner and tried to do the homeworkProfessor McGonagall had given them, but all three ofthem kept breaking off and glancing out of the towerwindow.

“There’s a light on in Hagrid’s window,” Harry saidsuddenly.

Ron looked at his watch.

“If we hurried, we could go down and see him. It’s stillquite early. ...”

“I don’t know,” Hermione said slowly, and Harry sawher glance at him.

“I’m allowed to walk across the grounds,” he saidpointedly. “Sirius Black hasn’t got past the dementorsyet, has he?”

So they put their things away and headed out of theportrait hole, glad to meet nobody on their way to thefront doors, as they weren’t entirely sure they weresupposed to be out.

The grass was still wet and looked almost black in thetwilight. When they reached Hagrid’s hut, theyknocked, and a voice growled, “C’min.”

Hagrid was sitting in his shirtsleeves at his scrubbedwooden table; his boarhound, Fang, had his head inHagrid’s lap. One look told them that Hagrid had beendrinking a lot; there was a pewter tankard almost asbig as a bucket in front of him, and he seemed to behaving difficulty getting them into focus.

Page | 132 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“ ’Spect it’s a record,” he said thickly, when herecognized them. “Don’ reckon they’ve ever had ateacher who lasted on’y a day before.”

“You haven’t been fired, Hagrid!” gasped Hermione.

“Not yet,” said Hagrid miserably, taking a huge gulpof whatever was in the tankard. “But’s only a mattero’ time, i’n’t it, after Malfoy ...”

“How is he?” said Ron as they all sat down. “It wasn’tserious, was it?”

“Madam Pomfrey fixed him best she could,” saidHagrid dully, “but he’s sayin’ it’s still agony ... coveredin bandages ... moanin’ ...”

“He’s faking it,” said Harry at once. “Madam Pomfreycan mend anything. She regrew half my bones lastyear. Trust Malfoy to milk it for all it’s worth.”

“School gov’nors have bin told, o’ course,” said Hagridmiserably. “They reckon I started too big. Shoulda lefthippogriffs fer later ... done flobberworms or summat.... Jus’ thought it’d make a good firs’ lesson. ... ’S allmy fault. ...”

“It’s all Malfoy’s fault, Hagrid!” said Hermioneearnestly.

“We’re witnesses,” said Harry. “You said hippogriffsattack if you insult them. It’s Malfoy’s problem thathe wasn’t listening. We’ll tell Dumbledore what reallyhappened.”

“Yeah, don’t worry, Hagrid, we’ll back you up,” saidRon.

Page | 133 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Tears leaked out of the crinkled corners of Hagrid’sbeetle-black eyes. He grabbed both Harry and Ronand pulled them into a bone-breaking hug.

“I think you’ve had enough to drink, Hagrid,” saidHermione firmly. She took the tankard from the tableand went outside to empty it.

“Ar, maybe she’s right,” said Hagrid, letting go ofHarry and Ron, who both staggered away, rubbingtheir ribs. Hagrid heaved himself out of his chair andfollowed Hermione unsteadily outside. They heard aloud splash.

“What’s he done?” said Harry nervously as Hermionecame back in with the empty tankard.

“Stuck his head in the water barrel,” said Hermione,putting the tankard away.

Hagrid came back, his long hair and beard soppingwet, wiping the water out of his eyes.

“Tha’s better,” he said, shaking his head like a dogand drenching them all. “Listen, it was good of yeh tercome an’ see me, I really —”

Hagrid stopped dead, staring at Harry as though he’donly just realized he was there.

“WHAT DYEH THINK YOU’RE DOIN’, EH?” he roared,so suddenly that they jumped a foot in the air.

“YEH’RE NOT TO GO WANDERIN’ AROUND AFTERDARK, HARRY! AN’ YOU TWO! LETTIN’ HIM!”

Hagrid strode over to Harry, grabbed his arm, andpulled him to the door.

Page | 134 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“C’mon!” Hagrid said angrily. “I’m takin’yer all backup ter school, an’ don’ let me catch yeh walkin’ downter see me after dark again. I’m not worth that!”

Page | 135 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



THE BOGGART IN THE WARDROBE

Malfoy didn’t reappear in classes until late onThursday morning, when the Slytherins andGryffindors were halfway through double Potions. Heswaggered into the dungeon, his right arm covered inbandages and bound up in a sling, acting, in Harry’sopinion, as though he were the heroic survivor ofsome dreadful battle.

“How is it, Draco?” simpered Pansy Parkinson. “Doesit hurt much?”

“Yeah,” said Malfoy, putting on a brave sort ofgrimace. But Harry saw him wink at Crabbe andGoyle when Pansy had looked away.

“Settle down, settle down,” said Professor Snape idly.

Harry and Ron scowled at each other; Snape wouldn’thave said “settle down” if they’d walked in late, he’dhave given them detention. But Malfoy had alwaysbeen able to get away with anything in Snape’s

Page | 136 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

classes; Snape was head of Slytherin House, andgenerally favored his own students above all others.

They were making a new potion today, a ShrinkingSolution. Malfoy set up his cauldron right next toHarry and Ron, so that they were preparing theiringredients on the same table.

“Sir,” Malfoy called, “sir, I’ll need help cutting upthese daisy roots, because of my arm —”

“Weasley, cut up Malfoy’s roots for him,” said Snapewithout looking up.

Ron went brick red.

“There’s nothing wrong with your arm,” he hissed atMalfoy.

Malfoy smirked across the table.

“Weasley, you heard Professor Snape; cut up theseroots.”

Ron seized his knife, pulled Malfoy’s roots towardhim, and began to chop them roughly, so that theywere all different sizes.

“Professor,” drawled Malfoy, “Weasley’s mutilating myroots, sir.”

Snape approached their table, stared down hishooked nose at the roots, then gave Ron anunpleasant smile from beneath his long, greasy blackhair.

“Change roots with Malfoy, Weasley.”

“But, sir — !”

Page | 137 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Ron had spent the last quarter of an hour carefullyshredding his own roots into exactly equal pieces.

“Now,” said Snape in his most dangerous voice.

Ron shoved his own beautifully cut roots across thetable at Malfoy, then took up the knife again.

“And, sir, 111 need this shrivelfig skinned,” saidMalfoy, his voice full of malicious laughter.

“Potter, you can skin Malfoy’s shrivelfig,” said Snape,giving Harry the look of loathing he always reservedjust for him.

Harry took Malfoy’s shrivelfig as Ron began trying torepair the damage to the roots he now had to use.Harry skinned the shrivelfig as fast as he could andflung it back across the table at Malfoy withoutspeaking. Malfoy was smirking more broadly thanever.

“Seen your pal Hagrid lately?” he asked them quietly.

“None of your business,” said Ron jerkily, withoutlooking up.

“I’m afraid he won’t be a teacher much longer,” saidMalfoy in a tone of mock sorrow. “Father’s not veryhappy about my injury —”

“Keep talking, Malfoy, and I’ll give you a real injury,”snarled Ron.

“— he’s complained to the school governors. And tothe Ministry of Magic. Father’s got a lot of influence,you know. And a lasting injury like this” — he gave ahuge, fake sigh — “who knows if my arm’ll ever be thesame again?”

Page | 138 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“So that’s why you’re putting it on,” said Harry,accidentally beheading a dead caterpillar because hishand was shaking in anger. “To try to get Hagridfired.”

“Well,” said Malfoy, lowering his voice to a whisper,

“partly, Potter. But there are other benefits too.Weasley, slice my caterpillars for me.”

A few cauldrons away, Neville was in trouble. Nevilleregularly went to pieces in Potions lessons; it was hisworst subject, and his great fear of Professor Snapemade things ten times worse. His potion, which wassupposed to be a bright, acid green, had turned —

“Orange, Longbottom,” said Snape, ladling some upand allowing it to splash back into the cauldron, sothat everyone could see. “Orange. Tell me, boy, doesanything penetrate that thick skull of yours? Didn’tyou hear me say, quite clearly, that only one ratspleen was needed? Didn’t I state plainly that a dashof leech juice would suffice? What do I have to do tomake you understand, Longbottom?”

Neville was pink and trembling. He looked as thoughhe was on the verge of tears.

“Please, sir,” said Hermione, “please, I could helpNeville put it right —”

“I don’t remember asking you to show off, MissGranger,” said Snape coldly, and Hermione went aspink as Neville. “Longbottom, at the end of this lessonwe will feed a few drops of this potion to your toadand see what happens. Perhaps that will encourageyou to do it properly.”

Snape moved away, leaving Neville breathless withfear.

Page | 139 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Help me!” he moaned to Hermione.

“Hey, Harry,” said Seamus Finnigan, leaning over toborrow Harry’s brass scales, “have you heard? DailyProphet this morning — they reckon Sirius Black’sbeen sighted.”

“Where?” said Harry and Ron quickly. On the otherside of the table, Malfoy looked up, listening closely.

“Not too far from here,” said Seamus, who lookedexcited. “It was a Muggle who saw him. ’Course, shedidn’t really understand. The Muggles think he’s justan ordinary criminal, don’t they? So she phoned thetelephone hot line. By the time the Ministry of Magicgot there, he was gone.”

“Not too far from here ... ,” Ron repeated, lookingsignificantly at Harry. He turned around and sawMalfoy watching closely. “What, Malfoy? Needsomething else skinned?”

But Malfoy’s eyes were shining malevolently, and theywere fixed on Harry. He leaned across the table.

“Thinking of trying to catch Black single-handed,Potter?”

“Yeah, that’s right,” said Harry offhandedly.

Malfoy’s thin mouth was curving in a mean smile.

“Of course, if it was me,” he said quietly, “I’d havedone something before now. I wouldn’t be staying inschool like a good boy, I’d be out there looking forhim.”

“What are you talking about, Malfoy?” said Ronroughly.

Page | 140 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t you know, Potter?” breathed Malfoy, his paleeyes narrowed.

“Know what?”

Malfoy let out a low, sneering laugh.

“Maybe you’d rather not risk your neck,” he said.“Want to leave it to the dementors, do you? But if itwas me, I’d want revenge. I’d hunt him down myself.”

“ What are you talking about?” said Harry angrily, butat that moment Snape called, “You should havefinished adding your ingredients by now; this potionneeds to stew before it can be drunk, so clear awaywhile it simmers and then we’ll test Longbottom’s. ...”

Crabbe and Goyle laughed openly, watching Nevillesweat as he stirred his potion feverishly. Hermionewas muttering instructions to him out of the corner ofher mouth, so that Snape wouldn’t see. Harry andRon packed away their unused ingredients and wentto wash their hands and ladles in the stone basin inthe corner.

“What did Malfoy mean?” Harry muttered to Ron ashe stuck his hands under the icy jet that poured fromthe gargoyle’s mouth. “Why would I want revenge onBlack? He hasn’t done anything to me — yet.”

“He’s making it up,” said Ron savagely. “He’s trying tomake you do something stupid. ...”

The end of the lesson in sight, Snape strode over toNeville, who was cowering by his cauldron.

“Everyone gather ’round,” said Snape, his black eyesglittering, “and watch what happens to Longbottom’stoad. If he has managed to produce a Shrinking

Page | 141 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Solution, it will shrink to a tadpole. If, as I don’tdoubt, he has done it wrong, his toad is likely to bepoisoned.”

The Gryffindors watched fearfully. The Slytherinslooked excited. Snape picked up Trevor the toad inhis left hand and dipped a small spoon into Neville’spotion, which was now green. He trickled a few dropsdown Trevor’s throat.

There was a moment of hushed silence, in whichTrevor gulped; then there was a small pop, and Trevorthe tadpole was wriggling in Snape’s palm.

The Gryffindors burst into applause. Snape, lookingsour, pulled a small bottle from the pocket of hisrobe, poured a few drops on top of Trevor, and hereappeared suddenly, fully grown.

“Five points from Gryffindor,” said Snape, whichwiped the smiles from every face. “I told you not tohelp him, Miss Granger. Class dismissed.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione climbed the steps to theentrance hall. Harry was still thinking about whatMalfoy had said, while Ron was seething aboutSnape.

“Five points from Gryffindor because the potion wasall right! Why didn’t you lie, Hermione? You should’vesaid Neville did it all by himself!”

Hermione didn’t answer. Ron looked around.

“Where is she?”

Harry turned too. They were at the top of the stepsnow, watching the rest of the class pass them,heading for the Great Hall and lunch.

Page | 142 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“She was right behind us,” said Ron, frowning.

Malfoy passed them, walking between Crabbe andGoyle. He smirked at Harry and disappeared.

“There she is,” said Harry.

Hermione was panting slightly, hurrying up thestairs; one hand clutched her bag, the other seemedto be tucking something down the front of her robes.

“How did you do that?” said Ron.

“What?” said Hermione, joining them.

“One minute you were right behind us, the nextmoment, you were back at the bottom of the stairsagain.”

“What?” Hermione looked slightly confused. “Oh — Ihad to go back for something. Oh no —”

A seam had split on Hermione’s bag. Harry wasn’tsurprised; he could see that it was crammed with atleast a dozen large and heavy books.

“Why are you carrying all these around with you?”Ron asked her.

“You know how many subjects I’m taking,” saidHermione breathlessly. “Couldn’t hold these for me,could you?”

“But —” Ron was turning over the books she hadhanded him, looking at the covers. “You haven’t gotany of these subjects today. It’s only Defense Againstthe Dark Arts this afternoon.”

Page | 143 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Oh yes,” said Hermione vaguely, but she packed allthe books back into her bag just the same. “I hopethere’s something good for lunch, I’m starving,” sheadded, and she marched off toward the Great Hall.

“D’you get the feeling Hermione’s not telling ussomething?” Ron asked Harry.

Professor Lupin wasn’t there when they arrived at hisfirst Defense Against the Dark Arts lesson. They allsat down, took out their books, quills, andparchment, and were talking when he finally enteredthe room. Lupin smiled vaguely and placed his tattyold briefcase on the teacher’s desk. He was as shabbyas ever but looked healthier than he had on the train,as though he had had a few square meals.

“Good afternoon,” he said. “Would you please put allyour books back in your bags. Today’s will be apractical lesson. You will need only your wands.”

A few curious looks were exchanged as the class putaway their books. They had never had a practicalDefense Against the Dark Arts before, unless youcounted the memorable class last year when their oldteacher had brought a cageful of pixies to class andset them loose.

“Right then,” said Professor Lupin, when everyonewas ready. “If you’d follow me.”

Puzzled but interested, the class got to its feet andfollowed Professor Lupin out of the classroom. He ledthem along the deserted corridor and around acorner, where the first thing they saw was Peeves thePoltergeist, who was floating upside down in midairand stuffing the nearest keyhole with chewing gum.Page | 144 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Peeves didn’t look up until Professor Lupin was twofeet away; then he wiggled his curly-toed feet andbroke into song.

“Loony, loopy Lupin,” Peeves sang. “Loony, loopyLupin, loony, loopy Lupin —”

Rude and unmanageable as he almost always was,Peeves usually showed some respect toward theteachers. Everyone looked quickly at Professor Lupinto see how he would take this; to their surprise, hewas still smiling.

“I’d take that gum out of the keyhole if I were you,Peeves,” he said pleasantly. “Mr. Filch won’t be able toget in to his brooms.”

Filch was the Hogwarts caretaker, a bad-tempered,failed wizard who waged a constant war against thestudents and, indeed, Peeves. However, Peeves paidno attention to Professor Lupin’s words, except toblow a loud wet raspberry.

Professor Lupin gave a small sigh and took out hiswand.

“This is a useful little spell,” he told the class over hisshoulder. “Please watch closely.”

He raised the wand to shoulder height, said,

“ Waddiwasil” and pointed it at Peeves.

With the force of a bullet, the wad of chewing gumshot out of the keyhole and straight down Peeves’s leftnostril; he whirled upright and zoomed away, cursing.

“Cool, sir!” said Dean Thomas in amazement.

Page | 145 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Thank you, Dean,” said Professor Lupin, putting hiswand away again. “Shall we proceed?”

They set off again, the class looking at shabbyProfessor Lupin with increased respect. He led themdown a second corridor and stopped, right outside thestaffroom door.

“Inside, please,” said Professor Lupin, opening it andstanding back.

The staffroom, a long, paneled room full of old,mismatched chairs, was empty except for one teacher.Professor Snape was sitting in a low armchair, and helooked around as the class filed in. His eyes wereglittering and there was a nasty sneer playing aroundhis mouth. As Professor Lupin came in and made toclose the door behind him, Snape said, “Leave it open,Lupin. Td rather not witness this.”

He got to his feet and strode past the class, his blackrobes billowing behind him. At the doorway he turnedon his heel and said, “Possibly no one’s warned you,Lupin, but this class contains Neville Longbottom. Iwould advise you not to entrust him with anythingdifficult. Not unless Miss Granger is hissinginstructions in his ear.”

Neville went scarlet. Harry glared at Snape; it was badenough that he bullied Neville in his own classes, letalone doing it in front of other teachers.

Professor Lupin had raised his eyebrows.

“I was hoping that Neville would assist me with thefirst stage of the operation,” he said, “and I am surehe will perform it admirably.”

Page | 146 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Neville’s face went, if possible, even redder. Snape’slip curled, but he left, shutting the door with a snap.

“Now, then,” said Professor Lupin, beckoning theclass toward the end of the room, where there wasnothing but an old wardrobe where the teachers kepttheir spare robes. As Professor Lupin went to standnext to it, the wardrobe gave a sudden wobble,banging off the wall.

“Nothing to worry about,” said Professor Lupin calmlybecause a few people had jumped backward in alarm.“There’s a boggart in there.”

Most people seemed to feel that this was something toworry about. Neville gave Professor Lupin a look ofpure terror, and Seamus Finnigan eyed the nowrattling doorknob apprehensively.

“Boggarts like dark, enclosed spaces,” said ProfessorLupin. “Wardrobes, the gap beneath beds, thecupboards under sinks — I’ve even met one that hadlodged itself in a grandfather clock. This one moved inyesterday afternoon, and I asked the headmaster ifthe staff would leave it to give my third years somepractice.

“So, the first question we must ask ourselves is, whatis a boggart?”

Hermione put up her hand.

“It’s a shape-shifter,” she said. “It can take the shapeof whatever it thinks will frighten us most.”

“Couldn’t have put it better myself,” said ProfessorLupin, and Hermione glowed. “So the boggart sittingin the darkness within has not yet assumed a form.

He does not yet know what will frighten the person on

Page | 147 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

the other side of the door. Nobody knows what aboggart looks like when he is alone, but when I lethim out, he will immediately become whatever each ofus most fears.

“This means,” said Professor Lupin, choosing toignore Neville’s small sputter of terror, “that we have ahuge advantage over the boggart before we begin.

Have you spotted it, Harry?”

Trying to answer a question with Hermione next tohim, bobbing up and down on the balls of her feetwith her hand in the air, was very off-putting, butHarry had a go.

“Er — because there are so many of us, it won’t knowwhat shape it should be?”

“Precisely,” said Professor Lupin, and Hermione puther hand down, looking a little disappointed. “It’salways best to have company when you’re dealingwith a boggart. He becomes confused. Which shouldhe become, a headless corpse or a flesh-eating slug? Ionce saw a boggart make that very mistake — tried tofrighten two people at once and turned himself intohalf a slug. Not remotely frightening.

“The charm that repels a boggart is simple, yet itrequires force of mind. You see, the thing that reallyfinishes a boggart is laughter. What you need to do isforce it to assume a shape that you find amusing.

“We will practice the charm without wands first. Afterme, please ... riddikulusV’

“RiddikulusV’ said the class together.

“Good,” said Professor Lupin. “Very good. But thatwas the easy part, I’m afraid. You see, the word alone

Page | 148 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

is not enough. And this is where you come in,Neville.”

The wardrobe shook again, though not as much asNeville, who walked forward as though he wereheading for the gallows.

“Right, Neville,” said Professor Lupin. “First thingsfirst: what would you say is the thing that frightensyou most in the world?”

Neville’s lips moved, but no noise came out.

“Didn’t catch that, Neville, sorry,” said ProfessorLupin cheerfully.

Neville looked around rather wildly, as thoughbegging someone to help him, then said, in barelymore than a whisper, “Professor Snape.”

Nearly everyone laughed. Even Neville grinnedapologetically. Professor Lupin, however, lookedthoughtful.

“Professor Snape ... hmmm ... Neville, I believe youlive with your grandmother?”

“Er — yes,” said Neville nervously. “But — I don’twant the boggart to turn into her either.”

“No, no, you misunderstand me,” said ProfessorLupin, now smiling. “I wonder, could you tell us whatsort of clothes your grandmother usually wears?”

Neville looked startled, but said, “Well ... always thesame hat. A tall one with a stuffed vulture on top.

And a long dress ... green, normally ... and sometimesa fox-fur scarf.”

Page | 149 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“And a handbag?” prompted Professor Lupin.

“A big red one,” said Neville.

“Right then,” said Professor Lupin. “Can you picturethose clothes very clearly, Neville? Can you see themin your mind’s eye?”

“Yes,” said Neville uncertainly, plainly wonderingwhat was coming next.

“When the boggart bursts out of this wardrobe,

Neville, and sees you, it will assume the form ofProfessor Snape,” said Lupin. “And you will raise yourwand — thus — and cry ‘Riddikulus’ — andconcentrate hard on your grandmother’s clothes. If allgoes well, Professor Boggart Snape will be forced intothat vulture-topped hat, and that green dress, withthat big red handbag.”

There was a great shout of laughter. The wardrobewobbled more violently.

“If Neville is successful, the boggart is likely to shifthis attention to each of us in turn,” said ProfessorLupin. “I would like all of you to take a moment nowto think of the thing that scares you most, andimagine how you might force it to look comical. ...”

The room went quiet. Harry thought ... What scaredhim most in the world?

His first thought was Lord Voldemort — a Voldemortreturned to full strength. But before he had evenstarted to plan a possible counterattack on a boggart -Voldemort, a horrible image came floating to thesurface of his mind. ...

Page | 150 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

A rotting, glistening hand, slithering back beneath ablack cloak ... a long, rattling breath from an unseenmouth ... then a cold so penetrating it felt likedrowning. ...

Harry shivered, then looked around, hoping no onehad noticed. Many people had their eyes shut tight.Ron was muttering to himself, “Take its legs off.”Harry was sure he knew what that was about. Ron’sgreatest fear was spiders.

“Everyone ready?” said Professor Lupin.

Harry felt a lurch of fear. He wasn’t ready. How couldyou make a dementor less frightening? But he didn’twant to ask for more time; everyone else was noddingand rolling up their sleeves.

“Neville, we’re going to back away,” said ProfessorLupin. “Let you have a clear field, all right? I’ll call thenext person forward. ... Everyone back, now, soNeville can get a clear shot —”

They all retreated, backed against the walls, leavingNeville alone beside the wardrobe. He looked pale andfrightened, but he had pushed up the sleeves of hisrobes and was holding his wand ready.

“On the count of three, Neville,” said Professor Lupin,who was pointing his own wand at the handle of thewardrobe. “One — two — three — now\”

A jet of sparks shot from the end of Professor Lupin’swand and hit the doorknob. The wardrobe burstopen. Hook-nosed and menacing, Professor Snapestepped out, his eyes flashing at Neville.

Page | 151 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Neville backed away, his wand up, mouthingwordlessly. Snape was bearing down upon him,reaching inside his robes.

“R— r— riddikulusV’ squeaked Neville.

There was a noise like a whip crack. Snape stumbled;he was wearing a long, lace-trimmed dress and atowering hat topped with a moth-eaten vulture, andhe was swinging a huge crimson handbag.

There was a roar of laughter; the boggart paused,confused, and Professor Lupin shouted, “Parvati!Forward!”

Parvati walked forward, her face set. Snape roundedon her. There was another crack, and where he hadstood was a bloodstained, bandaged mummy; itssightless face was turned to Parvati and it began towalk toward her very slowly, dragging its feet, its stiffarms rising —

“RiddikulusV’ cried Parvati.

A bandage unraveled at the mummy’s feet; it becameentangled, fell face forward, and its head rolled off.

“Seamus!” roared Professor Lupin.

Seamus darted past Parvati.

Crack! Where the mummy had been was a womanwith floor-length black hair and a skeletal, green-tinged face — a banshee. She opened her mouth wideand an unearthly sound filled the room, a long,wailing shriek that made the hair on Harry’s headstand on end —

“RiddikulusV’ shouted Seamus.

Page | 152 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The banshee made a rasping noise and clutched herthroat; her voice was gone.

Crack). The banshee turned into a rat, which chasedits tail in a circle, then — crack). — became arattlesnake, which slithered and writhed before —crack! — becoming a single, bloody eyeball.

“It’s confused!” shouted Lupin. “We’re getting there!Dean!”

Dean hurried forward.

Crack) The eyeball became a severed hand, whichflipped over and began to creep along the floor like acrab.

“RiddikulusV’ yelled Dean.

There was a snap, and the hand was trapped in amousetrap.

“Excellent! Ron, you next!”

Ron leapt forward.

Crack)

Quite a few people screamed. A giant spider, six feettall and covered in hair, was advancing on Ron,clicking its pincers menacingly. For a moment, Harrythought Ron had frozen. Then —

“RiddikulusV’ bellowed Ron, and the spider’s legsvanished; it rolled over and over; Lavender Brownsquealed and ran out of its way and it came to a haltat Harry’s feet. He raised his wand, ready, but —

Page | 153 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Here!” shouted Professor Lupin suddenly, hurryingforward.

Crack).

The legless spider had vanished. For a second,everyone looked wildly around to see where it was.Then they saw a silvery-white orb hanging in the airin front of Lupin, who said, “RiddikulusV’ almostlazily.

Crack!

“Forward, Neville, and finish him off!” said Lupin asthe boggart landed on the floor as a cockroach. Crack).Snape was back. This time Neville charged forwardlooking determined.

“RiddikulusV’ he shouted, and they had a splitsecond’s view of Snape in his lacy dress before Nevillelet out a great “Ha!” of laughter, and the boggartexploded, burst into a thousand tiny wisps of smoke,and was gone.

“Excellent!” cried Professor Lupin as the class brokeinto applause. “Excellent, Neville. Well done,everyone. ... Let me see ... five points to Gryffindor forevery person to tackle the boggart — ten for Nevillebecause he did it twice ... and five each to Hermioneand Harry.”

“But I didn’t do anything,” said Harry.

“You and Hermione answered my questions correctlyat the start of the class, Harry,” Lupin said lightly.“Very well, everyone, an excellent lesson. Homework,kindly read the chapter on boggarts and summarize itfor me ... to be handed in on Monday. That will beall.”

Page | 154 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Talking excitedly, the class left the staffroom. Harry,however, wasn’t feeling cheerful. Professor Lupin haddeliberately stopped him from tackling the boggart.Why? Was it because he’d seen Harry collapse on thetrain, and thought he wasn’t up to much? Had hethought Harry would pass out again?

But no one else seemed to have noticed anything.

“Did you see me take that banshee?” shoutedSeamus.

“And the hand!” said Dean, waving his own around.“And Snape in that hat!”

“And my mummy!”

“I wonder why Professor Lupin’s frightened of crystalballs?” said Lavender thoughtfully.

“That was the best Defense Against the Dark Artslesson we’ve ever had, wasn’t it?” said Ron excitedlyas they made their way back to the classroom to gettheir bags.

“He seems like a very good teacher,” said Hermioneapprovingly. “But I wish I could have had a turn withthe boggart —”

“What would it have been for you?” said Ron,sniggering. “A piece of homework that only got nineout of ten?”

Page | 155 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

d



FLIGHT OF THE FAT LADY

In no time at all, Defense Against the Dark Arts hadbecome most people’s favorite class. Only DracoMalfoy and his gang of Slytherins had anything bad tosay about Professor Lupin.

“Look at the state of his robes,” Malfoy would say in aloud whisper as Professor Lupin passed. “He dresseslike our old house-elf.”

But no one else cared that Professor Lupin’s robeswere patched and frayed. His next few lessons werejust as interesting as the first. After boggarts, theystudied Red Caps, nasty little goblinlike creaturesthat lurked wherever there had been bloodshed: inthe dungeons of castles and the potholes of desertedbattlefields, waiting to bludgeon those who had gottenlost. From Red Caps they moved on to kappas, creepywater-dwellers that looked like scaly monkeys, withwebbed hands itching to strangle unwitting waders intheir ponds.

Harry only wished he was as happy with some of hisother classes. Worst of all was Potions. Snape was in

Page | 156 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

a particularly vindictive mood these days, and no onewas in any doubt why. The story of the boggartassuming Snape’s shape, and the way that Nevillehad dressed it in his grandmother’s clothes, hadtraveled through the school like wildfire. Snape didn’tseem to find it funny. His eyes flashed menacingly atthe very mention of Professor Lupin’s name, and hewas bullying Neville worse than ever.

Harry was also growing to dread the hours he spentin Professor Trelawney’s stifling tower room,deciphering lopsided shapes and symbols, trying toignore the way Professor Trelawney’s enormous eyesfilled with tears every time she looked at him. Hecouldn’t like Professor Trelawney, even though shewas treated with respect bordering on reverence bymany of the class. Parvati Patil and Lavender Brownhad taken to haunting Professor Trelawney’s towerroom at lunchtimes, and always returned withannoyingly superior looks on their faces, as thoughthey knew things the others didn’t. They had alsostarted using hushed voices whenever they spoke toHarry, as though he were on his deathbed.

Nobody really liked Care of Magical Creatures, which,after the action-packed first class, had becomeextremely dull. Hagrid seemed to have lost hisconfidence. They were now spending lesson afterlesson learning how to look after flobberworms, whichhad to be some of the most boring creatures inexistence.

“Why would anyone bother looking after them?” saidRon, after yet another hour of poking shreddedlettuce down the flobberworms’ slimy throats.

At the start of October, however, Harry hadsomething else to occupy him, something so enjoyableit more than made up for his unsatisfactory classes.

Page | 157 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The Quidditch season was approaching, and OliverWood, Captain of the Gryffindor team, called ameeting one Thursday evening to discuss tactics forthe new season.

There were seven people on a Quidditch team: threeChasers, whose job it was to score goals by puttingthe Quaffle (a red, soccer-sized ball) through one ofthe fifty-foot-high hoops at each end of the field; twoBeaters, who were equipped with heavy bats to repelthe Bludgers (two heavy black balls that zoomedaround trying to attack the players); a Keeper, whodefended the goal posts, and the Seeker, who had thehardest job of all, that of catching the Golden Snitch,a tiny, winged, walnut-sized ball, whose captureended the game and earned the Seeker’s team anextra one hundred and fifty points.

Oliver Wood was a burly seventeen-year-old, now inhis seventh and final year at Hogwarts. There was aquiet sort of desperation in his voice as he addressedhis six fellow team members in the chilly locker roomson the edge of the darkening Quidditch field.

“This is our last chance — my last chance — to winthe Quidditch Cup,” he told them, striding up anddown in front of them. “I’ll be leaving at the end ofthis year. I’ll never get another shot at it.

“Gryffindor hasn’t won for seven years now. Okay, sowe’ve had the worst luck in the world — injuries —then the tournament getting called off last year. ...”Wood swallowed, as though the memory still broughta lump to his throat. “But we also know we’ve got thebest — ruddy — team — in — the — school,” he said,punching a fist into his other hand, the old manicglint back in his eye.

“We’ve got three superb Chasers.”

Page | 158 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Wood pointed at Alicia Spinnet, Angelina Johnson,and Katie Bell.

“We’ve got two unbeatable Beaters.”

“Stop it, Oliver, you’re embarrassing us,” said Fredand George Weasley together, pretending to blush.

“And we’ve got a Seeker who has never failed to winus a match).” Wood rumbled, glaring at Harry with akind of furious pride. “And me,” he added as anafterthought.

“We think you’re very good too, Oliver,” said George.

“Spanking good Keeper,” said Fred.

“The point is,” Wood went on, resuming his pacing,“the Quidditch Cup should have had our name on itthese last two years. Ever since Harry joined theteam, I’ve thought the thing was in the bag. But wehaven’t got it, and this year’s the last chance we’ll getto finally see our name on the thing. ...”

Wood spoke so dejectedly that even Fred and Georgelooked sympathetic.

“Oliver, this year’s our year,” said Fred.

“Well do it, Oliver!” said Angelina.

“Definitely,” said Harry.

Full of determination, the team started trainingsessions, three evenings a week. The weather wasgetting colder and wetter, the nights darker, but noamount of mud, wind, or rain could tarnish Harry’swonderful vision of finally winning the huge, silverQuidditch Cup.

Page | 159 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry returned to the Gryffindor common room oneevening after training, cold and stiff but pleased withthe way practice had gone, to find the room buzzingexcitedly.

“What’s happened?” he asked Ron and Hermione,who were sitting in two of the best chairs by thefireside and completing some star charts forAstronomy.

“First Hogsmeade weekend,” said Ron, pointing at anotice that had appeared on the battered old bulletinboard. “End of October. Halloween.”

“Excellent,” said Fred, who had followed Harrythrough the portrait hole. “I need to visit Zonko’s. I’mnearly out of Stink Pellets.”

Harry threw himself into a chair beside Ron, his highspirits ebbing away. Hermione seemed to read hismind.

“Harry, I’m sure you’ll be able to go next time,” shesaid. “They’re bound to catch Black soon. He’s beensighted once already”

“Black’s not fool enough to try anything inHogsmeade,” said Ron. “Ask McGonagall if you can gothis time, Harry. The next one might not be for ages

“Ron\” said Hermione. “Harry’s supposed to stay inschool —”

“He can’t be the only third year left behind,” said Ron.“Ask McGonagall, go on, Harry —”

“Yeah, I think I will,” said Harry, making up his mind.

Page | 160 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione opened her mouth to argue, but at thatmoment Crookshanks leapt lightly onto her lap. Alarge, dead spider was dangling from his mouth.

“Does he have to eat that in front of us?” said Ron,scowling.

“Clever Crookshanks, did you catch that all byyourself?” said Hermione.

Crookshanks slowly chewed up the spider, his yelloweyes fixed insolently on Ron.

“Just keep him over there, that’s all,” said Ronirritably, turning back to his star chart. “I’ve gotScabbers asleep in my bag.”

Harry yawned. He really wanted to go to bed, but hestill had his own star chart to complete. He pulled hisbag toward him, took out parchment, ink, and quill,and started work.

“You can copy mine, if you like,” said Ron, labelinghis last star with a flourish and shoving the charttoward Harry.

Hermione, who disapproved of copying, pursed herlips but didn’t say anything. Crookshanks was stillstaring unblinkingly at Ron, flicking the end of hisbushy tail. Then, without warning, he pounced.

“OY!” Ron roared, seizing his bag as Crookshankssank four sets of claws deep inside it and begantearing ferociously. “GET OFF, YOU STUPID ANIMAL!”

Ron tried to pull the bag away from Crookshanks, butCrookshanks clung on, spitting and slashing.

Page | 161 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Ron, don’t hurt him!” squealed Hermione; the wholecommon room was watching; Ron whirled the bagaround, Crookshanks still clinging to it, and Scabberscame flying out of the top —

“CATCH THAT CAT!” Ron yelled as Crookshanks freedhimself from the remnants of the bag, sprang over thetable, and chased after the terrified Scabbers.

George Weasley made a lunge for Crookshanks butmissed; Scabbers streaked through twenty pairs oflegs and shot beneath an old chest of drawers.Crookshanks skidded to a halt, crouched low on hisbandy legs, and started making furious swipesbeneath it with his front paw.

Ron and Hermione hurried over; Hermione grabbedCrookshanks around the middle and heaved himaway; Ron threw himself onto his stomach and, withgreat difficulty, pulled Scabbers out by the tail.

“Look at him!” he said furiously to Hermione,dangling Scabbers in front of her. “He’s skin andbone! You keep that cat away from him!”

“Crookshanks doesn’t understand it’s wrong!” saidHermione, her voice shaking. “All cats chase rats,Ron!”

“There’s something funny about that animal!” saidRon, who was trying to persuade a frantically wigglingScabbers back into his pocket. “It heard me say thatScabbers was in my bag!”

“Oh, what rubbish,” said Hermione impatiently.“Crookshanks could smell him, Ron, how else d’youthink —”

Page | 162 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“That cat’s got it in for Scabbers!” said Ron, ignoringthe people around him, who were starting to giggle.“And Scabbers was here first, and he’s ill!”

Ron marched through the common room and out ofsight up the stairs to the boys’ dormitories.

Ron was still in a bad mood with Hermione next day.He barely talked to her all through Herbology, eventhough he, Harry, and Hermione were workingtogether on the same puffapod.

“How’s Scabbers?” Hermione asked timidly as theystripped fat pink pods from the plants and emptiedthe shining beans into a wooden pail.

“He’s hiding at the bottom of my bed, shaking,” saidRon angrily, missing the pail and scattering beansover the greenhouse floor.

“Careful, Weasley, careful!” cried Professor Sprout asthe beans burst into bloom before their very eyes.

They had Transfiguration next. Harry, who hadresolved to ask Professor McGonagall after the lessonwhether he could go into Hogsmeade with the rest,joined the line outside the class trying to decide howhe was going to argue his case. He was distracted,however, by a disturbance at the front of the line.

Lavender Brown seemed to be crying. Parvati had herarm around her and was explaining something toSeamus Finnigan and Dean Thomas, who werelooking very serious.

“What’s the matter, Lavender?” said Hermioneanxiously as she, Harry, and Ron went to join thegroup.

Page | 163 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“She got a letter from home this morning,” Parvatiwhispered. “It’s her rabbit, Binky. He’s been killed bya fox.”

“Oh,” said Hermione, “I’m sorry, Lavender.”

“I should have known!” said Lavender tragically. “Youknow what day it is?”

“Er —”

“The sixteenth of October! That thing you’re dreading,it will happen on the sixteenth of October!’Remember? She was right, she was right!”

The whole class was gathered around Lavender now.Seamus shook his head seriously. Hermionehesitated; then she said, “You — you were dreadingBinky being killed by a fox?”

“Well, not necessarily by a fox,” said Lavender,looking up at Hermione with streaming eyes, “but Iwas obviously dreading him dying, wasn’t I?”

“Oh,” said Hermione. She paused again. Then —

“Was Binky an old rabbit?”

“N — no!” sobbed Lavender. “H — he was only ababy!”

Parvati tightened her arm around Lavender’sshoulders.

“But then, why would you dread him dying?” saidHermione.

Parvati glared at her.

Page | 164 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Well, look at it logically,” said Hermione, turning tothe rest of the group. “I mean, Binky didn’t even dietoday, did he? Lavender just got the news today —”Lavender wailed loudly. “— and she can’t have beendreading it, because it’s come as a real shock —”

“Don’t mind Hermione, Lavender,” said Ron loudly,“she doesn’t think other people’s pets matter verymuch.”

Professor McGonagall opened the classroom door atthat moment, which was perhaps lucky; Hermioneand Ron were looking daggers at each other, andwhen they got into class, they seated themselves oneither side of Harry and didn’t talk to each other forthe whole class.

Harry still hadn’t decided what he was going to say toProfessor McGonagall when the bell rang at the end ofthe lesson, but it was she who brought up the subjectof Hogsmeade first.

“One moment, please!” she called as the class madeto leave. “As you’re all in my House, you should handHogsmeade permission forms to me before Halloween.No form, no visiting the village, so don’t forget!”

Neville put up his hand.

“Please, Professor, I — I think I’ve lost —”

“Your grandmother sent yours to me directly,Longbottom,” said Professor McGonagall. “Sheseemed to think it was safer. Well, that’s all, you mayleave.”

“Ask her now,” Ron hissed at Harry.

“Oh, but —” Hermione began.

Page | 165 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Go for it, Harry,” said Ron stubbornly.

Harry waited for the rest of the class to disappear,then headed nervously for Professor McGonagall’sdesk.

“Yes, Potter?”

Harry took a deep breath.

“Professor, my aunt and uncle — er — forgot to signmy form,” he said.

Professor McGonagall looked over her squarespectacles at him but didn’t say anything.

“So — er — d’you think it would be all right — Imean, will it be okay if I — if I go to Hogsmeade?”

Professor McGonagall looked down and beganshuffling papers on her desk.

“I’m afraid not, Potter,” she said. “You heard what Isaid. No form, no visiting the village. That’s the rule.”

“But — Professor, my aunt and uncle — you know,they’re Muggles, they don’t really understand about— about Hogwarts forms and stuff,” Harry said, whileRon egged him on with vigorous nods. “If you said Icould go —”

“But I don’t say so,” said Professor McGonagall,standing up and piling her papers neatly into adrawer. “The form clearly states that the parent orguardian must give permission.” She turned to look athim, with an odd expression on her face. Was it pity?“I’m sorry, Potter, but that’s my final word. You hadbetter hurry, or you’ll be late for your next lesson.”

Page | 166 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

There was nothing to be done. Ron called ProfessorMcGonagall a lot of names that greatly annoyedHermione; Hermione assumed an “all-for-the-best”expression that made Ron even angrier, and Harryhad to endure everyone in the class talking loudlyand happily about what they were going to do first,once they got into Hogsmeade.

“There’s always the feast,” said Ron, in an effort tocheer Harry up. “You know, the Halloween feast, inthe evening.”

“Yeah,” said Harry gloomily, “great.”

The Halloween feast was always good, but it wouldtaste a lot better if he was coming to it after a day inHogsmeade with everyone else. Nothing anyone saidmade him feel any better about being left behind.Dean Thomas, who was good with a quill, had offeredto forge Uncle Vernon’s signature on the form, but asHarry had already told Professor McGonagall hehadn’t had it signed, that was no good. Ronhalfheartedly suggested the Invisibility Cloak, butHermione stamped on that one, reminding Ron whatDumbledore had told them about the dementorsbeing able to see through them. Percy had what werepossibly the least helpful words of comfort.

“They make a fuss about Hogsmeade, but I assureyou, Harry, it’s not all it’s cracked up to be,” he saidseriously. “All right, the sweetshop’s rather good, andZonko’s Joke Shop’s frankly dangerous, and yes, theShrieking Shack’s always worth a visit, but really,Harry, apart from that, you’re not missing anything.”

On Halloween morning, Harry awoke with the restand went down to breakfast, feeling thoroughlydepressed, though doing his best to act normally.

Page | 167 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Well bring you lots of sweets back fromHoneydukes,” said Hermione, looking desperatelysorry for him.

“Yeah, loads,” said Ron. He and Hermione had finallyforgotten their squabble about Crookshanks in theface of Harry’s difficulties.

“Don’t worry about me,” said Harry, in what he hopedwas an offhand voice, “I’ll see you at the feast. Have agood time.”

He accompanied them to the entrance hall, whereFilch, the caretaker, was standing inside the frontdoors, checking off names against a long list, peeringsuspiciously into every face, and making sure that noone was sneaking out who shouldn’t be going.

“Staying here, Potter?” shouted Malfoy, who wasstanding in line with Crabbe and Goyle. “Scared ofpassing the dementors?”

Harry ignored him and made his solitary way up themarble staircase, through the deserted corridors, andback to Gryffindor Tower.

“Password?” said the Fat Lady, jerking out of a doze.

“Fortuna Major,” said Harry listlessly.

The portrait swung open and he climbed through thehole into the common room. It was full of chatteringfirst and second years, and a few older students, whohad obviously visited Hogsmeade so often the noveltyhad worn off.

“Harry! Harry! Hi, Harry!”

Page | 168 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

It was Colin Creevey, a second year who was deeply inawe of Harry and never missed an opportunity tospeak to him.

“Aren’t you going to Hogsmeade, Harry? Why not?Hey” — Colin looked eagerly around at his friends —“you can come and sit with us, if you like, Harry!”

“Er — no, thanks, Colin,” said Harry, who wasn’t inthe mood to have a lot of people staring avidly at thescar on his forehead. “I — I’ve got to go to the library,got to get some work done.”

After that, he had no choice but to turn right aroundand head back out of the portrait hole again.

“What was the point waking me up?” the Fat Ladycalled grumpily after him as he walked away.

Harry wandered dispiritedly toward the library, buthalfway there he changed his mind; he didn’t feel likeworking. He turned around and came face-to-facewith Filch, who had obviously just seen off the last ofthe Hogsmeade visitors.

“What are you doing?” Filch snarled suspiciously.

“Nothing,” said Harry truthfully.

“Nothing!” spat Filch, his jowls quiveringunpleasantly. “A likely story! Sneaking around onyour own — why aren’t you in Hogsmeade buyingStink Pellets and Belch Powder and Whizzing Wormslike the rest of your nasty little friends?”

Harry shrugged.

Page | 169 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Well, get back to your common room where youbelong!” snapped Filch, and he stood glaring untilHarry had passed out of sight.

But Harry didn’t go back to the common room; heclimbed a staircase, thinking vaguely of visiting theOwlery to see Hedwig, and was walking along anothercorridor when a voice from inside one of the roomssaid, “Harry?”

Harry doubled back to see who had spoken and metProfessor Lupin, looking around his office door.

“What are you doing?” said Lupin, though in a verydifferent voice from Filch. “Where are Ron andHermione?”

“Hogsmeade,” said Harry, in a would-be casual voice.

“Ah,” said Lupin. He considered Harry for a moment.“Why don’t you come in? I’ve just taken delivery of agrindylow for our next lesson.”

“A what?” said Harry.

He followed Lupin into his office. In the corner stood avery large tank of water. A sickly green creature withsharp little horns had its face pressed against theglass, pulling faces and flexing its long, spindlyfingers.

“Water demon,” said Lupin, surveying the grindylowthoughtfully. “We shouldn’t have much difficulty withhim, not after the kappas. The trick is to break hisgrip. You notice the abnormally long fingers? Strong,but very brittle.”

The grindylow bared its green teeth and then burieditself in a tangle of weeds in a corner.

Page | 170 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Cup of tea?” Lupin said, looking around for hiskettle. “I was just thinking of making one.”

“All right,” said Harry awkwardly.

Lupin tapped the kettle with his wand and a blast ofsteam issued suddenly from the spout.

“Sit down,” said Lupin, taking the lid off a dusty tin.“I’ve only got teabags, I’m afraid — but I daresayyou’ve had enough of tea leaves?”

Harry looked at him. Lupin’s eyes were twinkling.

“How did you know about that?” Harry asked.

“Professor McGonagall told me,” said Lupin, passingHarry a chipped mug of tea. “You’re not worried, areyou?”

“No,” said Harry.

He thought for a moment of telling Lupin about thedog he’d seen in Magnolia Crescent but decided notto. He didn’t want Lupin to think he was a coward,especially since Lupin already seemed to think hecouldn’t cope with a boggart.

Something of Harry’s thoughts seemed to have shownon his face, because Lupin said, “Anything worryingyou, Harry?”

“No,” Harry lied. He drank a bit of tea and watchedthe grindylow brandishing a fist at him. “Yes,” he saidsuddenly, putting his tea down on Lupin’s desk. “Youknow that day we fought the boggart?

“Yes,” said Lupin slowly.

Page | 171 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Why didn’t you let me fight it?” said Harry abruptly.Lupin raised his eyebrows.

“I would have thought that was obvious, Harry,” hesaid, sounding surprised.

Harry, who had expected Lupin to deny that he’ddone any such thing, was taken aback.

“Why?” he said again.

“Well,” said Lupin, frowning slightly, “I assumed thatif the boggart faced you, it would assume the shape ofLord Voldemort.”

Harry stared. Not only was this the last answer he’dexpected, but Lupin had said Voldemort’s name. Theonly person Harry had ever heard say the name aloud(apart from himself) was Professor Dumbledore.

“Clearly, I was wrong,” said Lupin, still frowning atHarry. “But I didn’t think it a good idea for LordVoldemort to materialize in the staffroom. I imaginedthat people would panic.”

“I didn’t think of Voldemort,” said Harry honestly. “I— I remembered those dementors.”

“I see,” said Lupin thoughtfully. “Well, well ... I’mimpressed.” He smiled slightly at the look of surpriseon Harry’s face. “That suggests that what you fearmost of all is — fear. Very wise, Harry.”

Harry didn’t know what to say to that, so he dranksome more tea.

“So you’ve been thinking that I didn’t believe youcapable of fighting the boggart?” said Lupin shrewdly.

Page | 172 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Well ... yeah,” said Harry. He was suddenly feeling alot happier. “Professor Lupin, you know thedementors —”

He was interrupted by a knock on the door.

“Come in,” called Lupin.

The door opened, and in came Snape. He wascarrying a goblet, which was smoking faintly, andstopped at the sight of Harry, his black eyesnarrowing.

“Ah, Severus,” said Lupin, smiling. “Thanks verymuch. Could you leave it here on the desk for me?”

Snape set down the smoking goblet, his eyeswandering between Harry and Lupin.

“I was just showing Harry my grindylow,” said Lupinpleasantly, pointing at the tank.

“Fascinating,” said Snape, without looking at it. “Youshould drink that directly, Lupin.”

“Yes, yes, I will,” said Lupin.

“I made an entire cauldronful,” Snape continued. “Ifyou need more.”

“I should probably take some again tomorrow. Thanksvery much, Severus.”

“Not at all,” said Snape, but there was a look in hiseye Harry didn’t like. He backed out of the room,unsmiling and watchful.

Harry looked curiously at the goblet. Lupin smiled.

Page | 173 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Professor Snape has very kindly concocted a potionfor me,” he said. “I have never been much of a potion-brewer and this one is particularly complex.” Hepicked up the goblet and sniffed it. “Pity sugar makesit useless,” he added, taking a sip and shuddering.

“Why — ?” Harry began. Lupin looked at him andanswered the unfinished question.

“I’ve been feeling a bit off-color,” he said. “This potionis the only thing that helps. I am very lucky to beworking alongside Professor Snape; there aren’t manywizards who are up to making it.”

Professor Lupin took another sip and Harry had acrazy urge to knock the goblet out of his hands.

“Professor Snape’s very interested in the Dark Arts,”he blurted out.

“Really?” said Lupin, looking only mildly interested ashe took another gulp of potion.

“Some people reckon —” Harry hesitated, thenplunged recklessly on, “some people reckon he’d doanything to get the Defense Against the Dark Artsjob.”

Lupin drained the goblet and pulled a face.

“Disgusting,” he said. “Well, Harry, I’d better get backto work. I’ll see you at the feast later.”

“Right,” said Harry, putting down his empty teacup.

The empty goblet was still smoking.

“There you go,” said Ron. “We got as much as wecould carry.”

Page | 174 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

A shower of brilliantly colored sweets fell into Harry’slap. It was dusk, and Ron and Hermione had justturned up in the common room, pink-faced from thecold wind and looking as though they’d had the timeof their lives.

“Thanks,” said Harry, picking up a packet of tinyblack Pepper Imps. “What’s Hogsmeade like? Wheredid you go?”

By the sound of it — everywhere. Dervish andBanges, the wizarding equipment shop, Zonko’s JokeShop, into the Three Broomsticks for foaming mugs ofhot butterbeer, and many places besides.

“The post office, Harry! About two hundred owls, allsitting on shelves, all color-coded depending on howfast you want your letter to get there!”

“Honeydukes has got a new kind of fudge; they weregiving out free samples, there’s a bit, look —”

“We think we saw an ogre, honestly, they get all sortsat the Three Broomsticks —”

“Wish we could have brought you some butterbeer,really warms you up —”

“What did you do?” said Hermione, looking anxious.“Did you get any work done?”

“No,” said Harry. “Lupin made me a cup of tea in hisoffice. And then Snape came in. ...”

He told them all about the goblet. Ron’s mouth fellopen.

“Lupin drank it?” he gasped. “Is he mad?”

Page | 175 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione checked her watch.

“We’d better go down, you know, the feast’ll bestarting in five minutes. ...” They hurried through theportrait hole and into the crowd, still discussingSnape.

“But if he — you know” — Hermione dropped hervoice, glancing nervously around — “if he was tryingto — to poison Lupin — he wouldn’t have done it infront of Harry.”

“Yeah, maybe,” said Harry as they reached theentrance hall and crossed into the Great Hall. It hadbeen decorated with hundreds and hundreds ofcandle-filled pumpkins, a cloud of fluttering live bats,and many flaming orange streamers, which wereswimming lazily across the stormy ceiling like brilliantwatersnakes.

The food was delicious; even Hermione and Ron, whowere full to bursting with Honeydukes sweets,managed second helpings of everything. Harry keptglancing at the staff table. Professor Lupin lookedcheerful and as well as he ever did; he was talkinganimatedly to tiny little Professor Flitwick, theCharms teacher. Harry moved his eyes along thetable, to the place where Snape sat. Was he imaginingit, or were Snape’s eyes flickering toward Lupin moreoften than was natural?

The feast finished with an entertainment provided bythe Hogwarts ghosts. They popped out of the wallsand tables to do a bit of formation gliding; NearlyHeadless Nick, the Gryffindor ghost, had a greatsuccess with a reenactment of his own botchedbeheading.

Page | 176 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

It had been such a pleasant evening that Harry’s goodmood couldn’t even be spoiled by Malfoy, whoshouted through the crowd as they all left the hall,“The dementors send their love, Potter!”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione followed the rest of theGryffindors along the usual path to Gryffindor Tower,but when they reached the corridor that ended withthe portrait of the Fat Lady, they found it jammedwith students.

“Why isn’t anyone going in?” said Ron curiously.

Harry peered over the heads in front of him. Theportrait seemed to be closed.

“Let me through, please,” came Percy’s voice, and hecame bustling importantly through the crowd.

“What’s the holdup here? You can’t all have forgottenthe password — excuse me, I’m Head Boy —”

And then a silence fell over the crowd, from the frontfirst, so that a chill seemed to spread down thecorridor. They heard Percy say, in a suddenly sharpvoice, “Somebody get Professor Dumbledore. Quick.”

People’s heads turned; those at the back werestanding on tiptoe.

“What’s going on?” said Ginny, who had just arrived.

A moment later, Professor Dumbledore was there,sweeping toward the portrait; the Gryffindorssqueezed together to let him through, and Harry, Ron,and Hermione moved closer to see what the troublewas.

“Oh, my —” Hermione grabbed Harry’s arm.

Page | 177 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The Fat Lady had vanished from her portrait, whichhad been slashed so viciously that strips of canvaslittered the floor; great chunks of it had been tornaway completely.

Dumbledore took one quick look at the ruinedpainting and turned, his eyes somber, to seeProfessors McGonagall, Lupin, and Snape hurryingtoward him.

“We need to find her,” said Dumbledore. “ProfessorMcGonagall, please go to Mr. Filch at once and tellhim to search every painting in the castle for the FatLady.”

“You’ll be lucky!” said a cackling voice.

It was Peeves the Poltergeist, bobbing over the crowdand looking delighted, as he always did, at the sightof wreckage or worry.

“What do you mean, Peeves?” said Dumbledorecalmly, and Peeves’s grin faded a little. He didn’t daretaunt Dumbledore. Instead he adopted an oily voicethat was no better than his cackle.

“Ashamed, Your Headship, sir. Doesn’t want to beseen. She’s a horrible mess. Saw her running throughthe landscape up on the fourth floor, sir, dodgingbetween the trees. Crying something dreadful,” hesaid happily. “Poor thing,” he added unconvincingly.

“Did she say who did it?” said Dumbledore quietly.

“Oh yes, Professorhead,” said Peeves, with the air ofone cradling a large bombshell in his arms. “He gotvery angry when she wouldn’t let him in, you see.”Peeves flipped over and grinned at Dumbledore from

Page | 178 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

between his own legs. “Nasty temper he’s got, thatSirius Black.”

Page | 179 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



GRIM DEFEAT

Professor Dumbledore sent all the Gryffindors back tothe Great Hall, where they were joined ten minuteslater by the students from Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, andSlytherin, who all looked extremely confused.

“The teachers and I need to conduct a thoroughsearch of the castle,” Professor Dumbledore told themas Professors McGonagall and Flitwick closed alldoors into the hall. “I’m afraid that, for your ownsafety, you will have to spend the night here. I wantthe prefects to stand guard over the entrances to thehall and I am leaving the Head Boy and Girl incharge. Any disturbance should be reported to meimmediately,” he added to Percy, who was lookingimmensely proud and important. “Send word with oneof the ghosts.”

Professor Dumbledore paused, about to leave the hall,and said, “Oh, yes, you’ll be needing ...”

One casual wave of his wand and the long tables flewto the edges of the hall and stood themselves against

Page | 180 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

the walls; another wave, and the floor was coveredwith hundreds of squashy purple sleeping bags.

“Sleep well,” said Professor Dumbledore, closing thedoor behind him.

The hall immediately began to buzz excitedly; theGryffindors were telling the rest of the school whathad just happened.

“Everyone into their sleeping bags!” shouted Percy.“Come on, now, no more talking! Lights out in tenminutes!”

“C’mon,” Ron said to Harry and Hermione; they seizedthree sleeping bags and dragged them into a corner.

“Do you think Black’s still in the castle?” Hermionewhispered anxiously.

“Dumbledore obviously thinks he might be,” said Ron.

“It’s very lucky he picked tonight, you know,” saidHermione as they climbed fully dressed into theirsleeping bags and propped themselves on their elbowsto talk. “The one night we weren’t in the tower. ...”

“I reckon he’s lost track of time, being on the run,”said Ron. “Didn’t realize it was Halloween. Otherwisehe’d have come bursting in here.”

Hermione shuddered.

All around them, people were asking one another thesame question: “How did he get in?”

“Maybe he knows how to Apparate,” said a Ravenclawa few feet away. “Just appear out of thin air, youknow.”

Page | 181 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Disguised himself, probably,” said a Hufflepuff fifthyear.

“He could’ve flown in,” suggested Dean Thomas.

“Honestly, am I the only person who’s ever botheredto read Hogwarts, A History?” said Hermione crosslyto Harry and Ron.

“Probably,” said Ron. “Why?”

“Because the castle’s protected by more than walls,you know,” said Hermione. “There are all sorts ofenchantments on it, to stop people entering bystealth. You can’t just Apparate in here. And I’d liketo see the disguise that could fool those dementors.They’re guarding every single entrance to thegrounds. They’d have seen him fly in too. And Filchknows all the secret passages, they’ll have themcovered. ...”

“The lights are going out now!” Percy shouted. “I wanteveryone in their sleeping bags and no more talking!”

The candles all went out at once. The only light nowcame from the silvery ghosts, who were drifting abouttalking seriously to the prefects, and the enchantedceiling, which, like the sky outside, was scatteredwith stars. What with that, and the whispering thatstill filled the hall, Harry felt as though he weresleeping outdoors in a light wind.

Once every hour, a teacher would reappear in the hallto check that everything was quiet. Around three inthe morning, when many students had finally fallenasleep, Professor Dumbledore came in. Harry watchedhim looking around for Percy, who had been prowlingbetween the sleeping bags, telling people off fortalking. Percy was only a short way away from Harry,Page | 182 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Ron, and Hermione, who quickly pretended to beasleep as Dumbledore’s footsteps drew nearer.

“Any sign of him, Professor?” asked Percy in awhisper.

“No. All well here?”

“Everything under control, sir.”

“Good. There’s no point moving them all now. I’vefound a temporary guardian for the Gryffindorportrait hole. You’ll be able to move them back intomorrow.”

“And the Fat Lady, sir?”

“Hiding in a map of Argyllshire on the second floor.Apparently she refused to let Black in without thepassword, so he attacked. She’s still very distressed,but once she’s calmed down, I’ll have Mr. Filchrestore her.”

Harry heard the door of the hall creak open again,and more footsteps.

“Headmaster?” It was Snape. Harry kept quite still,listening hard. “The whole of the third floor has beensearched. He’s not there. And Filch has done thedungeons; nothing there either.”

“What about the Astronomy tower? ProfessorTrelawney’s room? The Owlery?”

“All searched ...”

“Very well, Severus. I didn’t really expect Black tolinger.”

Page | 183 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Have you any theory as to how he got in, Professor?”asked Snape.

Harry raised his head very slightly off his arms to freehis other ear.

“Many, Severus, each of them as unlikely as thenext.”

Harry opened his eyes a fraction and squinted up towhere they stood; Dumbledore’s back was to him, buthe could see Percy’s face, rapt with attention, andSnape’s profile, which looked angry.

“You remember the conversation we had,

Headmaster, just before — ah — the start of term?”said Snape, who was barely opening his lips, asthough trying to block Percy out of the conversation.

“I do, Severus,” said Dumbledore, and there wassomething like warning in his voice.

“It seems — almost impossible — that Black couldhave entered the school without inside help. I didexpress my concerns when you appointed —”

“I do not believe a single person inside this castlewould have helped Black enter it,” said Dumbledore,and his tone made it so clear that the subject wasclosed that Snape didn’t reply. “I must go down to thedementors,” said Dumbledore. “I said I would informthem when our search was complete.”

“Didn’t they want to help, sir?” said Percy.

“Oh yes,” said Dumbledore coldly. “But I’m afraid nodementor will cross the threshold of this castle while Iam headmaster.”

Page | 184 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Percy looked slightly abashed. Dumbledore left thehall, walking quickly and quietly. Snape stood for amoment, watching the headmaster with an expressionof deep resentment on his face; then he too left.

Harry glanced sideways at Ron and Hermione. Both ofthem had their eyes open too, reflecting the starryceiling.

“What was all that about?” Ron mouthed.

The school talked of nothing but Sirius Black for thenext few days. The theories about how he had enteredthe castle became wilder and wilder; Hannah Abbott,from Hufflepuff, spent much of their next Herbologyclass telling anyone who’d listen that Black couldturn into a flowering shrub.

The Fat Lady’s ripped canvas had been taken off thewall and replaced with the portrait of Sir Cadoganand his fat gray pony. Nobody was very happy aboutthis. Sir Cadogan spent half his time challengingpeople to duels, and the rest thinking up ridiculouslycomplicated passwords, which he changed at leasttwice a day.

“He’s a complete lunatic,” said Seamus Finniganangrily to Percy. “Can’t we get anyone else?”

“None of the other pictures wanted the job,” saidPercy. “Frightened of what happened to the Fat Lady.Sir Cadogan was the only one brave enough tovolunteer.”

Sir Cadogan, however, was the least of Harry’sworries. He was now being closely watched. Teachersfound excuses to walk along corridors with him, andPercy Weasley (acting, Harry suspected, on hismother’s orders) was tailing him everywhere like anPage | 185 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

extremely pompous guard dog. To cap it all, ProfessorMcGonagall summoned Harry into her office, withsuch a somber expression on her face Harry thoughtsomeone must have died.

“There’s no point hiding it from you any longer,Potter,” she said in a very serious voice. “I know thiswill come as a shock to you, but Sirius Black —”

“I know he’s after me,” said Harry wearily. “I heardRon’s dad telling his mum. Mr. Weasley works for theMinistry of Magic.”

Professor McGonagall seemed very taken aback. Shestared at Harry for a moment or two, then said, “I see!Well, in that case, Potter, you’ll understand why Idon’t think it’s a good idea for you to be practicingQuidditch in the evenings. Out on the field with onlyyour team members, it’s very exposed, Potter —”

“We’ve got our first match on Saturday!” said Harry,outraged. “I’ve got to train, Professor!”

Professor McGonagall considered him intently. Harryknew she was deeply interested in the Gryffindorteam’s prospects; it had been she, after all, who’dsuggested him as Seeker in the first place. He waited,holding his breath.

“Hmm ...” Professor McGonagall stood up and staredout of the window at the Quidditch field, just visiblethrough the rain. “Well ... goodness knows, I’d like tosee us win the Cup at last ... but all the same, Potter... I’d be happier if a teacher were present. I’ll askMadam Hooch to oversee your training sessions.”

The weather worsened steadily as the first Quidditchmatch drew nearer. Undaunted, the Gryffindor teamwas training harder than ever under the eye of

Page | 186 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Madam Hooch. Then, at their final training sessionbefore Saturday’s match, Oliver Wood gave his teamsome unwelcome news.

“We’re not playing Slytherin!” he told them, lookingvery angry. “Flint’s just been to see me. We’re playingHufflepuff instead.”

“Why?” chorused the rest of the team.

“Flint’s excuse is that their Seeker’s arm’s stillinjured,” said Wood, grinding his teeth furiously. “Butit’s obvious why they’re doing it. Don’t want to play inthis weather. Think it’ll damage their chances. ...”

There had been strong winds and heavy rain all day,and as Wood spoke, they heard a distant rumble ofthunder.

“There’s nothing wrong with Malfoy’s arm!” said Harryfuriously. “He’s faking it!”

“I know that, but we can’t prove it,” said Woodbitterly. “And we’ve been practicing all those movesassuming we’re playing Slytherin, and instead it’sHufflepuff, and their style’s quite different. They’ve gota new Captain and Seeker, Cedric Diggory —”

Angelina, Alicia, and Katie suddenly giggled.

“What?” said Wood, frowning at this lightheartedbehavior.

“He’s that tall, good-looking one, isn’t he?” saidAngelina.

“Strong and silent,” said Katie, and they started togiggle again.

Page | 187 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“He’s only silent because he’s too thick to string twowords together,” said Fred impatiently. “I don’t knowwhy you’re worried, Oliver, Hufflepuff is a pushover.Last time we played them, Harry caught the Snitch inabout five minutes, remember?”

“We were playing in completely different conditions!”Wood shouted, his eyes bulging slightly. “Diggory’sput a very strong side together! He’s an excellentSeeker! I was afraid you’d take it like this! We mustn’trelax! We must keep our focus! Slytherin is trying towrong-foot us! We must win!”

“Oliver, calm down!” said Fred, looking slightlyalarmed. “We’re taking Hufflepuff very seriously.Seriously.”

The day before the match, the winds reached howlingpoint and the rain fell harder than ever. It was sodark inside the corridors and classrooms that extratorches and lanterns were lit. The Slytherin team waslooking very smug indeed, and none more so thanMalfoy.

“Ah, if only my arm was feeling a bit better!” he sighedas the gale outside pounded the windows.

Harry had no room in his head to worry aboutanything except the match tomorrow. Oliver Woodkept hurrying up to him between classes and givinghim tips. The third time this happened, Wood talkedfor so long that Harry suddenly realized he was tenminutes late for Defense Against the Dark Arts, andset off at a run with Wood shouting after him,“Diggory’s got a very fast swerve, Harry, so you mightwant to try looping him —”

Page | 188 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry skidded to a halt outside the Defense Againstthe Dark Arts classroom, pulled the door open, anddashed inside.

“Sorry I’m late, Professor Lupin, I —”

But it wasn’t Professor Lupin who looked up at himfrom the teacher’s desk; it was Snape.

“This lesson began ten minutes ago, Potter, so I thinkwe’ll make it ten points from Gryffindor. Sit down.”

But Harry didn’t move.

“Where’s Professor Lupin?” he said.

“He says he is feeling too ill to teach today,” saidSnape with a twisted smile. “I believe I told you to sitdown?”

But Harry stayed where he was.

“What’s wrong with him?”

Snape’s black eyes glittered.

“Nothing life-threatening,” he said, looking as thoughhe wished it were. “Five more points from Gryffindor,and if I have to ask you to sit down again, it will befifty.”

Harry walked slowly to his seat and sat down. Snapelooked around at the class.

“As I was saying before Potter interrupted, ProfessorLupin has not left any record of the topics you havecovered so far —”

Page | 189 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Please, sir, we’ve done boggarts, Red Caps, kappas,and grindylows,” said Hermione quickly, “and we’rejust about to start —”

“Be quiet,” said Snape coldly. “I did not ask forinformation. I was merely commenting on ProfessorLupin’s lack of organization.”

“He’s the best Defense Against the Dark Arts teacherwe’ve ever had,” said Dean Thomas boldly, and therewas a murmur of agreement from the rest of theclass. Snape looked more menacing than ever.

“You are easily satisfied. Lupin is hardly overtaxingyou — I would expect first years to be able to dealwith Red Caps and grindylows. Today we shalldiscuss —”

Harry watched him flick through the textbook, to thevery back chapter, which he must know they hadn’tcovered.

“— werewolves,” said Snape.

“But, sir,” said Hermione, seemingly unable torestrain herself, “we’re not supposed to do werewolvesyet, we’re due to start hinkypunks —”

“Miss Granger,” said Snape in a voice of deadly calm,“I was under the impression that I am teaching thislesson, not you. And I am telling you all to turn topage 394.” He glanced around again. “All of you!

Now\”

With many bitter sidelong looks and some sullenmuttering, the class opened their books.

“Which of you can tell me how we distinguish betweenthe werewolf and the true wolf?” said Snape.

Page | 190 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Everyone sat in motionless silence; everyone exceptHermione, whose hand, as it so often did, had shotstraight into the air.

“Anyone?” Snape said, ignoring Hermione. His twistedsmile was back. “Are you telling me that ProfessorLupin hasn’t even taught you the basic distinctionbetween —”

“We told you,” said Parvati suddenly, “we haven’t gotas far as werewolves yet, we’re still on —”

“Silencel” snarled Snape. “Well, well, well, I neverthought I’d meet a third-year class who wouldn’t evenrecognize a werewolf when they saw one. I shall makea point of informing Professor Dumbledore how verybehind you all are. ...”

“Please, sir,” said Hermione, whose hand was still inthe air, “the werewolf differs from the true wolf inseveral small ways. The snout of the werewolf—”

“That is the second time you have spoken out of turn,Miss Granger,” said Snape coolly. “Five more pointsfrom Gryffindor for being an insufferable know-it-all.”

Hermione went very red, put down her hand, andstared at the floor with her eyes full of tears. It was amark of how much the class loathed Snape that theywere all glaring at him, because every one of themhad called Hermione a know-it-all at least once, andRon, who told Hermione she was a know-it-all at leasttwice a week, said loudly, “You asked us a questionand she knows the answer! Why ask if you don’t wantto be told?”

The class knew instantly he’d gone too far. Snapeadvanced on Ron slowly, and the room held itsbreath.

Page | 191 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Detention, Weasley,” Snape said silkily, his face veryclose to Ron’s. “And if I ever hear you criticize the wayI teach a class again, you will be very sorry indeed.”

No one made a sound throughout the rest of thelesson. They sat and made notes on werewolves fromthe textbook, while Snape prowled up and down therows of desks, examining the work they had beendoing with Professor Lupin.

“Very poorly explained ... That is incorrect, the kappais more commonly found in Mongolia. ... ProfessorLupin gave this eight out of ten? I wouldn’t have givenit three. ...”

When the bell rang at last, Snape held them back.

“You will each write an essay, to be handed in to me,on the ways you recognize and kill werewolves. I wanttwo rolls of parchment on the subject, and I wantthem by Monday morning. It is time somebody tookthis class in hand. Weasley, stay behind, we need toarrange your detention.”

Harry and Hermione left the room with the rest of theclass, who waited until they were well out of earshot,then burst into a furious tirade about Snape.

“Snape’s never been like this with any of our otherDefense Against the Dark Arts teachers, even if he didwant the job,” Harry said to Hermione. “Why’s he gotit in for Lupin? D’you think this is all because of theboggart?”

“I don’t know,” said Hermione pensively. “But I reallyhope Professor Lupin gets better soon. ...”

Ron caught up with them five minutes later, in atowering rage.

Page | 192 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“D’you know what that —” (he called Snapesomething that made Hermione say “Ron\”) “— ismaking me do? I’ve got to scrub out the bedpans inthe hospital wing. Without magid” He was breathingdeeply, his fists clenched. “Why couldn’t Black havehidden in Snape’s office, eh? He could have finishedhim off for us!”

Harry woke extremely early the next morning; so earlythat it was still dark. For a moment he thought theroaring of the wind had woken him. Then he felt acold breeze on the back of his neck and sat boltupright — Peeves the Poltergeist had been floatingnext to him, blowing hard in his ear.

“What did you do that for?” said Harry furiously.

Peeves puffed out his cheeks, blew hard, and zoomedbackward out of the room, cackling.

Harry fumbled for his alarm clock and looked at it. Itwas half past four. Cursing Peeves, he rolled over andtried to get back to sleep, but it was very difficult, nowthat he was awake, to ignore the sounds of thethunder rumbling overhead, the pounding of the windagainst the castle walls, and the distant creaking ofthe trees in the Forbidden Forest. In a few hours hewould be out on the Quidditch field, battling throughthat gale. Finally, he gave up any thought of moresleep, got up, dressed, picked up his Nimbus TwoThousand, and walked quietly out of the dormitory.

As Harry opened the door, something brushed againsthis leg. He bent down just in time to grabCrookshanks by the end of his bushy tail and draghim outside.

“You know, I reckon Ron was right about you,” Harrytold Crookshanks suspiciously. “There are plenty of

Page | 193 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

mice around this place — go and chase them. Go on,”he added, nudging Crookshanks down the spiralstaircase with his foot. “Leave Scabbers alone.”

The noise of the storm was even louder in thecommon room. Harry knew better than to think thematch would be canceled; Quidditch matches weren’tcalled off for trifles like thunderstorms. Nevertheless,he was starting to feel very apprehensive. Wood hadpointed out Cedric Diggory to him in the corridor;Diggory was a fifth year and a lot bigger than Harry.Seekers were usually light and speedy, but Diggory’sweight would be an advantage in this weatherbecause he was less likely to be blown off course.

Harry whiled away the hours until dawn in front ofthe fire, getting up every now and then to stopCrookshanks from sneaking up the boys’ staircaseagain. At long last Harry thought it must be time forbreakfast, so he headed through the portrait holealone.

“Stand and fight, you mangy cur!” yelled Sir Cadogan.“Oh, shut up,” Harry yawned.

He revived a bit over a large bowl of porridge, and bythe time he’d started on toast, the rest of the teamhad turned up.

“It’s going to be a tough one,” said Wood, who wasn’teating anything.

“Stop worrying, Oliver,” said Alicia soothingly, “wedon’t mind a bit of rain.”

But it was considerably more than a bit of rain. Suchwas the popularity of Quidditch that the whole schoolturned out to watch the match as usual, but they ran

Page | 194 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

down the lawns toward the Quidditch field, headsbowed against the ferocious wind, umbrellas beingwhipped out of their hands as they went. Just beforehe entered the locker room, Harry saw Malfoy,

Crabbe, and Goyle, laughing and pointing at him fromunder an enormous umbrella on their way to thestadium.

The team changed into their scarlet robes and waitedfor Wood’s usual pre-match pep talk, but it didn’tcome. He tried to speak several times, made an oddgulping noise, then shook his head hopelessly andbeckoned them to follow him.

The wind was so strong that they staggered sidewaysas they walked out onto the field. If the crowd wascheering, they couldn’t hear it over the fresh rolls ofthunder. Rain was splattering over Harry’s glasses.How on earth was he going to see the Snitch in this?

The Hufflepuffs were approaching from the oppositeside of the field, wearing canary-yellow robes. TheCaptains walked up to each other and shook hands;Diggory smiled at Wood but Wood now looked asthough he had lockjaw and merely nodded. Harry sawMadam Hooch’s mouth form the words, “Mount yourbrooms.” He pulled his right foot out of the mud witha squelch and swung it over his Nimbus TwoThousand. Madam Hooch put her whistle to her lipsand gave it a blast that sounded shrill and distant —they were off.

Harry rose fast, but his Nimbus was swerving slightlywith the wind. He held it as steady as he could andturned, squinting into the rain.

Within five minutes Harry was soaked to his skin andfrozen, hardly able to see his teammates, let alone thetiny Snitch. He flew backward and forward across the

Page | 195 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

field past blurred red and yellow shapes, with no ideaof what was happening in the rest of the game. Hecouldn’t hear the commentary over the wind. Thecrowd was hidden beneath a sea of cloaks andbattered umbrellas. Twice Harry came very close tobeing unseated by a Bludger; his vision was soclouded by the rain on his glasses he hadn’t seenthem coming.

He lost track of time. It was getting harder and harderto hold his broom straight. The sky was gettingdarker, as though night had decided to come early.Twice Harry nearly hit another player, withoutknowing whether it was a teammate or opponent;everyone was now so wet, and the rain so thick, hecould hardly tell them apart. ...

With the first flash of lightning came the sound ofMadam Hooch’s whistle; Harry could just see theoutline of Wood through the thick rain, gesturing himto the ground. The whole team splashed down intothe mud.

“I called for time-out!” Wood roared at his team.

“Come on, under here —”

They huddled at the edge of the field under a largeumbrella; Harry took off his glasses and wiped themhurriedly on his robes.

“What’s the score?”

“We’re fifty points up,” said Wood, “but unless we getthe Snitch soon, we’ll be playing into the night.”

“I’ve got no chance with these on,” Harry saidexasperatedly, waving his glasses.

Page | 196 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

At that very moment, Hermione appeared at hisshoulder; she was holding her cloak over her headand was, inexplicably, beaming.

“I’ve had an idea, Harry! Give me your glasses, quick!”

He handed them to her, and as the team watched inamazement, Hermione tapped them with her wandand said, “Imperviusl”

“There!” she said, handing them back to Harry.“They’ll repel water!”

Wood looked as though he could have kissed her.

“Brilliant!” he called hoarsely after her as shedisappeared into the crowd. “Okay, team, let’s go forit!”

Hermione’s spell had done the trick. Harry was stillnumb with cold, still wetter than he’d ever been in hislife, but he could see. Full of fresh determination, heurged his broom through the turbulent air, staring inevery direction for the Snitch, avoiding a Bludger,ducking beneath Diggory, who was streaking in theopposite direction. ...

There was another clap of thunder, followedimmediately by forked lightning. This was gettingmore and more dangerous. Harry needed to get theSnitch quickly —

He turned, intending to head back toward the middleof the field, but at that moment, another flash oflightning illuminated the stands, and Harry sawsomething that distracted him completely — thesilhouette of an enormous shaggy black dog, clearlyimprinted against the sky, motionless in the topmost,empty row of seats.

Page | 197 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s numb hands slipped on the broom handleand his Nimbus dropped a few feet. Shaking hissodden bangs out of his eyes, he squinted back intothe stands. The dog had vanished.

“Harry!” came Wood’s anguished yell from theGryffindor goal posts. “Harry, behind you!”

Harry looked wildly around. Cedric Diggory waspelting up the field, and a tiny speck of gold wasshimmering in the rain-filled air between them —

With a jolt of panic, Harry threw himself flat to thebroom-handle and zoomed toward the Snitch.

“Come on!” he growled at his Nimbus as the rainwhipped his face. “Fasteri”

But something odd was happening. An eerie silencewas falling across the stadium. The wind, though asstrong as ever, was forgetting to roar. It was asthough someone had turned off the sound, as thoughHarry had gone suddenly deaf — what was going on?

And then a horribly familiar wave of cold swept overhim, inside him, just as he became aware ofsomething moving on the field below. ...

Before he’d had time to think, Harry had taken hiseyes off the Snitch and looked down.

At least a hundred dementors, their hidden facespointing up at him, were standing beneath him. Itwas as though freezing water were rising in his chest,cutting at his insides. And then he heard it again. ...Someone was screaming, screaming inside his head... a woman ...

“Not Harry, not Harry, please not Harry\”

Page | 198 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Stand aside, you silly girl... stand aside, now. ...”

“Not Harry, please no, take me, kill me instead —”

Numbing, swirling white mist was filling Harry’sbrain. ... What was he doing? Why was he flying? Heneeded to help her. ... She was going to die. ... Shewas going to be murdered. ...

He was falling, falling through the icy mist.

“Not Harry\ Please ... have mercy ... have mercy. ...”

A shrill voice was laughing, the woman wasscreaming, and Harry knew no more.

“Lucky the ground was so soft.”

“I thought he was dead for sure.”

“But he didn’t even break his glasses.”

Harry could hear the voices whispering, but theymade no sense whatsoever. He didn’t have a cluewhere he was, or how he’d got there, or what he’dbeen doing before he got there. All he knew was thatevery inch of him was aching as though it had beenbeaten.

“That was the scariest thing I’ve ever seen in my life.”

Scariest ... the scariest thing ... hooded black figures... cold ... screaming ...

Harry’s eyes snapped open. He was lying in thehospital wing. The Gryffindor Quidditch team,spattered with mud from head to foot, was gatheredaround his bed. Ron and Hermione were also there,

Page | 199 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

looking as though they’d just climbed out of aswimming pool.

“Harry!” said Fred, who looked extremely whiteunderneath the mud. “How’re you feeling?”

It was as though Harry’s memory was on fast forward.The lightning — the Grim — the Snitch — and thedementors ...

“What happened?” he said, sitting up so suddenlythey all gasped.

“You fell off,” said Fred. “Must’ve been — what — fiftyfeet?”

“We thought you’d died,” said Alicia, who wasshaking.

Hermione made a small, squeaky noise. Her eyes wereextremely bloodshot.

“But the match,” said Harry. “What happened? Are wedoing a replay?”

No one said anything. The horrible truth sank intoHarry like a stone.

“We didn’t — lose?”

“Diggory got the Snitch,” said George. “Just after youfell. He didn’t realize what had happened. When helooked back and saw you on the ground, he tried tocall it off. Wanted a rematch. But they won fair andsquare ... even Wood admits it.”

“Where is Wood?” said Harry, suddenly realizing hewasn’t there.

Page | 200 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Still in the showers,” said Fred. “We think he’s tryingto drown himself.”

Harry put his face to his knees, his hands grippinghis hair. Fred grabbed his shoulder and shook itroughly.

“C’mon, Harry, you’ve never missed the Snitchbefore.”

“There had to be one time you didn’t get it,” saidGeorge.

“It’s not over yet,” said Fred. “We lost by a hundredpoints, right? So if Hufflepuff loses to Ravenclaw andwe beat Ravenclaw and Slytherin ...”

“Hufflepuff’ll have to lose by at least two hundredpoints,” said George.

“But if they beat Ravenclaw ...”

“No way, Ravenclaw is too good. But if Slytherin losesagainst Hufflepuff ...”

“It all depends on the points — a margin of a hundredeither way —”

Harry lay there, not saying a word. They had lost ...for the first time ever, he had lost a Quidditch match.

After ten minutes or so, Madam Pomfrey came over totell the team to leave him in peace.

“Well come and see you later,” Fred told him. “Don’tbeat yourself up, Harry, you’re still the best Seekerwe’ve ever had.”

Page | 201 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The team trooped out, trailing mud behind them.Madam Pomfrey shut the door behind them, lookingdisapproving. Ron and Hermione moved nearer toHarry’s bed.

“Dumbledore was really angry,” Hermione said in aquaking voice. “I’ve never seen him like that before.

He ran onto the field as you fell, waved his wand, andyou sort of slowed down before you hit the ground.Then he whirled his wand at the dementors. Shotsilver stuff at them. They left the stadium right away.... He was furious they’d come onto the grounds. Weheard him —”

“Then he magicked you onto a stretcher,” said Ron.“And walked up to school with you floating on it.Everyone thought you were ...”

His voice faded, but Harry hardly noticed. He wasthinking about what the dementors had done to him... about the screaming voice. He looked up and sawRon and Hermione looking at him so anxiously thathe quickly cast around for something matter-of-fact tosay.

“Did someone get my Nimbus?”

Ron and Hermione looked quickly at each other.

“Er —”

“What?” said Harry, looking from one to the other.

“Well ... when you fell off, it got blown away,” saidHermione hesitantly.

“And?”

Page | 202 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“And it hit — it hit — oh, Harry — it hit theWhomping Willow.”

Harry’s insides lurched. The Whomping Willow was avery violent tree that stood alone in the middle of thegrounds.

“And?” he said, dreading the answer.

“Well, you know the Whomping Willow,” said Ron. “It— it doesn’t like being hit.”

“Professor Flitwick brought it back just before youcame around,” said Hermione in a very small voice.

Slowly, she reached down for a bag at her feet, turnedit upside down, and tipped a dozen bits of splinteredwood and twig onto the bed, the only remains ofHarry’s faithful, finally beaten broomstick.

Page | 203 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



THE MARAUDER’S MAP

Madam Pomfrey insisted on keeping Harry in thehospital wing for the rest of the weekend. He didn’targue or complain, but he wouldn’t let her throwaway the shattered remnants of his Nimbus TwoThousand. He knew he was being stupid, knew thatthe Nimbus was beyond repair, but Harry couldn’thelp it; he felt as though he’d lost one of his bestfriends.

He had a stream of visitors, all intent on cheering himup. Hagrid sent him a bunch of earwiggy flowers thatlooked like yellow cabbages, and Ginny Weasley,blushing furiously, turned up with a get-well card shehad made herself, which sang shrilly unless Harrykept it shut under his bowl of fruit. The Gryffindorteam visited again on Sunday morning, this timeaccompanied by Wood, who told Harry (in a hollow,dead sort of voice) that he didn’t blame him in theslightest. Ron and Hermione left Harry’s bedside onlyat night. But nothing anyone said or did could makeHarry feel any better, because they knew only half ofwhat was troubling him.

Page | 204 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He hadn’t told anyone about the Grim, not even Ronand Hermione, because he knew Ron would panicand Hermione would scoff. The fact remained,however, that it had now appeared twice, and bothappearances had been followed by near-fatalaccidents; the first time, he had nearly been run overby the Knight Bus; the second, fallen fifty feet fromhis broomstick. Was the Grim going to haunt himuntil he actually died? Was he going to spend the restof his life looking over his shoulder for the beast?

And then there were the dementors. Harry felt sickand humiliated every time he thought of them.Everyone said the dementors were horrible, but noone else collapsed every time they went near one. Noone else heard echoes in their head of their dyingparents.

Because Harry knew who that screaming voicebelonged to now. He had heard her words, heardthem over and over again during the night hours inthe hospital wing while he lay awake, staring at thestrips of moonlight on the ceiling. When thedementors approached him, he heard the lastmoments of his mother’s life, her attempts to protecthim, Harry, from Lord Voldemort, and Voldemort’slaughter before he murdered her. ... Harry dozedfitfully, sinking into dreams full of clammy, rottedhands and petrified pleading, jerking awake to dwellagain on his mother’s voice.

It was a relief to return to the noise and bustle of themain school on Monday, where he was forced to thinkabout other things, even if he had to endure DracoMalfoy’s taunting. Malfoy was almost beside himselfwith glee at Gryffindor’s defeat. He had finally takenoff his bandages, and celebrated having the full use ofboth arms again by doing spirited imitations of Harryfalling off his broom. Malfoy spent much of their nextPage | 205 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Potions class doing dementor imitations across thedungeon; Ron finally cracked and flung a large,slippery crocodile heart at Malfoy, which hit him inthe face and caused Snape to take fifty points fromGryffindor.

“If Snape’s teaching Defense Against the Dark Artsagain, I’m skiving off,” said Ron as they headedtoward Lupin’s classroom after lunch. “Check who’sin there, Hermione.”

Hermione peered around the classroom door.

“It’s okay!”

Professor Lupin was back at work. It certainly lookedas though he had been ill. His old robes were hangingmore loosely on him and there were dark shadowsbeneath his eyes; nevertheless, he smiled at the classas they took their seats, and they burst at once intoan explosion of complaints about Snape’s behaviorwhile Lupin had been ill.

“It’s not fair, he was only filling in, why should he giveus homework?”

“We don’t know anything about werewolves —”

“— two rolls of parchment!”

“Did you tell Professor Snape we haven’t covered themyet?” Lupin asked, frowning slightly.

The babble broke out again.

“Yes, but he said we were really behind —”

“— he wouldn’t listen —”

Page | 206 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“— two rolls of parchmenti”

Professor Lupin smiled at the look of indignation onevery face.

“Don’t worry. I’ll speak to Professor Snape. You don’thave to do the essay.”

“Oh no,” said Hermione, looking very disappointed.“I’ve already finished it!”

They had a very enjoyable lesson. Professor Lupinhad brought along a glass box containing ahinkypunk, a little one-legged creature who looked asthough he were made of wisps of smoke, rather frailand harmless-looking.

“Lures travelers into bogs,” said Professor Lupin asthey took notes. “You notice the lantern dangling fromhis hand? Hops ahead — people follow the light —then —’”

The hinkypunk made a horrible squelching noiseagainst the glass.

When the bell rang, everyone gathered up their thingsand headed for the door, Harry among them, but —

“Wait a moment, Harry,” Lupin called. “I’d like aword.”

Harry doubled back and watched Professor Lupincovering the hinkypunk’s box with a cloth.

“I heard about the match,” said Lupin, turning backto his desk and starting to pile books into hisbriefcase, “and I’m sorry about your broomstick. Isthere any chance of fixing it?”

Page | 207 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“No,” said Harry. “The tree smashed it to bits.”

Lupin sighed.

“They planted the Whomping Willow the same yearthat I arrived at Hogwarts. People used to play agame, trying to get near enough to touch the trunk. Inthe end, a boy called Davey Gudgeon nearly lost aneye, and we were forbidden to go near it. Nobroomstick would have a chance.

“Did you hear about the dementors too?” said Harrywith difficulty.

Lupin looked at him quickly.

“Yes, I did. I don’t think any of us have seen ProfessorDumbledore that angry. They have been growingrestless for some time ... furious at his refusal to letthem inside the grounds. ... I suppose they were thereason you fell?”

“Yes,” said Harry. He hesitated, and then the questionhe had to ask burst from him before he could stophimself. “ Why? Why do they affect me like that? Am Ijust — ?”

“It has nothing to do with weakness,” said ProfessorLupin sharply, as though he had read Harry’s mind.“The dementors affect you worse than the othersbecause there are horrors in your past that the othersdon’t have.”

A ray of wintery sunlight fell across the classroom,illuminating Lupin’s gray hairs and the lines on hisyoung face.

“Dementors are among the foulest creatures that walkthis earth. They infest the darkest, filthiest places,

Page | 208 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

they glory in decay and despair, they drain peace,hope, and happiness out of the air around them.

Even Muggles feel their presence, though they can’tsee them. Get too near a dementor and every goodfeeling, every happy memory will be sucked out ofyou. If it can, the dementor will feed on you longenough to reduce you to something like itself ... soul-less and evil. You’ll be left with nothing but the worstexperiences of your life. And the worst that happenedto you, Harry, is enough to make anyone fall off theirbroom. You have nothing to feel ashamed of.”

“When they get near me —” Harry stared at Lupin’sdesk, his throat tight. “I can hear Voldemortmurdering my mum.”

Lupin made a sudden motion with his arm as thoughto grip Harry’s shoulder, but thought better of it.

There was a moment’s silence, then —

“Why did they have to come to the match?” said Harrybitterly.

“They’re getting hungry,” said Lupin coolly, shuttinghis briefcase with a snap. “Dumbledore won’t let theminto the school, so their supply of human prey hasdried up. ... I don’t think they could resist the largecrowd around the Quidditch field. All that excitement... emotions running high ... it was their idea of afeast.”

“Azkaban must be terrible,” Harry muttered. Lupinnodded grimly.

“The fortress is set on a tiny island, way out to sea,but they don’t need walls and water to keep theprisoners in, not when they’re all trapped inside theirown heads, incapable of a single cheerful thought.Most of them go mad within weeks.”

Page | 209 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“But Sirius Black escaped from them,” Harry saidslowly. “He got away. ...”

Lupin’s briefcase slipped from the desk; he had tostoop quickly to catch it.

“Yes,” he said, straightening up, “Black must havefound a way to fight them. I wouldn’t have believed itpossible. ... Dementors are supposed to drain awizard of his powers if he is left with them too long.

“You made that dementor on the train back off,” saidHarry suddenly.

“There are — certain defenses one can use,” saidLupin. “But there was only one dementor on the train.The more there are, the more difficult it becomes toresist.”

“What defenses?” said Harry at once. “Can you teachme?”

“I don’t pretend to be an expert at fighting dementors,Harry ... quite the contrary. ...”

“But if the dementors come to another Quidditchmatch, I need to be able to fight them —”

Lupin looked into Harry’s determined face, hesitated,then said, “Well ... all right. I’ll try and help. But it’llhave to wait until next term, I’m afraid. I have a lot todo before the holidays. I chose a very inconvenienttime to fall ill.”

What with the promise of anti-dementor lessons fromLupin, the thought that he might never have to hearhis mother’s death again, and the fact that Ravenclawflattened Hufflepuff in their Quidditch match at the

Page | 210 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

end of November, Harry’s mood took a definiteupturn. Gryffindor were not out of the running afterall, although they could not afford to lose anothermatch. Wood became repossessed of his manicenergy, and worked his team as hard as ever in thechilly haze of rain that persisted into December.

Harry saw no hint of a dementor within the grounds.Dumbledore’s anger seemed to be keeping them attheir stations at the entrances.

Two weeks before the end of the term, the skylightened suddenly to a dazzling, opaline white andthe muddy grounds were revealed one morningcovered in glittering frost. Inside the castle, there wasa buzz of Christmas in the air. Professor Flitwick, theCharms teacher, had already decorated his classroomwith shimmering lights that turned out to be real,fluttering fairies. The students were all happilydiscussing their plans for the holidays. Both Ron andHermione had decided to remain at Hogwarts, andthough Ron said it was because he couldn’t stand twoweeks with Percy, and Hermione insisted she neededto use the library, Harry wasn’t fooled; they weredoing it to keep him company, and he was verygrateful.

To everyone’s delight except Harry’s, there was to beanother Hogsmeade trip on the very last weekend ofthe term.

“We can do all our Christmas shopping there!” saidHermione. “Mum and Dad would really love thoseToothflossing Stringmints from Honeydukes!”

Resigned to the fact that he would be the only thirdyear staying behind again, Harry borrowed a copy ofWhich Broomstick from Wood, and decided to spendthe day reading up on the different makes. He hadbeen riding one of the school brooms at teamPage | 211 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

practice, an ancient Shooting Star, which was veryslow and jerky; he definitely needed a new broom ofhis own.

On the Saturday morning of the Hogsmeade trip,Harry bid good-bye to Ron and Hermione, who werewrapped in cloaks and scarves, then turned up themarble staircase alone, and headed back towardGryffindor Tower. Snow had started to fall outside thewindows, and the castle was very still and quiet.

“Psst — Harry!”

He turned, halfway along the third-floor corridor, tosee Fred and George peering out at him from behind astatue of a humpbacked, one-eyed witch.

“What are you doing?” said Harry curiously. “Howcome you’re not going to Hogsmeade?”

“We’ve come to give you a bit of festive cheer beforewe go,” said Fred, with a mysterious wink. “Come inhere. ...”

He nodded toward an empty classroom to the left ofthe one-eyed statue. Harry followed Fred and Georgeinside. George closed the door quietly and thenturned, beaming, to look at Harry.

“Early Christmas present for you, Harry,” he said.

Fred pulled something from inside his cloak with aflourish and laid it on one of the desks. It was a large,square, very worn piece of parchment with nothingwritten on it. Harry, suspecting one of Fred andGeorge’s jokes, stared at it.

“What’s that supposed to be?”

Page | 212 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“This, Harry, is the secret of our success,” saidGeorge, patting the parchment fondly.

“It’s a wrench, giving it to you,” said Fred, “but wedecided last night, your need’s greater than ours.”

“Anyway, we know it by heart,” said George. “Webequeath it to you. We don’t really need it anymore.”

“And what do I need with a bit of old parchment?”said Harry.

“A bit of old parchment!” said Fred, closing his eyeswith a grimace as though Harry had mortally offendedhim. “Explain, George.”

“Well ... when we were in our first year, Harry —young, carefree, and innocent —”

Harry snorted. He doubted whether Fred and Georgehad ever been innocent.

“— well, more innocent than we are now — we gotinto a spot of bother with Filch.”

“We let off a Dungbomb in the corridor and it upsethim for some reason —”

“So he hauled us off to his office and startedthreatening us with the usual —”

“— detention —”

“— disembowelment —”

“— and we couldn’t help noticing a drawer in one ofhis filing cabinets marked Confiscated and HighlyDangerous.”

Page | 213 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t tell me —” said Harry, starting to grin.

“Well, what would you’ve done?” said Fred. “Georgecaused a diversion by dropping another Dungbomb, Iwhipped the drawer open, and grabbed — this.”

“It’s not as bad as it sounds, you know,” said George.“We don’t reckon Filch ever found out how to work it.He probably suspected what it was, though, or hewouldn’t have confiscated it.”

“And you know how to work it?”

“Oh yes,” said Fred, smirking. “This little beauty’staught us more than all the teachers in this school.”

“You’re winding me up,” said Harry, looking at theragged old bit of parchment.

“Oh, are we?” said George.

He took out his wand, touched the parchment lightly,and said, “I solemnly swear that I am up to no good.”

And at once, thin ink lines began to spread like aspider’s web from the point that George’s wand hadtouched. They joined each other, they crisscrossed,they fanned into every corner of the parchment; thenwords began to blossom across the top, great, curlygreen words, that proclaimed:

Messrs. Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs

Purveyors of Aids to Magical Mischief-Makers

are proud to present

THE MARAUDER’S MAP

Page | 214 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

It was a map showing every detail of the Hogwartscastle and grounds. But the truly remarkable thingwere the tiny ink dots moving around it, each labeledwith a name in minuscule writing. Astounded, Harrybent over it. A labeled dot in the top left cornershowed that Professor Dumbledore was pacing hisstudy; the caretaker’s cat, Mrs. Norris, was prowlingthe second floor; and Peeves the Poltergeist wascurrently bouncing around the trophy room. And asHarry’s eyes traveled up and down the familiarcorridors, he noticed something else.

This map showed a set of passages he had neverentered. And many of them seemed to lead —

“Right into Hogsmeade,” said Fred, tracing one ofthem with his finger. “There are seven in all. Now,Filch knows about these four” — he pointed them out— “but we’re sure we’re the only ones who knowabout these. Don’t bother with the one behind themirror on the fourth floor. We used it until lastwinter, but it’s caved in — completely blocked. Andwe don’t reckon anyone’s ever used this one, becausethe Whomping Willow’s planted right over theentrance. But this one here, this one leads right intothe cellar of Honeydukes. We’ve used it loads of times.And as you might’ve noticed, the entrance is rightoutside this room, through that one-eyed old crone’shump.”

“Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongs,” sighedGeorge, patting the heading of the map. “We owethem so much.”

“Noble men, working tirelessly to help a newgeneration of law-breakers,” said Fred solemnly.

“Right,” said George briskly. “Don’t forget to wipe itafter you’ve used it —”

Page | 215 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“— or anyone can read it,” Fred said warningly.

“Just tap it again and say, ‘Mischief managed!’ Andit’ll go blank.”

“So, young Harry,” said Fred, in an uncannyimpersonation of Percy, “mind you behave yourself.”

“See you in Honeydukes,” said George, winking.

They left the room, both smirking in a satisfied sort ofway.

Harry stood there, gazing at the miraculous map. Hewatched the tiny ink Mrs. Norris turn left and pauseto sniff at something on the floor. If Filch really didn’tknow ... he wouldn’t have to pass the dementors atall. ...

But even as he stood there, flooded with excitement,something Harry had once heard Mr. Weasley saycame floating out of his memory.

Never trust anything that can think for itself, if youcan’t see where it keeps its brain.

This map was one of those dangerous magical objectsMr. Weasley had been warning against. ... Aids forMagical Mischief-Makers ... but then, Harry reasoned,he only wanted to use it to get into Hogsmeade, itwasn’t as though he wanted to steal anything orattack anyone ... and Fred and George had beenusing it for years without anything horriblehappening. ...

Harry traced the secret passage to Honeydukes withhis finger.

Page | 216 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Then, quite suddenly, as though following orders, herolled up the map, stuffed it inside his robes, andhurried to the door of the classroom. He opened it acouple of inches. There was no one outside. Verycarefully, he edged out of the room and behind thestatue of the one-eyed witch.

What did he have to do? He pulled out the map againand saw, to his astonishment, that a new ink figurehad appeared upon it, labeled Harry Potter. Thisfigure was standing exactly where the real Harry wasstanding, about halfway down the third-floor corridor.Harry watched carefully. His little ink self appeared tobe tapping the witch with his minute wand. Harryquickly took out his real wand and tapped the statue.Nothing happened. He looked back at the map. Thetiniest speech bubble had appeared next to his figure.The word inside said, “Dissendium.”

“Dissendiurrd” Harry whispered, tapping the stonewitch again.

At once, the statue’s hump opened wide enough toadmit a fairly thin person. Harry glanced quickly upand down the corridor, then tucked the map awayagain, hoisted himself into the hole headfirst, andpushed himself forward.

He slid a considerable way down what felt like a stoneslide, then landed on cold, damp earth. He stood up,looking around. It was pitch dark. He held up hiswand, muttered, “Lumos\” and saw that he was in avery narrow, low, earthy passageway. He raised themap, tapped it with the tip of his wand, andmuttered, “Mischief managed!” The map went blankat once. He folded it carefully, tucked it inside hisrobes, then, heart beating fast, both excited andapprehensive, he set off.

Page | 217 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The passage twisted and turned, more like the burrowof a giant rabbit than anything else. Harry hurriedalong it, stumbling now and then on the uneven floor,holding his wand out in front of him.

It took ages, but Harry had the thought ofHoneydukes to sustain him. After what felt like anhour, the passage began to rise. Panting, Harry spedup, his face hot, his feet very cold.

Ten minutes later, he came to the foot of some wornstone steps, which rose out of sight above him.

Careful not to make any noise, Harry began to climb.A hundred steps, two hundred steps, he lost count ashe climbed, watching his feet. ... Then, withoutwarning, his head hit something hard.

It seemed to be a trapdoor. Harry stood there,massaging the top of his head, listening. He couldn’thear any sounds above him. Very slowly, he pushedthe trapdoor open and peered over the edge.

He was in a cellar, which was full of wooden cratesand boxes. Harry climbed out of the trapdoor andreplaced it — it blended so perfectly with the dustyfloor that it was impossible to tell it was there. Harrycrept slowly toward the wooden staircase that ledupstairs. Now he could definitely hear voices, not tomention the tinkle of a bell and the opening andshutting of a door.

Wondering what he ought to do, he suddenly heard adoor open much closer at hand; somebody was aboutto come downstairs.

“And get another box of Jelly Slugs, dear, they’venearly cleaned us out —” said a woman’s voice.

Page | 218 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

A pair of feet was coming down the staircase. Harryleapt behind an enormous crate and waited for thefootsteps to pass. He heard the man shifting boxesagainst the opposite wall. He might not get anotherchance —

Quickly and silently, Harry dodged out from hishiding place and climbed the stairs; looking back, hesaw an enormous backside and shiny bald head,buried in a box. Harry reached the door at the top ofthe stairs, slipped through it, and found himselfbehind the counter of Honeydukes — he ducked,crept sideways, and then straightened up.

Honeydukes was so crowded with Hogwarts studentsthat no one looked twice at Harry. He edged amongthem, looking around, and suppressed a laugh as heimagined the look that would spread over Dudley’spiggy face if he could see where Harry was now.

There were shelves upon shelves of the mostsucculent-looking sweets imaginable. Creamy chunksof nougat, shimmering pink squares of coconut ice,fat, honey-colored toffees; hundreds of different kindsof chocolate in neat rows; there was a large barrel ofEvery Flavor Beans, and another of Fizzing Whizbees,the levitating sherbert balls that Ron had mentioned;along yet another wall were “Special Effects” sweets:Drooble’s Best Blowing Gum (which filled a room withbluebell-colored bubbles that refused to pop for days),the strange, splintery Toothflossing Stringmints, tinyblack Pepper Imps (“breathe fire for your friends!”),

Ice Mice (“hear your teeth chatter and squeak!”),peppermint creams shaped like toads (“hoprealistically in the stomach!”), fragile sugar-spunquills, and exploding bonbons.

Harry squeezed himself through a crowd of sixthyears and saw a sign hanging in the farthest corner of

Page | 219 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

the shop (UNUSUAL TASTES). Ron and Hermionewere standing underneath it, examining a tray ofblood-flavored lollipops. Harry sneaked up behindthem.

“Ugh, no, Harry won’t want one of those, they’re forvampires, I expect,” Hermione was saying.

“How about these?” said Ron, shoving ajar ofCockroach Clusters under Hermione’s nose.

“Definitely not,” said Harry.

Ron nearly dropped the jar.

“Harry\” squealed Hermione. “What are you doinghere? How — how did you — ?”

“Wow!” said Ron, looking very impressed, “you’velearned to Apparate!”

“ ’Course I haven’t,” said Harry. He dropped his voiceso that none of the sixth years could hear him andtold them all about the Marauder’s Map.

“How come Fred and George never gave it to me!” saidRon, outraged. “I’m their brother!”

“But Harry isn’t going to keep it!” said Hermione, asthough the idea were ludicrous. “He’s going to hand itin to Professor McGonagall, aren’t you, Harry?”

“No, I’m not!” said Harry.

“Are you mad?” said Ron, goggling at Hermione.

“Hand in something that good?”

“If I hand it in, I’ll have to say where I got it! Filchwould know Fred and George had nicked it!”

Page | 220 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“But what about Sirius Black?” Hermione hissed. “Hecould be using one of the passages on that map to getinto the castle! The teachers have got to know!”

“He can’t be getting in through a passage,” said Harryquickly. “There are seven secret tunnels on the map,right? Fred and George reckon Filch already knowsabout four of them. And of the other three — one ofthem’s caved in, so no one can get through it. One ofthem’s got the Whomping Willow planted over theentrance, so you can’t get out of it. And the one I justcame through — well — it’s really hard to see theentrance to it down in the cellar, so unless he knew itwas there ...”

Harry hesitated. What if Black did know the passagewas there? Ron, however, cleared his throatsignificantly, and pointed to a notice pasted on theinside of the sweetshop door.

— BY ORDER OF —

THE MINISTRY OF MAGIC

Customers are reminded that until further notice,dementors will be patrolling the streets of Hogsmeadeevery night after sundown. This measure has been putin place for the safety of Hogsmeade residents and willbe lifted upon the recapture of Sirius Black. It istherefore advisable that you complete your shoppingwell before nightfall.

Merry Christmas!

“See?” said Ron quietly. “I’d like to see Black try andbreak into Honeydukes with dementors swarming all

Page | 221 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

over the village. Anyway, Hermione, the Honeydukesowners would hear a break-in, wouldn’t they? Theylive over the shop!”

“Yes, but — but —” Hermoine seemed to be strugglingto find another problem. “Look, Harry still shouldn’tbe coming into Hogsmeade. He hasn’t got a signedform! If anyone finds out, he’ll be in so much trouble!And it’s not nightfall yet — what if Sirius Black turnsup today? Now?”

“He’d have a job spotting Harry in this,” said Ron,nodding through the mullioned windows at the thick,swirling snow. “Come on, Hermione, it’s Christmas.Harry deserves a break.”

Hermione bit her lip, looking extremely worried.

“Are you going to report me?” Harry asked her,grinning.

“Oh — of course not — but honestly, Harry —”

“Seen the Fizzing Whizbees, Harry?” said Ron,grabbing him and leading him over to their barrel.“And the Jelly Slugs? And the Acid Pops? Fred gaveme one of those when I was seven — it burnt a holeright through my tongue. I remember Mum wallopinghim with her broomstick.” Ron stared broodingly intothe Acid Pop box. “Reckon Fred’d take a bit ofCockroach Cluster if I told him they were peanuts?”

When Ron and Hermione had paid for all their sweets,the three of them left Honeydukes for the blizzardoutside.

Hogsmeade looked like a Christmas card; the littlethatched cottages and shops were all covered in alayer of crisp snow; there were holly wreaths on the

Page | 222 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

doors and strings of enchanted candles hanging inthe trees.

Harry shivered; unlike the other two, he didn’t havehis cloak. They headed up the street, heads bowedagainst the wind, Ron and Hermione shoutingthrough their scarves.

“That’s the post office —”

“Zonko’s is up there —”

“We could go up to the Shrieking Shack —”

“Tell you what,” said Ron, his teeth chattering, “shallwe go for a butterbeer in the Three Broomsticks?”

Harry was more than willing; the wind was fierce andhis hands were freezing, so they crossed the road,and in a few minutes were entering the tiny inn.

It was extremely crowded, noisy, warm, and smoky. Acurvy sort of woman with a pretty face was serving abunch of rowdy warlocks up at the bar.

“That’s Madam Rosmerta,” said Ron. “I’ll get thedrinks, shall I?” he added, going slightly red.

Harry and Hermione made their way to the back ofthe room, where there was a small, vacant tablebetween the window and a handsome Christmas tree,which stood next to the fireplace. Ron came back fiveminutes later, carrying three foaming tankards of hotbutterbeer.

“Merry Christmas!” he said happily, raising histankard.

Page | 223 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry drank deeply. It was the most delicious thinghe’d ever tasted and seemed to heat every bit of himfrom the inside.

A sudden breeze ruffled his hair. The door of theThree Broomsticks had opened again. Harry lookedover the rim of his tankard and choked.

Professors McGonagall and Flitwick had just enteredthe pub with a flurry of snowflakes, shortly followedby Hagrid, who was deep in conversation with a portlyman in a lime-green bowler hat and a pinstripedcloak — Cornelius Fudge, Minister of Magic.

In an instant, Ron and Hermione had both placedhands on the top of Harry’s head and forced him offhis stool and under the table. Dripping withbutterbeer and crouching out of sight, Harry clutchedhis empty tankard and watched the teachers’ andFudge’s feet move toward the bar, pause, then turnand walk right toward him.

Somewhere above him, Hermione whispered,“Mobiliarbus\”

The Christmas tree beside their table rose a fewinches off the ground, drifted sideways, and landedwith a soft thump right in front of their table, hidingthem from view. Staring through the dense lowerbranches, Harry saw four sets of chair legs move backfrom the table right beside theirs, then heard thegrunts and sighs of the teachers and minister as theysat down.

Next he saw another pair of feet, wearing sparklyturquoise high heels, and heard a woman’s voice.

“A small gillywater —”

Page | 224 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Mine,” said Professor McGonagall’s voice.

“Four pints of mulled mead —”

“Ta, Rosmerta,” said Hagrid.

“A cherry syrup and soda with ice and umbrella —”

“Mmm!” said Professor Flitwick, smacking his lips.

“So you 11 be the red currant rum, Minister.”

“Thank you, Rosmerta, m’dear,” said Fudge’s voice.“Lovely to see you again, I must say. Have oneyourself, won’t you? Come and join us. ...”

“Well, thank you very much, Minister.”

Harry watched the glittering heels march away andback again. His heart was pounding uncomfortably inhis throat. Why hadn’t it occurred to him that thiswas the last weekend of term for the teachers too?And how long were they going to sit there? He neededtime to sneak back into Honeydukes if he wanted toreturn to school tonight. ... Hermione’s leg gave anervous twitch next to him.

“So, what brings you to this neck of the woods,Minister?” came Madam Rosmerta’s voice.

Harry saw the lower part of Fudge’s thick body twistin his chair as though he were checking foreavesdroppers. Then he said in a quiet voice, “Whatelse, m’dear, but Sirius Black? I daresay you heardwhat happened up at the school at Halloween?”

“I did hear a rumor,” admitted Madam Rosmerta.

Page | 225 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Did you tell the whole pub, Hagrid?” said ProfessorMcGonagall exasperatedly.

“Do you think Black’s still in the area, Minister?”whispered Madam Rosmerta.

“I’m sure of it,” said Fudge shortly.

“You know that the dementors have searched thewhole village twice?” said Madam Rosmerta, a slightedge to her voice. “Scared all my customers away. ...It’s very bad for business, Minister.”

“Rosmerta, m’dear, I don’t like them any more thanyou do,” said Fudge uncomfortably. “Necessaryprecaution ... unfortunate, but there you are. ... I’vejust met some of them. They’re in a fury againstDumbledore — he won’t let them inside the castlegrounds.”

“I should think not,” said Professor McGonagallsharply. “How are we supposed to teach with thosehorrors floating around?”

“Hear, hear!” squeaked tiny Professor Flitwick, whosefeet were dangling a foot from the ground.

“All the same,” demurred Fudge, “they are here toprotect you all from something much worse. ... We allknow what Black’s capable of. ...”

“Do you know, I still have trouble believing it,” saidMadam Rosmerta thoughtfully. “Of all the people togo over to the Dark Side, Sirius Black was the last I’dhave thought ... I mean, I remember him when he wasa boy at Hogwarts. If you’d told me then what he wasgoing to become, I’d have said you’d had too muchmead.”

Page | 226 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You don’t know the half of it, Rosmerta,” said Fudgegruffly. “The worst he did isn’t widely known.”

“The worst?” said Madam Rosmerta, her voice alivewith curiosity. “Worse than murdering all those poorpeople, you mean?”

“I certainly do,” said Fudge.

“I can’t believe that. What could possibly be worse?”

“You say you remember him at Hogwarts, Rosmerta,”murmured Professor McGonagall. “Do you rememberwho his best friend was?”

“Naturally,” said Madam Rosmerta, with a smalllaugh. “Never saw one without the other, did you? Thenumber of times I had them in here — ooh, they usedto make me laugh. Quite the double act, Sirius Blackand James Potter!”

Harry dropped his tankard with a loud clunk. Ronkicked him.

“Precisely,” said Professor McGonagall. “Black andPotter. Ringleaders of their little gang. Both verybright, of course — exceptionally bright, in fact — butI don’t think we’ve ever had such a pair oftroublemakers —”

“I dunno,” chuckled Hagrid. “Fred and GeorgeWeasley could give ’em a run fer their money.”

“You’d have thought Black and Potter were brothers!”chimed in Professor Flitwick. “Inseparable!”

“Of course they were,” said Fudge. “Potter trustedBlack beyond all his other friends. Nothing changedwhen they left school. Black was best man when

Page | 227 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

James married Lily. Then they named him godfatherto Harry. Harry has no idea, of course. You canimagine how the idea would torment him.”

“Because Black turned out to be in league with You-Know-Who?” whispered Madam Rosmerta.

“Worse even than that, m’dear. ...” Fudge dropped hisvoice and proceeded in a sort of low rumble. “Notmany people are aware that the Potters knew You-Know-Who was after them. Dumbledore, who was ofcourse working tirelessly against You-Know-Who, hada number of useful spies. One of them tipped him off,and he alerted James and Lily at once. He advisedthem to go into hiding. Well, of course, You-Know-Who wasn’t an easy person to hide from. Dumbledoretold them that their best chance was the FideliusCharm.”

“How does that work?” said Madam Rosmerta,breathless with interest. Professor Flitwick cleared histhroat.

“An immensely complex spell,” he said squeakily,“involving the magical concealment of a secret insidea single, living soul. The information is hidden insidethe chosen person, or Secret-Keeper, and ishenceforth impossible to find — unless, of course, theSecret-Keeper chooses to divulge it. As long as theSecret-Keeper refused to speak, You-Know-Who couldsearch the village where Lily and James were stayingfor years and never find them, not even if he had hisnose pressed against their sitting room window!”

“So Black was the Potters’ Secret-Keeper?” whisperedMadam Rosmerta.

“Naturally,” said Professor McGonagall. “James Pottertold Dumbledore that Black would die rather than tell

Page | 228 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

where they were, that Black was planning to go intohiding himself ... and yet, Dumbledore remainedworried. I remember him offering to be the Potters’Secret-Keeper himself.”

“He suspected Black?” gasped Madam Rosmerta.

“He was sure that somebody close to the Potters hadbeen keeping You-Know-Who informed of theirmovements,” said Professor McGonagall darkly.“Indeed, he had suspected for some time thatsomeone on our side had turned traitor and waspassing a lot of information to You-Know-Who.”

“But James Potter insisted on using Black?”

“He did,” said Fudge heavily. “And then, barely a weekafter the Fidelius Charm had been performed —”

“Black betrayed them?” breathed Madam Rosmerta.

“He did indeed. Black was tired of his double-agentrole, he was ready to declare his support openly forYou-Know-Who, and he seems to have planned thisfor the moment of the Potters’ death. But, as we allknow, You-Know-Who met his downfall in little HarryPotter. Powers gone, horribly weakened, he fled. Andthis left Black in a very nasty position indeed. Hismaster had fallen at the very moment when he, Black,had shown his true colors as a traitor. He had nochoice but to run for it —”

“Filthy, stinkin’ turncoat!” Hagrid said, so loudly thathalf the bar went quiet.

“Shh!” said Professor McGonagall.

“I met him!” growled Hagrid. “I musta bin the last tersee him before he killed all them people! It was me

Page | 229 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

what rescued Harry from Lily an’ James’s house afterthey was killed! Jus’ got him outta the ruins, poorlittle thing, with a great slash across his forehead, an’his parents dead ... an’ Sirius Black turns up, on thatflyin’ motorbike he used ter ride. Never occurred terme what he was doin’ there. I didn’ know he’d bin Lilyan’ James’s Secret-Keeper. Thought he’d jus’ heardthe news o’ You-Know-Who’s attack an’ come ter seewhat he could do. White an’ shakin’, he was. An’ yehknow what I did? I COMFORTED THE MURDERIN’TRAITOR!” Hagrid roared.

“Hagrid, please!” said Professor McGonagall. “Keepyour voice down!”

“How was I ter know he wasn’ upset abou’ Lily an’James? It was You-Know-Who he cared abou’! An’then he says, ‘Give Harry ter me, Hagrid, I’m hisgodfather, I’ll look after him —’ Ha! But I’d had meorders from Dumbledore, an’ I told Black no,Dumbledore said Harry was ter go ter his aunt an’uncle’s. Black argued, but in the end he gave in. Toldme ter take his motorbike ter get Harry there. ‘I won’tneed it anymore,’ he says.

“I shoulda known there was somethin’ fishy goin’ onthen. He loved that motorbike, what was he givin’ itter me for? Why wouldn’ he need it anymore? Factwas, it was too easy ter trace. Dumbledore knew he’dbin the Potters’ Secret-Keeper. Black knew he wasgoin’ ter have ter run fer it that night, knew it was amatter o’ hours before the Ministry was after him.

“But what if I’d given Harry to him, eh? I bet he’d’vepitched him off the bike halfway out ter sea. His bes’friends’ son! But when a wizard goes over ter the DarkSide, there’s nothin’ and no one that matters to ’emanymore. ...”

Page | 230 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

A long silence followed Hagrid’s story. Then MadamRosmerta said with some satisfaction, “But he didn’tmanage to disappear, did he? The Ministry of Magiccaught up with him next day!”

“Alas, if only we had,” said Fudge bitterly. “It was notwe who found him. It was little Peter Pettigrew —another of the Potters’ friends. Maddened by grief, nodoubt, and knowing that Black had been the Potters’Secret-Keeper, he went after Black himself.”

“Pettigrew ... that fat little boy who was alwaystagging around after them at Hogwarts?” said MadamRosmerta.

“Hero-worshipped Black and Potter,” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “Never quite in their league, talent-wise.

I was often rather sharp with him. You can imaginehow I — how I regret that now. ...” She sounded asthough she had a sudden head cold.

“There, now, Minerva,” said Fudge kindly, “Pettigrewdied a hero’s death. Eyewitnesses — Muggles, ofcourse, we wiped their memories later — told us howPettigrew cornered Black. They say he was sobbing,“Lily and James, Sirius! How could you?’ And then hewent for his wand. Well, of course, Black was quicker.Blew Pettigrew to smithereens. ...”

Professor McGonagall blew her nose and said thickly,“Stupid boy ... foolish boy ... he was always hopelessat dueling ... should have left it to the Ministry. ...”

“I tell yeh, if I’d got ter Black before little Pettigrewdid, I wouldn’t’ve messed around with wands — I’d’veripped him limb — from — limb,” Hagrid growled.

“You don’t know what you’re talking about, Hagrid,”said Fudge sharply. “Nobody but trained Hit Wizards

Page | 231 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

from the Magical Law Enforcement Squad would havestood a chance against Black once he was cornered. Iwas Junior Minister in the Department of MagicalCatastrophes at the time, and I was one of the first onthe scene after Black murdered all those people. I — Iwill never forget it. I still dream about it sometimes. Acrater in the middle of the street, so deep it hadcracked the sewer below. Bodies everywhere. Mugglesscreaming. And Black standing there laughing, withwhat was left of Pettigrew in front of him ... a heap ofbloodstained robes and a few — a few fragments —”

Fudge’s voice stopped abruptly. There was the soundof five noses being blown.

“Well, there you have it, Rosmerta,” said Fudgethickly. “Black was taken away by twenty members ofthe Magical Law Enforcement Squad and Pettigrewreceived the Order of Merlin, First Class, which Ithink was some comfort to his poor mother. Black’sbeen in Azkaban ever since.”

Madam Rosmerta let out a long sigh.

“Is it true he’s mad, Minister?”

“I wish I could say that he was,” said Fudge slowly. “Icertainly believe his master’s defeat unhinged him fora while. The murder of Pettigrew and all thoseMuggles was the action of a cornered and desperateman — cruel ... pointless. Yet I met Black on my lastinspection of Azkaban. You know, most of theprisoners in there sit muttering to themselves in thedark; there’s no sense in them ... but I was shockedat how normal Black seemed. He spoke quiterationally to me. It was unnerving. You’d havethought he was merely bored — asked if I’d finishedwith my newspaper, cool as you please, said hemissed doing the crossword. Yes, I was astounded atPage | 232 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

how little effect the dementors seemed to be having onhim — and he was one of the most heavily guarded inthe place, you know. Dementors outside his door dayand night.”

“But what do you think he’s broken out to do?” saidMadam Rosmerta. “Good gracious, Minister, he isn’ttrying to rejoin You-Know-Who, is he?”

“I daresay that is his — er — eventual plan,” saidFudge evasively. “But we hope to catch Black longbefore that. I must say, You-Know-Who alone andfriendless is one thing ... but give him back his mostdevoted servant, and I shudder to think how quicklyhe’ll rise again. ...”

There was a small chink of glass on wood. Someonehad set down their glass.

“You know, Cornelius, if you’re dining with theheadmaster, we’d better head back up to the castle,”said Professor McGonagall.

One by one, the pairs of feet in front of Harry took theweight of their owners once more; hems of cloaksswung into sight, and Madam Rosemerta’s glitteringheels disappeared behind the bar. The door of theThree Broomsticks opened again, there was anotherflurry of snow, and the teachers had disappeared.

“Harry?”

Ron’s and Hermione’s faces appeared under the table.They were both staring at him, lost for words.

Page | 233 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





THE FIREBOLT

Harry didn’t have a very clear idea of how he hadmanaged to get back into the Honeydukes cellar,through the tunnel, and into the castle once more. Allhe knew was that the return trip seemed to take notime at all, and that he hardly noticed what he wasdoing, because his head was still pounding with theconversation he had just heard.

Why had nobody ever told him? Dumbledore, Hagrid,Mr. Weasley, Cornelius Fudge ... why hadn’t anyoneever mentioned the fact that Harry’s parents had diedbecause their best friend had betrayed them?

Ron and Hermione watched Harry nervously allthrough dinner, not daring to talk about what they’doverheard, because Percy was sitting close by them.When they went upstairs to the crowded commonroom, it was to find Fred and George had set off half adozen Dungbombs in a fit of end-of-term high spirits.Harry, who didn’t want Fred and George asking himwhether he’d reached Hogsmeade or not, sneakedquietly up to the empty dormitory and headedPage | 234 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

straight for his bedside cabinet. He pushed his booksaside and quickly found what he was looking for —the leather-bound photo album Hagrid had given himtwo years ago, which was full of wizard pictures of hismother and father. He sat down on his bed, drew thehangings around him, and started turning the pages,searching, until ...

He stopped on a picture of his parents’ wedding day.There was his father waving up at him, beaming, theuntidy black hair Harry had inherited standing up inall directions. There was his mother, alight withhappiness, arm in arm with his dad. And there ...that must be him. Their best man ... Harry had nevergiven him a thought before.

If he hadn’t known it was the same person, he wouldnever have guessed it was Black in this oldphotograph. His face wasn’t sunken and waxy, buthandsome, full of laughter. Had he already beenworking for Voldemort when this picture had beentaken? Was he already planning the deaths of the twopeople next to him? Did he realize he was facingtwelve years in Azkaban, twelve years that wouldmake him unrecognizable?

But the dementors don’t affect him, Harry thought,staring into the handsome, laughing face. He doesn’thave to hear my mum screaming if they get too close —

Harry slammed the album shut, reached over andstuffed it back into his cabinet, took off his robe andglasses and got into bed, making sure the hangingswere hiding him from view.

The dormitory door opened.

“Harry?” said Ron’s voice uncertainly.

Page | 235 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

But Harry lay still, pretending to be asleep. He heardRon leave again, and rolled over on his back, his eyeswide open.

A hatred such as he had never known before wascoursing through Harry like poison. He could seeBlack laughing at him through the darkness, asthough somebody had pasted the picture from thealbum over his eyes. He watched, as thoughsomebody was playing him a piece of film, SiriusBlack blasting Peter Pettigrew (who resembled NevilleLongbottom) into a thousand pieces. He could hear(though having no idea what Black’s voice mightsound like) a low, excited mutter. “It has happened,My Lord ... the Potters have made me their Secret-Keeper. ...” And then came another voice, laughingshrilly, the same laugh that Harry heard inside hishead whenever the dementors drew near. ...

“Harry, you — you look terrible.”

Harry hadn’t gotten to sleep until daybreak. He hadawoken to find the dormitory deserted, dressed, andgone down the spiral staircase to a common roomthat was completely empty except for Ron, who waseating a Peppermint Toad and massaging hisstomach, and Hermione, who had spread herhomework over three tables.

“Where is everyone?” said Harry.

“Gone! It’s the first day of the holidays, remember?”said Ron, watching Harry closely. “It’s nearlylunchtime; I was going to come and wake you up in aminute.”

Harry slumped into a chair next to the fire. Snow wasstill falling outside the windows. Crookshanks wasspread out in front of the fire like a large, ginger rug.

Page | 236 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You really don’t look well, you know,” Hermione said,peering anxiously into his face.

“I’m fine,” said Harry.

“Harry, listen,” said Hermione, exchanging a look withRon, “you must be really upset about what we heardyesterday. But the thing is, you mustn’t go doinganything stupid.”

“Like what?” said Harry.

“Like trying to go after Black,” said Ron sharply.

Harry could tell they had rehearsed this conversationwhile he had been asleep. He didn’t say anything.

“You won’t, will you, Harry?” said Hermione.

“Because Black’s not worth dying for,” said Ron.

Harry looked at them. They didn’t seem tounderstand at all.

“D’you know what I see and hear every time adementor gets too near me?” Ron and Hermioneshook their heads, looking apprehensive. “I can hearmy mum screaming and pleading with Voldemort.

And if you’d heard your mum screaming like that,just about to be killed, you wouldn’t forget it in ahurry. And if you found out someone who wassupposed to be a friend of hers betrayed her and sentVoldemort after her —”

“There’s nothing you can do!” said Hermione, lookingstricken. “The dementors will catch Black and he’ll goback to Azkaban and — and serve him right!”

Page | 237 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You heard what Fudge said. Black isn’t affected byAzkaban like normal people are. It’s not apunishment for him like it is for the others.”

“So what are you saying?” said Ron, looking verytense. “You want to — to kill Black or something?”

“Don’t be silly,” said Hermione in a panicky voice.“Harry doesn’t want to kill anyone, do you, Harry?”

Again, Harry didn’t answer. He didn’t know what hewanted to do. All he knew was that the idea of doingnothing, while Black was at liberty, was almost morethan he could stand.

“Malfoy knows,” he said abruptly. “Remember whathe said to me in Potions? ‘If it was me, I’d hunt himdown myself. ... I’d want revenge.’ ”

“You’re going to take Malfoy’s advice instead of ours?”said Ron furiously. “Listen ... you know whatPettigrew’s mother got back after Black had finishedwith him? Dad told me — the Order of Merlin, FirstClass, and Pettigrew’s finger in a box. That was thebiggest bit of him they could find. Black’s a madman,Harry, and he’s dangerous —”

“Malfoy’s dad must have told him,” said Harry,ignoring Ron. “He was right in Voldemort’s innercircle —”

“Say You-Knotu-Who, will you?” interjected Ronangrily.

“— so obviously, the Malfoys knew Black was workingfor Voldemort —”

“— and Malfoy’d love to see you blown into about amillion pieces, like Pettigrew! Get a grip. Malfoy’s just

Page | 238 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

hoping you 11 get yourself killed before he has to playyou at Quidditch.”

“Harry, please,” said Hermione, her eyes now shiningwith tears, “please be sensible. Black did a terrible,terrible thing, but d-don’t put yourself in danger, it’swhat Black wants. ... Oh, Harry, you’d be playingright into Black’s hands if you went looking for him.Your mum and dad wouldn’t want you to get hurt,would they? They’d never want you to go looking forBlack!”

“I’ll never know what they’d have wanted, becausethanks to Black, I’ve never spoken to them,” saidHarry shortly.

There was a silence in which Crookshanks stretchedluxuriously, flexing his claws. Ron’s pocket quivered.

“Look,” said Ron, obviously casting around for achange of subject, “it’s the holidays! It’s nearlyChristmas! Let’s — let’s go down and see Hagrid. Wehaven’t visited him for ages!”

“No!” said Hermione quickly. “Harry isn’t supposed toleave the castle, Ron —”

“Yeah, let’s go,” said Harry, sitting up, “and I can askhim how come he never mentioned Black when hetold me all about my parents!”

Further discussion of Sirius Black plainly wasn’twhat Ron had had in mind.

“Or we could have a game of chess,” he said hastily,“or Gobstones. Percy left a set —”

“No, let’s visit Hagrid,” said Harry firmly.

Page | 239 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

So they got their cloaks from their dormitories and setoff through the portrait hole (“Stand and fight, youyellow-bellied mongrels!”), down through the emptycastle and out through the oak front doors.

They made their way slowly down the lawn, making ashallow trench in the glittering, powdery snow, theirsocks and the hems of their cloaks soaked andfreezing. The Forbidden Forest looked as though ithad been enchanted, each tree smattered with silver,and Hagrid’s cabin looked like an iced cake.

Ron knocked, but there was no answer.

“He’s not out, is he?” said Hermione, who wasshivering under her cloak.

Ron had his ear to the door.

“There’s a weird noise,” he said. “Listen — is thatFang?”

Harry and Hermione put their ears to the door too.From inside the cabin came a series of low, throbbingmoans.

“Think we’d better go and get someone?” said Ronnervously.

“Hagrid!” called Harry, thumping the door. “Hagrid,are you in there?”

There was a sound of heavy footsteps, then the doorcreaked open. Hagrid stood there with his eyes redand swollen, tears splashing down the front of hisleather vest.

“Yeh’ve heard?” he bellowed, and he flung himselfonto Harry’s neck.

Page | 240 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid being at least twice the size of a normal man,this was no laughing matter. Harry, about to collapseunder Hagrid’s weight, was rescued by Ron andHermione, who each seized Hagrid under an arm andheaved him back into the cabin. Hagrid allowedhimself to be steered into a chair and slumped overthe table, sobbing uncontrollably, his face glazed withtears that dripped down into his tangled beard.

“Hagrid, what is it?” said Hermione, aghast.

Harry spotted an official-looking letter lying open onthe table.

“What’s this, Hagrid?”

Hagrid’s sobs redoubled, but he shoved the lettertoward Harry, who picked it up and read aloud:

Dear Mr. Hagrid,

Further to our inquiry into the attack by a hippogriff ona student in your class, we have accepted theassurances of Professor Dumbledore that you bear noresponsibility for the regrettable incident.

“Well, that’s okay then, Hagrid!” said Ron, clappingHagrid on the shoulder. But Hagrid continued to sob,and waved one of his gigantic hands, inviting Harry toread on.

However, we must register our concern about thehippogriff in question. We have decided to uphold theofficial complaint of Mr. Lucius Malfoy, and this matterwill therefore be taken to the Committee for theDisposal of Dangerous Creatures. The hearing will takeplace on April 20th, and we ask you to presentyourself and your hippogriff at the Committee’s offices

Page | 241 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

in London on that date. In the meantime, the hippogriffshould be kept tethered and isolated.

Yours in fellowship ...

There followed a list of the school governors.

“Oh,” said Ron. “But you said Buckbeak isn’t a badhippogriff, Hagrid. I bet he’ll get off—”

“Yeh don’ know them gargoyles at the Committee ferthe Disposal o’ Dangerous Creatures!” choked Hagrid,wiping his eyes on his sleeve. “They’ve got it in ferinterestin’ creatures!”

A sudden sound from the corner of Hagrid’s cabinmade Harry, Ron, and Hermione whip around.Buckbeak the hippogriff was lying in the corner,chomping on something that was oozing blood all overthe floor.

“I couldn’ leave him tied up out there in the snow!”choked Hagrid. “All on his own! At Christmas.”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione looked at one another.

They had never seen eye to eye with Hagrid aboutwhat he called “interesting creatures” and otherpeople called “terrifying monsters.” On the otherhand, there didn’t seem to be any particular harm inBuckbeak. In fact, by Hagrid’s usual standards, hewas positively cute.

“You’ll have to put up a good strong defense, Hagrid,”said Hermione, sitting down and laying a hand onHagrid’s massive forearm. “I’m sure you can proveBuckbeak is safe.”

Page | 242 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Won’t make no difference!” sobbed Hagrid. “ThemDisposal devils, they’re all in Lucius Malfoy’s pocket!Scared o’ him! An’ if I lose the case, Buckbeak —”

Hagrid drew his finger swiftly across his throat, thengave a great wail and lurched forward, his face in hisarms.

“What about Dumbledore, Hagrid?” said Harry.

“He’s done more’n enough fer me already,” groanedHagrid. “Got enough on his plate what with keepin’them dementors outta the castle, an’ Sirius Blacklurkin’ around —”

Ron and Hermione looked quickly at Harry, as thoughexpecting him to start berating Hagrid for not tellinghim the truth about Black. But Harry couldn’t bringhimself to do it, not now that he saw Hagrid somiserable and scared.

“Listen, Hagrid,” he said, “you can’t give up.Hermione’s right, you just need a good defense. Youcan call us as witnesses —”

“I’m sure I’ve read about a case of hippogriff-baiting,”said Hermione thoughtfully, “where the hippogriff gotoff. I’ll look it up for you, Hagrid, and see exactly whathappened.”

Hagrid howled still more loudly. Harry and Hermionelooked at Ron to help them.

“Er — shall I make a cup of tea?” said Ron.

Harry stared at him.

“It’s what my mum does whenever someone’s upset,”Ron muttered, shrugging.

Page | 243 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

At last, after many more assurances of help, with asteaming mug of tea in front of him, Hagrid blew hisnose on a handkerchief the size of a tablecloth andsaid, “Yer right. I can’ afford to go ter pieces. Gottapull meself together. ...”

Fang the boarhound came timidly out from under thetable and laid his head on Hagrid’s knee.

“I’ve not bin meself lately,” said Hagrid, stroking Fangwith one hand and mopping his face with the other.“Worried abou’ Buckbeak, an’ no one likin’ me classes

“We do like them!” lied Hermione at once.

“Yeah, they’re great!” said Ron, crossing his fingersunder the table. “Er — how are the flobberworms?”

“Dead,” said Hagrid gloomily. “Too much lettuce.”

“Oh no!” said Ron, his lip twitching.

“An’ them dementors make me feel ruddy terrible an’all,” said Hagrid, with a sudden shudder. “Gotta walkpast ’em ev’ry time I want a drink in the ThreeBroomsticks. ’S like bein’ back in Azkaban —”

He fell silent, gulping his tea. Harry, Ron, andHermione watched him breathlessly. They had neverheard Hagrid talk about his brief spell in Azkabanbefore. After a pause, Hermione said timidly, “Is itawful in there, Hagrid?”

“Yeh’ve no idea,” said Hagrid quietly. “Never binanywhere like it. Thought I was goin’ mad. Kep’ goin’over horrible stuff in me mind ... the day I gotexpelled from Hogwarts ... day me dad died ... day Ihad ter let Norbert go. ...”

Page | 244 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

His eyes filled with tears. Norbert was the babydragon Hagrid had once won in a game of cards.

“Yeh can’ really remember who yeh are after a while.An’ yeh can’ see the point o’ livin’ at all. I used terhope I’d jus’ die in me sleep. ... When they let me out,it was like bein’ born again, ev’rythin’ came floodin’back, it was the bes’ feelin’ in the world. Mind, thedementors weren’t keen on lettin’ me go.”

“But you were innocent!” said Hermione.

Hagrid snorted.

“Think that matters to them? They don’ care. Long asthey’ve got a couple o’ hundred humans stuck therewith ’em, so they can leech all the happiness out of’em, they don’ give a damn who’s guilty an’ who’snot.”

Hagrid went quiet for a moment, staring into his tea.Then he said quietly, “Thought o’jus’ lettingBuckbeak go ... tryin’ ter make him fly away ... buthow d’yeh explain ter a hippogriff it’s gotta go interhidin’? An’ — an’ I’m scared o’ breakin’ the law. ...” Helooked up at them, tears leaking down his face again.“I don’ ever want ter go back ter Azkaban.”

The trip to Hagrid’s, though far from fun, hadnevertheless had the effect Ron and Hermione hadhoped. Though Harry had by no means forgottenabout Black, he couldn’t brood constantly on revengeif he wanted to help Hagrid win his case against theCommittee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures.He, Ron, and Hermione went to the library the nextday and returned to the empty common room ladenwith books that might help prepare a defense forBuckbeak. The three of them sat in front of theroaring fire, slowly turning the pages of dustyPage | 245 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

volumes about famous cases of marauding beasts,speaking occasionally when they ran acrosssomething relevant.

“Here’s something ... there was a case in 1722 ... butthe hippogriff was convicted — ugh, look what theydid to it, that’s disgusting —”

“This might help, look — a manticore savagedsomeone in 1296, and they let the manticore off— oh— no, that was only because everyone was too scaredto go near it. ...”

Meanwhile, in the rest of the castle, the usualmagnificent Christmas decorations had been put up,despite the fact that hardly any of the studentsremained to enjoy them. Thick streamers of holly andmistletoe were strung along the corridors, mysteriouslights shone from inside every suit of armor, and theGreat Hall was filled with its usual twelve Christmastrees, glittering with golden stars. A powerful anddelicious smell of cooking pervaded the corridors, andby Christmas Eve, it had grown so strong that evenScabbers poked his nose out of the shelter of Ron’spocket to sniff hopefully at the air.

On Christmas morning, Harry was woken by Ronthrowing his pillow at him.

“Oy! Presents!”

Harry reached for his glasses and put them on,squinting through the semi-darkness to the foot of hisbed, where a small heap of parcels had appeared. Ronwas already ripping the paper off his own presents.

“Another sweater from Mum ... maroon again ... see ifyou’ve got one.”

Page | 246 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry had. Mrs. Weasley had sent him a scarletsweater with the Gryffindor lion knitted on the front,also a dozen home-baked mince pies, some Christmascake, and a box of nut brittle. As he moved all thesethings aside, he saw a long, thin package lyingunderneath.

“What’s that?” said Ron, looking over, a freshlyunwrapped pair of maroon socks in his hand.

“Dunno ...”

Harry ripped the parcel open and gasped as amagnificent, gleaming broomstick rolled out onto hisbedspread. Ron dropped his socks and jumped off hisbed for a closer look.

“I don’t believe it,” he said hoarsely.

It was a Firebolt, identical to the dream broom Harryhad gone to see every day in Diagon Alley. Its handleglittered as he picked it up. He could feel it vibratingand let go; it hung in midair, unsupported, at exactlythe right height for him to mount it. His eyes movedfrom the golden registration number at the top of thehandle, right down to the perfectly smooth,streamlined birch twigs that made up the tail.

“Who sent it to you?” said Ron in a hushed voice.

“Look and see if there’s a card,” said Harry.

Ron ripped apart the Firebolt’s wrappings.

“Nothing! Blimey, who’d spend that much on you?”

“Well,” said Harry, feeling stunned, “I’m betting itwasn’t the Dursleys.”

Page | 247 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I bet it was Dumbledore,” said Ron, now walkingaround and around the Firebolt, taking in everyglorious inch. “He sent you the Invisibility Cloakanonymously. ...”

“That was my dad’s, though,” said Harry.“Dumbledore was just passing it on to me. Hewouldn’t spend hundreds of Galleons on me. He can’tgo giving students stuff like this —”

“That’s why he wouldn’t say it was from him!” saidRon. “In case some git like Malfoy said it wasfavoritism. Hey, Harry” — Ron gave a great whoop oflaughter — “Malfoyl Wait till he sees you on this! He’llbe sick as a pig! This is an international standardbroom, this is!”

“I can’t believe this,” Harry muttered, running a handalong the Firebolt, while Ron sank onto Harry’s bed,laughing his head off at the thought of Malfoy. “ Who— ?”

“I know,” said Ron, controlling himself, “I know who itcould’ve been — Lupin!”

“What?” said Harry, now starting to laugh himself.“Lupin? Listen, if he had this much gold, he’d be ableto buy himself some new robes.”

“Yeah, but he likes you,” said Ron. “And he was awaywhen your Nimbus got smashed, and he might’veheard about it and decided to visit Diagon Alley andget this for you —”

“What d’you mean, he was away?” said Harry. “Hewas ill when I was playing in that match.”

Page | 248 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Well, he wasn’t in the hospital wing,” said Ron. “Iwas there, cleaning out the bedpans on that detentionfrom Snape, remember?”

Harry frowned at Ron.

“I can’t see Lupin affording something like this.”

“What’re you two laughing about?”

Hermione had just come in, wearing her dressinggown and carrying Crookshanks, who was lookingvery grumpy, with a string of tinsel tied around hisneck.

“Don’t bring him in here!” said Ron, hurriedlysnatching Scabbers from the depths of his bed andstowing him in his pajama pocket. But Hermionewasn’t listening. She dropped Crookshanks ontoSeamus’s empty bed and stared, open-mouthed, atthe Firebolt.

“Oh, Harry\ Who sent you that?”

“No idea,” said Harry. “There wasn’t a card oranything with it.”

To his great surprise, Hermione did not appear eitherexcited or intrigued by the news. On the contrary, herface fell, and she bit her lip.

“What’s the matter with you?” said Ron.

“I don’t know,” said Hermione slowly, “but it’s a bitodd, isn’t it? I mean, this is supposed to be quite agood broom, isn’t it?”

Ron sighed exasperatedly.

Page | 249 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It’s the best broom there is, Hermione,” he said.

“So it must’ve been really expensive. ...”

“Probably cost more than all the Slytherins’ broomsput together,” said Ron happily.

“Well ... who’d send Harry something as expensive asthat, and not even tell him they’d sent it?” saidHermione.

“Who cares?” said Ron impatiently. “Listen, Harry,can I have a go on it? Can I?”

“I don’t think anyone should ride that broom just yet!”said Hermione shrilly.

Harry and Ron looked at her.

“What d’you think Harry’s going to do with it — sweepthe floor?” said Ron.

But before Hermione could answer, Crookshankssprang from Seamus’s bed, right at Ron’s chest.

“GET — HIM — OUT — OF — HERE!” Ron bellowedas Crookshanks’s claws ripped his pajamas andScabbers attempted a wild escape over his shoulder.Ron seized Scabbers by the tail and aimed amisjudged kick at Crookshanks that hit the trunk atthe end of Harry’s bed, knocking it over and causingRon to hop up and down, howling with pain.

Crookshanks’s fur suddenly stood on end. A shrill,tinny whistling was filling the room. The PocketSneakoscope had become dislodged from UncleVernon’s old socks and was whirling and gleaming onthe floor.

Page | 250 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I forgot about that!” Harry said, bending down andpicking up the Sneakoscope. “I never wear thosesocks if I can help it. ...”

The Sneakoscope whirled and whistled in his palm.Crookshanks was hissing and spitting at it.

“You’d better take that cat out of here, Hermione,”said Ron furiously, sitting on Harry’s bed nursing histoe. “Can’t you shut that thing up?” he added toHarry as Hermione strode out of the room,Crookshanks’s yellow eyes still fixed maliciously onRon.

Harry stuffed the Sneakoscope back inside the socksand threw it back into his trunk. All that could beheard now were Ron’s stifled moans of pain and rage.Scabbers was huddled in Ron’s hands. It had been awhile since Harry had seen him out of Ron’s pocket,and he was unpleasantly surprised to see thatScabbers, once so fat, was now very skinny; patchesof fur seemed to have fallen out too.

“He’s not looking too good, is he?” Harry said.

“It’s stress!” said Ron. “He’d be fine if that big stupidfurball left him alone!”

But Harry, remembering what the woman at theMagical Menagerie had said about rats living onlythree years, couldn’t help feeling that unless Scabbershad powers he had never revealed, he was reachingthe end of his life. And despite Ron’s frequentcomplaints that Scabbers was both boring anduseless, he was sure Ron would be very miserable ifScabbers died.

Christmas spirit was definitely thin on the ground inthe Gryffindor common room that morning. Hermione

Page | 251 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

had shut Crookshanks in her dormitory, but wasfurious with Ron for trying to kick him; Ron was stillfuming about Crookshanks’s fresh attempt to eatScabbers. Harry gave up trying to make them talk toeach other and devoted himself to examining theFirebolt, which he had brought down to the commonroom with him. For some reason this seemed toannoy Hermione as well; she didn’t say anything, butshe kept looking darkly at the broom as though it toohad been criticizing her cat.

At lunchtime they went down to the Great Hall, tofind that the House tables had been moved againstthe walls again, and that a single table, set for twelve,stood in the middle of the room. ProfessorsDumbledore, McGonagall, Snape, Sprout, andFlitwick were there, along with Filch, the caretaker,who had taken off his usual brown coat and waswearing a very old and rather moldy-looking tailcoat.There were only three other students, two extremelynervous-looking first years and a sullen-facedSlytherin fifth year.

“Merry Christmas!” said Dumbledore as Harry, Ron,and Hermione approached the table. “As there are sofew of us, it seemed foolish to use the House tables.

... Sit down, sit down!”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione sat down side by side atthe end of the table.

“Crackers!” said Dumbledore enthusiastically, offeringthe end of a large silver noisemaker to Snape, whotook it reluctantly and tugged. With a bang like agunshot, the cracker flew apart to reveal a large,pointed witch’s hat topped with a stuffed vulture.

Harry, remembering the boggart, caught Ron’s eyeand they both grinned; Snape’s mouth thinned and

Page | 252 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

he pushed the hat toward Dumbledore, who swappedit for his wizard’s hat at once.

“Dig in!” he advised the table, beaming around.

As Harry was helping himself to roast potatoes, thedoors of the Great Hall opened again. It was ProfessorTrelawney, gliding toward them as though on wheels.She had put on a green sequined dress in honor ofthe occasion, making her look more than ever like aglittering, oversized dragonfly.

“Sibyll, this is a pleasant surprise!” said Dumbledore,standing up.

“I have been crystal gazing, Headmaster,” saidProfessor Trelawney in her mistiest, most farawayvoice, “and to my astonishment, I saw myselfabandoning my solitary luncheon and coming to joinyou. Who am I to refuse the promptings of fate? I atonce hastened from my tower, and I do beg you toforgive my lateness. ...”

“Certainly, certainly,” said Dumbledore, his eyestwinkling. “Let me draw you up a chair —”

And he did indeed draw a chair in midair with hiswand, which revolved for a few seconds before fallingwith a thud between Professors Snape andMcGonagall. Professor Trelawney, however, did not sitdown; her enormous eyes had been roving around thetable, and she suddenly uttered a kind of soft scream.

“I dare not, Headmaster! If I join the table, we shall bethirteen! Nothing could be more unlucky! Never forgetthat when thirteen dine together, the first to rise willbe the first to die!”

Page | 253 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Well risk it, Sibyll,” said Professor McGonagallimpatiently. “Do sit down, the turkey’s getting stonecold.”

Professor Trelawney hesitated, then lowered herselfinto the empty chair, eyes shut and mouth clenchedtight, as though expecting a thunderbolt to hit thetable. Professor McGonagall poked a large spoon intothe nearest tureen.

“Tripe, Sibyll?”

Professor Trelawney ignored her. Eyes open again,she looked around once more and said, “But where isdear Professor Lupin?”

“I’m afraid the poor fellow is ill again,” saidDumbledore, indicating that everybody should startserving themselves. “Most unfortunate that it shouldhappen on Christmas Day.”

“But surely you already knew that, Sibyll?” saidProfessor McGonagall, her eyebrows raised.

Professor Trelawney gave Professor McGonagall a verycold look.

“Certainly I knew, Minerva,” she said quietly. “Butone does not parade the fact that one is All-Knowing.

I frequently act as though I am not possessed of theInner Eye, so as not to make others nervous.”

“That explains a great deal,” said ProfessorMcGonagall tartly.

Professor Trelawney’s voice suddenly became a gooddeal less misty.

Page | 254 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“If you must know, Minerva, I have seen that poorProfessor Lupin will not be with us for very long. Heseems aware, himself, that his time is short. Hepositively fled when I offered to crystal gaze for him —

“Imagine that,” said Professor McGonagall dryly.

“I doubt,” said Dumbledore, in a cheerful but slightlyraised voice, which put an end to ProfessorMcGonagall and Professor Trelawney’s conversation,“that Professor Lupin is in any immediate danger.Severus, you’ve made the potion for him again?”

“Yes, Headmaster,” said Snape.

“Good,” said Dumbledore. “Then he should be up andabout in no time. ... Derek, have you had any of thesechipolatas? They’re excellent.”

The first-year boy went furiously red on beingaddressed directly by Dumbledore, and took theplatter of sausages with trembling hands.

Professor Trelawney behaved almost normally untilthe very end of Christmas dinner, two hours later.

Full to bursting with Christmas dinner and stillwearing their party hats, Harry and Ron got up firstfrom the table and she shrieked loudly.

“My dears! Which of you left his seat first? Which?”

“Dunno,” said Ron, looking uneasily at Harry.

“I doubt it will make much difference,” said ProfessorMcGonagall coldly, “unless a mad axe-man is waitingoutside the doors to slaughter the first into theentrance hall.”

Page | 255 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Even Ron laughed. Professor Trelawney looked highlyaffronted.

“Coming?” Harry said to Hermione.

“No,” Hermione muttered, “I want a quick word withProfessor McGonagall.”

“Probably trying to see if she can take any moreclasses,” yawned Ron as they made their way into theentrance hall, which was completely devoid of madaxe-men.

When they reached the portrait hole, they found SirCadogan enjoying a Christmas party with a couple ofmonks, several previous headmasters of Hogwarts,and his fat pony. He pushed up his visor and toastedthem with a flagon of mead.

“Merry — hie — Christmas! Password?”

“Scurvy cur,” said Ron.

“And the same to you, sir!” roared Sir Cadogan as thepainting swung forward to admit them.

Harry went straight up to the dormitory, collected theFirebolt and the Broomstick Servicing Kit Hermionehad given him for his birthday, brought themdownstairs, and tried to find something to do to theFirebolt; however, there were no bent twigs to clip,and the handle was so shiny already it seemedpointless to polish it. He and Ron simply sat admiringit from every angle until the portrait hole opened, andHermione came in, accompanied by ProfessorMcGonagall.

Though Professor McGonagall was head of GryffindorHouse, Harry had seen her in the common room only

Page | 256 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

once before, and that had been to make a very graveannouncement. He and Ron stared at her, bothholding the Firebolt. Hermione walked around them,sat down, picked up the nearest book, and hid herface behind it.

“So that’s it, is it?” said Professor McGonagall beadily,walking over to the fireside and staring at theFirebolt. “Miss Granger has just informed me that youhave been sent a broomstick, Potter.”

Harry and Ron looked around at Hermione. Theycould see her forehead reddening over the top of herbook, which was upside down.

“May I?” said Professor McGonagall, but she didn’twait for an answer before pulling the Firebolt out oftheir hands. She examined it carefully from handle totwig-ends. “Hmm. And there was no note at all,

Potter? No card? No message of any kind?”

“No,” said Harry blankly.

“I see ... ,” said Professor McGonagall. “Well, I’mafraid I will have to take this, Potter.”

“W — what?” said Harry, scrambling to his feet.“Why?”

“It will need to be checked for jinxes,” said ProfessorMcGonagall. “Of course, I’m no expert, but I daresayMadam Hooch and Professor Flitwick will strip itdown —”

“Strip it down?” repeated Ron, as though ProfessorMcGonagall was mad.

Page | 257 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It shouldn’t take more than a few weeks,” saidProfessor McGonagall. “You will have it back if we aresure it is jinx-free.”

“There’s nothing wrong with it!” said Harry, his voiceshaking slightly. “Honestly, Professor —”

“You can’t know that, Potter,” said ProfessorMcGonagall, quite kindly, “not until you’ve flown it, atany rate, and I’m afraid that is out of the questionuntil we are certain that it has not been tamperedwith. I shall keep you informed.”

Professor McGonagall turned on her heel and carriedthe Firebolt out of the portrait hole, which closedbehind her. Harry stood staring after her, the tin ofHigh-Finish Polish still clutched in his hands. Ron,however, rounded on Hermione.

“What did you go running to McGonagall for?”

Hermione threw her book aside. She was still pink inthe face, but stood up and faced Ron defiantly.

“Because I thought — and Professor McGonagallagrees with me — that that broom was probably sentto Harry by Sirius Black!”

Page | 258 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



THE PATRONUS

Harry knew that Hermione had meant well, but thatdidn’t stop him from being angry with her. He hadbeen the owner of the best broom in the world for afew short hours, and now, because of herinterference, he didn’t know whether he would eversee it again. He was positive that there was nothingwrong with the Firebolt now, but what sort of statewould it be in once it had been subjected to all sortsof anti-jinx tests?

Ron was furious with Hermione too. As far as he wasconcerned, the stripping-down of a brand-newFirebolt was nothing less than criminal damage.Hermione, who remained convinced that she hadacted for the best, started avoiding the common room.Harry and Ron supposed she had taken refuge in thelibrary and didn’t try to persuade her to come back.All in all, they were glad when the rest of the schoolreturned shortly after New Year, and Gryffindor Towerbecame crowded and noisy again.

Page | 259 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Wood sought Harry out on the night before termstarted.

“Had a good Christmas?” he said, and then, withoutwaiting for an answer, he sat down, lowered his voice,and said, “I’ve been doing some thinking overChristmas, Harry. After the last match, you know. Ifthe dementors come to the next one ... I mean ... wecan’t afford you to — well —”

Wood broke off, looking awkward.

“I’m working on it,” said Harry quickly. “ProfessorLupin said he’d train me to ward off the dementors.We should be starting this week. He said he’d havetime after Christmas.”

“Ah,” said Wood, his expression clearing. “Well, inthat case — I really didn’t want to lose you as Seeker,Harry. And have you ordered a new broom yet?”

“No,” said Harry.

“What! You’d better get a move on, you know — youcan’t ride that Shooting Star against Ravenclaw!”

“He got a Firebolt for Christmas,” said Ron.

“A Firebolt? No! Seriously? A — a real Firebolt?”

“Don’t get excited, Oliver,” said Harry gloomily. “Ihaven’t got it anymore. It was confiscated.” And heexplained all about how the Firebolt was now beingchecked for jinxes.

“Jinxed? How could it be jinxed?”

Page | 260 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Sirius Black,” Harry said wearily. “He’s supposed tobe after me. So McGonagall reckons he might havesent it.”

Waving aside the information that a famous murdererwas after his Seeker, Wood said, “But Black couldn’thave bought a Firebolt! He’s on the run! The wholecountry’s on the lookout for him! How could he justwalk into Quality Quidditch Supplies and buy abroomstick?”

“I know,” said Harry, “but McGonagall still wants tostrip it down —”

Wood went pale.

“I’ll go and talk to her, Harry,” he promised. “I’ll makeher see reason. ... A Firebolt ... a real Firebolt, on ourteam ... She wants Gryffindor to win as much as wedo. ... I’ll make her see sense. A Firebolt...”

Classes started again the next day. The last thinganyone felt like doing was spending two hours on thegrounds on a raw January morning, but Hagrid hadprovided a bonfire full of salamanders for theirenjoyment, and they spent an unusually good lessoncollecting dry wood and leaves to keep the fire blazingwhile the flame-loving lizards scampered up anddown the crumbling, white-hot logs. The firstDivination lesson of the new term was much less fun;Professor Trelawney was now teaching thempalmistry, and she lost no time in informing Harrythat he had the shortest life line she had ever seen.

It was Defense Against the Dark Arts that Harry waskeen to get to; after his conversation with Wood, hewanted to get started on his anti-dementor lessons assoon as possible.

Page | 261 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Ah yes,” said Lupin, when Harry reminded him of hispromise at the end of class. “Let me see ... how abouteight o’clock on Thursday evening? The History ofMagic classroom should be large enough. ... I’ll haveto think carefully about how we’re going to do this. ...We can’t bring a real dementor into the castle topractice on. ...”

“Still looks ill, doesn’t he?” said Ron as they walkeddown the corridor, heading to dinner. “What d’youreckon’s the matter with him?”

There was a loud and impatient “tuh” from behindthem. It was Hermione, who had been sitting at thefeet of a suit of armor, repacking her bag, which wasso full of books it wouldn’t close.

“And what are you tutting at us for?” said Ronirritably.

“Nothing,” said Hermione in a lofty voice, heaving herbag back over her shoulder.

“Yes, you were,” said Ron. “I said I wonder what’swrong with Lupin, and you —”

“Well, isn’t it obvious?” said Hermione, with a look ofmaddening superiority.

“If you don’t want to tell us, don’t,” snapped Ron.

“Fine,” said Hermione haughtily, and she marched off.

“She doesn’t know,” said Ron, staring resentfully afterHermione. “She’s just trying to get us to talk to heragain.”

At eight o’clock on Thursday evening, Harry leftGryffindor Tower for the History of Magic classroom.

Page | 262 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

It was dark and empty when he arrived, but he lit thelamps with his wand and had waited only fiveminutes when Professor Lupin turned up, carrying alarge packing case, which he heaved onto ProfessorBinns’ desk.

“What’s that?” said Harry.

“Another boggart,” said Lupin, stripping off his cloak.“I’ve been combing the castle ever since Tuesday, andvery luckily, I found this one lurking inside Mr. Filch’sfiling cabinet. It’s the nearest we’ll get to a realdementor. The boggart will turn into a dementor whenhe sees you, so we’ll be able to practice on him. I canstore him in my office when we’re not using him;there’s a cupboard under my desk he’ll like.”

“Okay,” said Harry, trying to sound as though hewasn’t apprehensive at all and merely glad that Lupinhad found such a good substitute for a real dementor.

“So ...” Professor Lupin had taken out his own wand,and indicated that Harry should do the same. “Thespell I am going to try and teach you is highlyadvanced magic, Harry — well beyond OrdinaryWizarding Level. It is called the Patronus Charm.”

“How does it work?” said Harry nervously.

“Well, when it works correctly, it conjures up aPatronus,” said Lupin, “which is a kind of anti-dementor — a guardian that acts as a shield betweenyou and the dementor.”

Harry had a sudden vision of himself crouchingbehind a Hagrid-sized figure holding a large club.Professor Lupin continued, “The Patronus is a kind ofpositive force, a projection of the very things that thedementor feeds upon — hope, happiness, the desirePage | 263 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

to survive — but it cannot feel despair, as realhumans can, so the dementors can’t hurt it. But Imust warn you, Harry, that the charm might be tooadvanced for you. Many qualified wizards havedifficulty with it.”

“What does a Patronus look like?” said Harrycuriously.

“Each one is unique to the wizard who conjures it.”“And how do you conjure it?”

“With an incantation, which will work only if you areconcentrating, with all your might, on a single, veryhappy memory.”

Harry cast his mind about for a happy memory.Certainly, nothing that had happened to him at theDursleys’was going to do. Finally, he settled on themoment when he had first ridden a broomstick.

“Right,” he said, trying to recall as exactly as possiblethe wonderful, soaring sensation of his stomach.

“The incantation is this —” Lupin cleared his throat.“Expecto patronum).”

“Expecto patronum,” Harry repeated under his breath,“expecto patronum.”

“Concentrating hard on your happy memory?”

“Oh — yeah —” said Harry, quickly forcing histhoughts back to that first broom ride. “Expectopatrono — no, patronum — sorry — expecto patronum,expecto patronum —”

Page | 264 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Something whooshed suddenly out of the end of hiswand; it looked like a wisp of silvery gas.

“Did you see that?” said Harry excitedly. “Somethinghappened!”

“Very good,” said Lupin, smiling. “Right, then — readyto try it on a dementor?”

“Yes,” Harry said, gripping his wand very tightly, andmoving into the middle of the deserted classroom. Hetried to keep his mind on flying, but something elsekept intruding. ... Any second now, he might hear hismother again ... but he shouldn’t think that, or hewould hear her again, and he didn’t want to ... or didhe?

Lupin grasped the lid of the packing case and pulled.

A dementor rose slowly from the box, its hooded faceturned toward Harry, one glistening, scabbed handgripping its cloak. The lamps around the classroomflickered and went out. The dementor stepped fromthe box and started to sweep silently toward Harry,drawing a deep, rattling breath. A wave of piercingcold broke over him —

“Expecto patronurrd” Harry yelled. “Expecto patronum).Expecto —”

But the classroom and the dementor were dissolving.

... Harry was falling again through thick white fog,and his mother’s voice was louder than ever, echoinginside his head — “Not Harry\ Not Harry\ Please — I’lldo anything —”

“Stand aside. Stand aside, girl\”

“Harry!”

Page | 265 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry jerked back to life. He was lying flat on his backon the floor. The classroom lamps were alight again.He didn’t have to ask what had happened.

“Sorry,” he muttered, sitting up and feeling cold sweattrickling down behind his glasses.

“Are you all right?” said Lupin.

“Yes ...” Harry pulled himself up on one of the desksand leaned against it.

“Here —” Lupin handed him a Chocolate Frog. “Eatthis before we try again. I didn’t expect you to do ityour first time; in fact, I would have been astounded ifyou had.”

“It’s getting worse,” Harry muttered, biting off theFrog’s head. “I could hear her louder that time — andhim — Voldemort —”

Lupin looked paler than usual.

“Harry, if you don’t want to continue, I will more thanunderstand —”

“I do!” said Harry fiercely, stuffing the rest of theChocolate Frog into his mouth. “I’ve got to! What ifthe dementors turn up at our match againstRavenclaw? I can’t afford to fall off again. If we losethis game we’ve lost the Quidditch Cup!”

“All right then ... ,” said Lupin. “You might want toselect another memory, a happy memory, I mean, toconcentrate on. ... That one doesn’t seem to havebeen strong enough. ...”

Harry thought hard and decided his feelings whenGryffindor had won the House Championship last

Page | 266 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

year had definitely qualified as very happy. Hegripped his wand tightly again and took up hisposition in the middle of the classroom.

“Ready?” said Lupin, gripping the box lid.

“Ready,” said Harry, trying hard to fill his head withhappy thoughts about Gryffindor winning, and notdark thoughts about what was going to happen whenthe box opened.

“Go!” said Lupin, pulling off the lid. The room wenticily cold and dark once more. The dementor glidedforward, drawing its breath; one rotting hand wasextending toward Harry —

“Expecto patronum).” Harry yelled. “Expecto patronumlExpecto pat —”

White fog obscured his senses ... big, blurred shapeswere moving around him ... then came a new voice, aman’s voice, shouting, panicking —

“Lily, take Harry and go\ It’s him\ Go! Run\ I’ll hold him

off~

The sounds of someone stumbling from a room — adoor bursting open — a cackle of high-pitchedlaughter —

“Harry! Harry ... wake up. ...”

Lupin was tapping Harry hard on the face. This timeit was a minute before Harry understood why he waslying on a dusty classroom floor.

“I heard my dad,” Harry mumbled. “That’s the firsttime I’ve ever heard him — he tried to take on

Page | 267 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Voldemort himself, to give my mum time to run for it.

Harry suddenly realized that there were tears on hisface mingling with the sweat. He bent his face as lowas possible, wiping them off on his robes, pretendingto do up his shoelace, so that Lupin wouldn’t see.

“You heard James?” said Lupin in a strange voice.

“Yeah ...” Face dry, Harry looked up. “Why — youdidn’t know my dad, did you?”

“I — I did, as a matter of fact,” said Lupin. “We werefriends at Hogwarts. Listen, Harry — perhaps weshould leave it here for tonight. This charm isridiculously advanced. ... I shouldn’t have suggestedputting you through this. ...”

“No!” said Harry. He got up again. “I’ll have one morego! I’m not thinking of happy enough things, that’swhat it is. ... Hang on. ...”

He racked his brains. A really, really happy memory... one that he could turn into a good, strongPatronus ...

The moment when he’d first found out he was awizard, and would be leaving the Dursleys forHogwarts! If that wasn’t a happy memory, he didn’tknow what was. ... Concentrating very hard on howhe had felt when he’d realized he’d be leaving PrivetDrive, Harry got to his feet and faced the packing caseonce more.

“Ready?” said Lupin, who looked as though he weredoing this against his better judgment.

“Concentrating hard? All right — go!”

Page | 268 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He pulled off the lid of the case for the third time, andthe dementor rose out of it; the room fell cold anddark —

“EXPECTO PATRONUM” Harry bellowed. “EXPECTOPATRONUM EXPECTO PATRONUM”

The screaming inside Harry’s head had started again— except this time, it sounded as though it werecoming from a badly tuned radio — softer and louderand softer again — and he could still see thedementor — it had halted — and then a huge, silvershadow came bursting out of the end of Harry’s wand,to hover between him and the dementor, and thoughHarry’s legs felt like water, he was still on his feet —though for how much longer, he wasn’t sure —

“RiddikulusV’ roared Lupin, springing forward.

There was a loud crack, and Harry’s cloudy Patronusvanished along with the dementor; he sank into achair, feeling as exhausted as if he’d just run a mile,and felt his legs shaking. Out of the corner of his eye,he saw Professor Lupin forcing the boggart back intothe packing case with his wand; it had turned into asilvery orb again.

“Excellent!” Lupin said, striding over to where Harrysat. “Excellent, Harry! That was definitely a start!”

“Can we have another go? Just one more go?”

“Not now,” said Lupin firmly. “You’ve had enough forone night. Here —”

He handed Harry a large bar of Honeydukes’ bestchocolate.

Page | 269 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Eat the lot, or Madam Pomfrey will be after my blood.Same time next week?”

“Okay,” said Harry. He took a bite of the chocolateand watched Lupin extinguishing the lamps that hadrekindled with the disappearance of the dementor. Athought had just occurred to him.

“Professor Lupin?” he said. “If you knew my dad, youmust’ve known Sirius Black as well.”

Lupin turned very quickly.

“What gives you that idea?” he said sharply.

“Nothing — I mean, I just knew they were friends atHogwarts too. ...”

Lupin’s face relaxed.

“Yes, I knew him,” he said shortly. “Or I thought I did.You’d better be off, Harry, it’s getting late.”

Harry left the classroom, walking along the corridorand around a corner, then took a detour behind asuit of armor and sank down on its plinth to finishhis chocolate, wishing he hadn’t mentioned Black, asLupin was obviously not keen on the subject. ThenHarry’s thoughts wandered back to his mother andfather. ...

He felt drained and strangely empty, even though hewas so full of chocolate. Terrible though it was to hearhis parents’ last moments replayed inside his head,these were the only times Harry had heard theirvoices since he was a very small child. But he’d neverbe able to produce a proper Patronus if he halfwanted to hear his parents again. ...

Page | 270 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“They’re dead,” he told himself sternly. “They’re deadand listening to echoes of them won’t bring themback. You’d better get a grip on yourself if you wantthat Quidditch Cup.”

He stood up, crammed the last bit of chocolate intohis mouth, and headed back to Gryffindor Tower.

Ravenclaw played Slytherin a week after the start ofterm. Slytherin won, though narrowly. According toWood, this was good news for Gryffindor, who wouldtake second place if they beat Ravenclaw too. Hetherefore increased the number of team practices tofive a week. This meant that with Lupin’s anti-dementor classes, which in themselves were moredraining than six Quidditch practices, Harry had justone night a week to do all his homework. Even so, hewasn’t showing the strain nearly as much asHermione, whose immense workload finally seemed tobe getting to her. Every night, without fail, Hermionewas to be seen in a corner of the common room,several tables spread with books, Arithmancy charts,rune dictionaries, diagrams of Muggles lifting heavyobjects, and file upon file of extensive notes; shebarely spoke to anybody and snapped when she wasinterrupted.

“How’s she doing it?” Ron muttered to Harry oneevening as Harry sat finishing a nasty essay onUndetectable Poisons for Snape. Harry looked up.Hermione was barely visible behind a tottering pile ofbooks.

“Doing what?”

“Getting to all her classes!” Ron said. “I heard hertalking to Professor Vector, that Arithmancy witch,this morning. They were going on about yesterday’slesson, but Hermione can’t’ve been there, because she

Page | 271 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

was with us in Care of Magical Creatures! And ErnieMcMillan told me she’s never missed a MuggleStudies class, but half of them are at the same timeas Divination, and she’s never missed one of themeither!”

Harry didn’t have time to fathom the mystery ofHermione’s impossible schedule at the moment; hereally needed to get on with Snape’s essay. Twoseconds later, however, he was interrupted again, thistime by Wood.

“Bad news, Harry. I’ve just been to see ProfessorMcGonagall about the Firebolt. She — er — got a bitshirty with me. Told me I’d got my priorities wrong.Seemed to think I cared more about winning the Cupthan I do about you staying alive. Just because I toldher I didn’t care if it threw you off, as long as youcaught the Snitch first.” Wood shook his head indisbelief. “Honestly, the way she was yelling at me ...you’d think I’d said something terrible. ... Then Iasked her how much longer she was going to keep it....” He screwed up his face and imitated ProfessorMcGonagall’s severe voice. “ ‘As long as necessary,Wood’ ... I reckon it’s time you ordered a new broom,Harry. There’s an order form at the back of WhichBroomstick ... you could get a Nimbus Two Thousandand One, like Malfoy’s got.”

“I’m not buying anything Malfoy thinks is good,” saidHarry flatly.

January faded imperceptibly into February, with nochange in the bitterly cold weather. The matchagainst Ravenclaw was drawing nearer and nearer,but Harry still hadn’t ordered a new broom. He wasnow asking Professor McGonagall for news of theFirebolt after every Transfiguration lesson, Ron

Page | 272 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

standing hopefully at his shoulder, Hermione rushingpast with her face averted.

“No, Potter, you can’t have it back yet,” ProfessorMcGonagall told him the twelfth time this happened,before he’d even opened his mouth. “We’ve checkedfor most of the usual curses, but Professor Flitwickbelieves the broom might be carrying a Hurling Hex. Ishall tell you once we’ve finished checking it. Now,please stop badgering me.”

To make matters even worse, Harry’s anti-dementorlessons were not going nearly as well as he hadhoped. Several sessions on, he was able to producean indistinct, silvery shadow every time the boggart-dementor approached him, but his Patronus was toofeeble to drive the dementor away. All it did washover, like a semi-transparent cloud, draining Harryof energy as he fought to keep it there. Harry feltangry with himself, guilty about his secret desire tohear his parents’ voices again.

“You’re expecting too much of yourself,” saidProfessor Lupin sternly in their fourth week ofpractice. “For a thirteen-year-old wizard, even anindistinct Patronus is a huge achievement. You aren’tpassing out anymore, are you?”

“I thought a Patronus would — charge the dementorsdown or something,” said Harry dispiritedly. “Makethem disappear —”

“The true Patronus does do that,” said Lupin. “Butyou’ve achieved a great deal in a very short space oftime. If the dementors put in an appearance at yournext Quidditch match, you will be able to keep themat bay long enough to get back to the ground.”

Page | 273 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You said it’s harder if there are loads of them,” saidHarry.

“I have complete confidence in you,” said Lupin,smiling. “Here — you’ve earned a drink — somethingfrom the Three Broomsticks. You won’t have tried itbefore —”

He pulled two bottles out of his briefcase.

“Butterbeer!” said Harry, without thinking. “Yeah, Ilike that stuff!”

Lupin raised an eyebrow.

“Oh — Ron and Hermione brought me some backfrom Hogsmeade,” Harry lied quickly.

“I see,” said Lupin, though he still looked slightlysuspicious. “Well — let’s drink to a Gryffindor victoryagainst Ravenclaw! Not that I’m supposed to takesides, as a teacher ... ,” he added hastily.

They drank the butterbeer in silence, until Harryvoiced something he’d been wondering for a while.

“What’s under a dementor’s hood?”

Professor Lupin lowered his bottle thoughtfully.

“Hmmm ... well, the only people who really know arein no condition to tell us. You see, the dementorlowers its hood only to use its last and worstweapon.”

“What’s that?”

“They call it the Dementor’s Kiss,” said Lupin, with aslightly twisted smile. “It’s what dementors do to

Page | 274 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

those they wish to destroy utterly. I suppose theremust be some kind of mouth under there, becausethey clamp their jaws upon the mouth of the victimand — and suck out his soul.”

Harry accidentally spat out a bit of butterbeer.

“What — they kill — ?”

“Oh no,” said Lupin. “Much worse than that. You canexist without your soul, you know, as long as yourbrain and heart are still working. But you 11 have nosense of self anymore, no memory, no ... anything.There’s no chance at all of recovery. You’ll just —exist. As an empty shell. And your soul is gone forever... lost.”

Lupin drank a little more butterbeer, then said, “It’sthe fate that awaits Sirius Black. It was in the DailyProphet this morning. The Ministry have given thedementors permission to perform it if they find him.”

Harry sat stunned for a moment at the idea ofsomeone having their soul sucked out through theirmouth. But then he thought of Black.

“He deserves it,” he said suddenly.

“You think so?” said Lupin lightly. “Do you reallythink anyone deserves that?”

“Yes,” said Harry defiantly. “For ... for some things ...”

He would have liked to have told Lupin about theconversation he’d overheard about Black in the ThreeBroomsticks, about Black betraying his mother andfather, but it would have involved revealing that he’dgone to Hogsmeade without permission, and he knewLupin wouldn’t be very impressed by that. So hePage | 275 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

finished his butterbeer, thanked Lupin, and left theHistory of Magic classroom.

Harry half wished that he hadn’t asked what wasunder a dementor’s hood, the answer had been sohorrible, and he was so lost in unpleasant thoughts ofwhat it would feel like to have your soul sucked out ofyou that he walked headlong into ProfessorMcGonagall halfway up the stairs.

“Do watch where you’re going, Potter!”

“Sorry, Professor —”

“I’ve just been looking for you in the Gryffindorcommon room. Well, here it is, we’ve done everythingwe could think of, and there doesn’t seem to beanything wrong with it at all. You’ve got a very goodfriend somewhere, Potter. ...”

Harry’s jaw dropped. She was holding out hisFirebolt, and it looked as magnificent as ever.

“I can have it back?” Harry said weakly. “Seriously?”

“Seriously,” said Professor McGonagall, and she wasactually smiling. “I daresay you’ll need to get the feelof it before Saturday’s match, won’t you? And Potter— do try and win, won’t you? Or we’ll be out of therunning for the eighth year in a row, as ProfessorSnape was kind enough to remind me only last night.

Speechless, Harry carried the Firebolt back upstairstoward Gryffindor Tower. As he turned a corner, hesaw Ron dashing toward him, grinning from ear toear.

Page | 276 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“She gave it to you? Excellent! Listen, can I still havea go on it? Tomorrow?”

“Yeah ... anything ... said Harry, his heart lighterthan it had been in a month. “You know what — weshould make up with Hermione. ... She was onlytrying to help. ...”

“Yeah, all right,” said Ron. “She’s in the commonroom now — working, for a change —”

They turned into the corridor to Gryffindor Tower andsaw Neville Longbottom, pleading with Sir Cadogan,who seemed to be refusing him entrance.

“I wrote them down!” Neville was saying tearfully.

“But I must’ve dropped them somewhere!”

“A likely tale!” roared Sir Cadogan. Then, spottingHarry and Ron: “Good even, my fine young yeomen!Come clap this loon in irons. He is trying to forceentry to the chambers within!”

“Oh, shut up,” said Ron as he and Harry drew levelwith Neville.

“I’ve lost the passwords!” Neville told them miserably.“I made him tell me what passwords he was going touse this week, because he keeps changing them, andnow I don’t know what I’ve done with them!”

“Oddsbodikins,” said Harry to Sir Cadogan, wholooked extremely disappointed and reluctantly swungforward to let them into the common room. There wasa sudden, excited murmur as every head turned andthe next moment, Harry was surrounded by peopleexclaiming over his Firebolt.

“Where’d you get it, Harry?”

Page | 277 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Will you let me have a go?”

“Have you ridden it yet, Harry?”

“Ravenclaw’ll have no chance, they’re all onCleansweep Sevens!”

“Can I just hold it, Harry?”

After ten minutes or so, during which the Firebolt waspassed around and admired from every angle, thecrowd dispersed and Harry and Ron had a clear viewof Hermione, the only person who hadn’t rushed overto them, bent over her work and carefully avoidingtheir eyes. Harry and Ron approached her table andat last, she looked up.

“I got it back,” said Harry, grinning at her and holdingup the Firebolt.

“See, Hermione? There wasn’t anything wrong withit!” said Ron.

“Well — there might have been!” said Hermione. “Imean, at least you know now that it’s safe!”

“Yeah, I suppose so,” said Harry. “I’d better put itupstairs —”

“I’ll take it!” said Ron eagerly. “I’ve got to giveScabbers his rat tonic.”

He took the Firebolt and, holding it as if it were madeof glass, carried it away up the boys’ staircase.

“Can I sit down, then?” Harry asked Hermione.

“I suppose so,” said Hermione, moving a great stackof parchment off a chair.

Page | 278 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry looked around at the cluttered table, at thelong Arithmancy essay on which the ink was stillglistening, at the even longer Muggle Studies essay(“Explain Why Muggles Need Electricity”) and at therune translation Hermione was now poring over.

“How are you getting through all this stuff?” Harryasked her.

“Oh, well — you know — working hard,” saidHermione. Close-up, Harry saw that she lookedalmost as tired as Lupin.

“Why don’t you just drop a couple of subjects?” Harryasked, watching her lifting books as she searched forher rune dictionary.

“I couldn’t do that!” said Hermione, lookingscandalized.

“Arithmancy looks terrible,” said Harry, picking up avery complicated-looking number chart.

“Oh no, it’s wonderful!” said Hermione earnestly. “It’smy favorite subject! It’s —”

But exactly what was wonderful about Arithmancy,Harry never found out. At that precise moment, astrangled yell echoed down the boys’ staircase. Thewhole common room fell silent, staring, petrified, atthe entrance. Then came hurried footsteps, growinglouder and louder — and then Ron came leaping intoview, dragging with him a bedsheet.

“LOOK!” he bellowed, striding over to Hermione’stable. “LOOK!” he yelled, shaking the sheets in herface.

“Ron, what — ?”

Page | 279 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“SCABBERS! LOOK! SCABBERS!”

Hermione was leaning away from Ron, looking utterlybewildered. Harry looked down at the sheet Ron washolding. There was something red on it. Somethingthat looked horribly like —

“BLOOD!” Ron yelled into the stunned silence. “HE’SGONE! AND YOU KNOW WHAT WAS ON THEFLOOR?”

“N — no,” said Hermione in a trembling voice.

Ron threw something down onto Hermione’s runetranslation. Hermione and Harry leaned forward.Lying on top of the weird, spiky shapes were severallong, ginger cat hairs.

Page | 280 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





GRYFFINDOR VERSUS RAVENCLAW

It looked like the end of Ron and Hermione’sfriendship. Each was so angry with the other thatHarry couldn’t see how they’d ever make up.

Ron was enraged that Hermione had never takenCrookshanks’s attempts to eat Scabbers seriously,hadn’t bothered to keep a close enough watch on him,and was still trying to pretend that Crookshanks wasinnocent by suggesting that Ron look for Scabbersunder all the boys’ beds. Hermione, meanwhile,maintained fiercely that Ron had no proof thatCrookshanks had eaten Scabbers, that the gingerhairs might have been there since Christmas, andthat Ron had been prejudiced against her cat eversince Crookshanks had landed on Ron’s head in theMagical Menagerie.

Personally, Harry was sure that Crookshanks hadeaten Scabbers, and when he tried to point out toHermione that the evidence all pointed that way, shelost her temper with Harry too.

Page | 281 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Okay, side with Ron, I knew you would!” she saidshrilly. “First the Firebolt, now Scabbers, everything’smy fault, isn’t it! Just leave me alone, Harry, I’ve got alot of work to do!”

Ron had taken the loss of his rat very hard indeed.

“Come on, Ron, you were always saying how boringScabbers was,” said Fred bracingly “And he’s beenoff-color for ages, he was wasting away. It wasprobably better for him to snuff it quickly — oneswallow — he probably didn’t feel a thing.”

“Fred\” said Ginny indignantly.

“All he did was eat and sleep, Ron, you said ityourself,” said George.

“He bit Goyle for us once!” Ron said miserably.“Remember, Harry?”

“Yeah, that’s true,” said Harry.

“His finest hour,” said Fred, unable to keep a straightface. “Let the scar on Goyle’s finger stand as a lastingtribute to his memory. Oh, come on, Ron, get yourselfdown to Hogsmeade and buy a new rat, what’s thepoint of moaning?”

In a last-ditch attempt to cheer Ron up, Harrypersuaded him to come along to the Gryffindor team’sfinal practice before the Ravenclaw match, so that hecould have a ride on the Firebolt after they’d finished.This did seem to take Ron’s mind off Scabbers for amoment (“Great! Can I try and shoot a few goals onit?”) so they set off for the Quidditch field together.

Madam Hooch, who was still overseeing Gryffindorpractices to keep an eye on Harry, was just as

Page | 282 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

impressed with the Firebolt as everyone else hadbeen. She took it in her hands before takeoff and gavethem the benefit of her professional opinion.

“Look at the balance on it! If the Nimbus series has afault, it’s a slight list to the tail end — you often findthey develop a drag after a few years. They’ve updatedthe handle too, a bit slimmer than the Cleansweeps,reminds me of the old Silver Arrows — a pity they’vestopped making them. I learned to fly on one, and avery fine old broom it was too. ...”

She continued in this vein for some time, until Woodsaid, “Er — Madam Hooch? Is it okay if Harry has theFirebolt back? We need to practice. ...”

“Oh — right — here you are, then, Potter,” saidMadam Hooch. “I’ll sit over here with Weasley ...”

She and Ron left the field to sit in the stadium, andthe Gryffindor team gathered around Wood for hisfinal instructions for tomorrow’s match.

“Harry, I’ve just found out who Ravenclaw is playingas Seeker. It’s Cho Chang. She’s a fourth year, andshe’s pretty good. ... I really hoped she wouldn’t be fit,she’s had some problems with injuries. ...” Woodscowled his displeasure that Cho Chang had made afull recovery, then said, “On the other hand, she ridesa Comet Two Sixty, which is going to look like a jokenext to the Firebolt.” He gave Harry’s broom a look offervent admiration, then said, “Okay, everyone, let’sgo

And at long last, Harry mounted his Firebolt, andkicked off from the ground.

It was better than he’d ever dreamed. The Fireboltturned with the lightest touch; it seemed to obey his

Page | 283 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

thoughts rather than his grip; it sped across the fieldat such speed that the stadium turned into a green-and-gray blur; Harry turned it so sharply that AliciaSpinnet screamed, then he went into a perfectlycontrolled dive, brushing the grassy field with his toesbefore rising thirty, forty, fifty feet into the air again —

“Harry, I’m letting the Snitch out!” Wood called.

Harry turned and raced a Bludger toward the goalposts; he outstripped it easily, saw the Snitch dartout from behind Wood, and within ten seconds hadcaught it tightly in his hand.

The team cheered madly. Harry let the Snitch goagain, gave it a minute’s head start, then tore after it,weaving in and out of the others; he spotted it lurkingnear Katie Bell’s knee, looped her easily, and caughtit again.

It was the best practice ever; the team, inspired bythe presence of the Firebolt in their midst, performedtheir best moves faultlessly, and by the time they hitthe ground again, Wood didn’t have a single criticismto make, which, as George Weasley pointed out, was afirst.

“I can’t see what’s going to stop us tomorrow!” saidWood. “Not unless — Harry, you’ve sorted out yourdementor problem, haven’t you?”

“Yeah,” said Harry, thinking of his feeble Patronusand wishing it were stronger.

“The dementors won’t turn up again, Oliver.Dumbledore’d go ballistic,” said Fred confidently.

Page | 284 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Well, let’s hope not,” said Wood. “Anyway — goodwork, everyone. Let’s get back to the tower ... turn inearly —”

“I’m staying out for a bit; Ron wants a go on theFirebolt,” Harry told Wood, and while the rest of theteam headed off to the locker rooms, Harry strodeover to Ron, who vaulted the barrier to the standsand came to meet him. Madam Hooch had fallenasleep in her seat.

“Here you go,” said Harry, handing Ron the Firebolt.

Ron, an expression of ecstasy on his face, mountedthe broom and zoomed off into the gathering darknesswhile Harry walked around the edge of the field,watching him. Night had fallen before Madam Hoochawoke with a start, told Harry and Ron off for notwaking her, and insisted that they go back to thecastle.

Harry shouldered the Firebolt and he and Ron walkedout of the shadowy stadium, discussing the Firebolt’ssuperbly smooth action, its phenomenal acceleration,and its pinpoint turning. They were halfway towardthe castle when Harry, glancing to his left, sawsomething that made his heart turn over — a pair ofeyes, gleaming out of the darkness.

Harry stopped dead, his heart banging against hisribs.

“What’s the matter?” said Ron.

Harry pointed. Ron pulled out his wand andmuttered, “Lumos\”

Page | 285 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

A beam of light fell across the grass, hit the bottom ofa tree, and illuminated its branches; there, crouchingamong the budding leaves, was Crookshanks.

“Get out of here!” Ron roared, and he stooped downand seized a stone lying on the grass, but before hecould do anything else, Crookshanks had vanishedwith one swish of his long ginger tail.

“See?” Ron said furiously, chucking the stone downagain. “She’s still letting him wander about whereverhe wants — probably washing down Scabbers with acouple of birds now. ...”

Harry didn’t say anything. He took a deep breath asrelief seeped through him; he had been sure for amoment that those eyes had belonged to the Grim.They set off for the castle once more. Slightlyashamed of his moment of panic, Harry didn’t sayanything to Ron — nor did he look left or right untilthey had reached the well-lit entrance hall.

Harry went down to breakfast the next morning withthe rest of the boys in his dormitory, all of whomseemed to think the Firebolt deserved a sort of guardof honor. As Harry entered the Great Hall, headsturned in the direction of the Firebolt, and there wasa good deal of excited muttering. Harry saw, withenormous satisfaction, that the Slytherin team wereall looking thunderstruck.

“Did you see his face?” said Ron gleefully, lookingback at Malfoy. “He can’t believe it! This is brilliant!”

Wood, too, was basking in the reflected glory of theFirebolt.

“Put it here, Harry,” he said, laying the broom in themiddle of the table and carefully turning it so that its

Page | 286 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

name faced upward. People from the Ravenclaw andHufflepuff tables were soon coming over to look.Cedric Diggory came over to congratulate Harry onhaving acquired such a superb replacement for hisNimbus, and Percy’s Ravenclaw girlfriend, PenelopeClearwater, asked if she could actually hold theFirebolt.

“Now, now, Penny, no sabotage!” said Percy heartilyas she examined the Firebolt closely “Penelope and Ihave got a bet on,” he told the team. “Ten Galleons onthe outcome of the match!”

Penelope put the Firebolt down again, thanked Harry,and went back to her table.

“Harry — make sure you win,” said Percy, in anurgent whisper. “I haven’t got ten Galleons. Yes, I’mcoming, Penny!” And he bustled off to join her in apiece of toast.

“Sure you can manage that broom, Potter?” said acold, drawling voice.

Draco Malfoy had arrived for a closer look, Crabbeand Goyle right behind him.

“Yeah, reckon so,” said Harry casually.

“Got plenty of special features, hasn’t it?” said Malfoy,eyes glittering maliciously. “Shame it doesn’t comewith a parachute — in case you get too near adementor.”

Crabbe and Goyle sniggered.

“Pity you can’t attach an extra arm to yours, Malfoy,”said Harry. “Then it could catch the Snitch for you.”

Page | 287 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The Gryffindor team laughed loudly. Malfoy’s paleeyes narrowed, and he stalked away. They watchedhim rejoin the rest of the Slytherin team, who puttheir heads together, no doubt asking Malfoy whetherHarry’s broom really was a Firebolt.

At a quarter to eleven, the Gryffindor team set off forthe locker rooms. The weather couldn’t have beenmore different from their match against Hufflepuff. Itwas a clear, cool day with a very light breeze; therewould be no visibility problems this time, and Harry,though nervous, was starting to feel the excitementonly a Quidditch match could bring. They could hearthe rest of the school moving into the stadiumbeyond. Harry took off his black school robes,removed his wand from his pocket, and stuck itinside the T-shirt he was going to wear under hisQuidditch robes. He only hoped he wouldn’t need it.He wondered suddenly whether Professor Lupin wasin the crowd, watching.

“You know what we’ve got to do,” said Wood as theyprepared to leave the locker rooms. “If we lose thismatch, we’re out of the running. Just —just fly likeyou did in practice yesterday, and we’ll be okay!”

They walked out onto the field to tumultuousapplause. The Ravenclaw team, dressed in blue, werealready standing in the middle of the field. TheirSeeker, Cho Chang, was the only girl on their team.She was shorter than Harry by about a head, andHarry couldn’t help noticing, nervous as he was, thatshe was extremely pretty. She smiled at Harry as theteams faced each other behind their captains, and hefelt a slight lurch in the region of his stomach that hedidn’t think had anything to do with nerves.

Page | 288 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Wood, Davies, shake hands,” Madam Hooch saidbriskly, and Wood shook hands with the RavenclawCaptain.

“Mount your brooms ... on my whistle ... three — two— one —”

Harry kicked off into the air and the Firebolt zoomedhigher and faster than any other broom; he soaredaround the stadium and began squinting around forthe Snitch, listening all the while to the commentary,which was being provided by the Weasley twins’friend Lee Jordan.

“They’re off, and the big excitement this match is theFirebolt that Harry Potter is flying for Gryffindor.According to Which Broomstick, the Firebolt’s going tobe the broom of choice for the national teams at thisyear’s World Championship —”

“Jordan, would you mind telling us what’s going on inthe match?” interrupted Professor McGonagall’s voice.

“Right you are, Professor — just giving a bit ofbackground information — the Firebolt, incidentally,has a built-in auto-brake and —”

“Jordan!”

“Okay, okay, Gryffindor in possession, Katie Bell ofGryffindor heading for goal ...”

Harry streaked past Katie in the opposite direction,gazing around for a glint of gold and noticing that ChoChang was tailing him closely. She was undoubtedlya very good flier — she kept cutting across him,forcing him to change direction.

Page | 289 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Show her your acceleration, Harry!” Fred yelled as hewhooshed past in pursuit of a Bludger that wasaiming for Alicia.

Harry urged the Firebolt forward as they rounded theRavenclaw goal posts and Cho fell behind. Just asKatie succeeded in scoring the first goal of the match,and the Gryffindor end of the field went wild, he sawit — the Snitch was close to the ground, flitting nearone of the barriers.

Harry dived; Cho saw what he was doing and toreafter him — Harry was speeding up, excitementflooding him; dives were his speciality, he was ten feetaway —

Then a Bludger, hit by one of the Ravenclaw Beaters,came pelting out of nowhere; Harry veered off course,avoiding it by an inch, and in those few, crucialseconds, the Snitch had vanished.

There was a great “Ooooooh” of disappointment fromthe Gryffindor supporters, but much applause fortheir Beater from the Ravenclaw end. George Weasleyvented his feelings by hitting the second Bludgerdirectly at the offending Beater, who was forced to rollright over in midair to avoid it.

“Gryffindor leads by eighty points to zero, and look atthat Firebolt go! Potter’s really putting it through itspaces now, see it turn — Chang’s Comet is just nomatch for it, the Firebolt’s precision-balance is reallynoticeable in these long —”

“JORDAN! ARE YOU BEING PAID TO ADVERTISEFIREBOLTS? GET ON WITH THE COMMENTARY!”

Ravenclaw was pulling back; they had now scoredthree goals, which put Gryffindor only fifty points

Page | 290 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

ahead — if Cho got the Snitch before him, Ravenclawwould win. Harry dropped lower, narrowly avoiding aRavenclaw Chaser, scanning the field frantically — aglint of gold, a flutter of tiny wings — the Snitch wascircling the Gryffindor goal post —

Harry accelerated, eyes fixed on the speck of goldahead — but just then, Cho appeared out of thin air,blocking him —

“HARRY, THIS IS NO TIME TO BE A GENTLEMAN!”Wood roared as Harry swerved to avoid a collision.“KNOCK HER OFF HER BROOM IF YOU HAVE TO!”

Harry turned and caught sight of Cho; she wasgrinning. The Snitch had vanished again. Harryturned his Firebolt upward and was soon twenty feetabove the game. Out of the corner of his eye, he sawCho following him. ... She’d decided to mark himrather than search for the Snitch herself. ... All right,then ... if she wanted to tail him, she’d have to takethe consequences. ...

He dived again, and Cho, thinking he’d seen theSnitch, tried to follow; Harry pulled out of the divevery sharply; she hurtled downward; he rose fast as abullet once more, and then saw it, for the third time— the Snitch was glittering way above the field at theRavenclaw end.

He accelerated; so, many feet below, did Cho. He waswinning, gaining on the Snitch with every second —then —

“Oh!” screamed Cho, pointing.

Distracted, Harry looked down.

Page | 291 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Three dementors, three tall, black, hooded dementors,were looking up at him.

He didn’t stop to think. Plunging a hand down theneck of his robes, he whipped out his wand androared, “Expecto patronum).”

Something silver-white, something enormous, eruptedfrom the end of his wand. He knew it had shotdirectly at the dementors but didn’t pause to watch;his mind still miraculously clear, he looked ahead —he was nearly there. He stretched out the hand stillgrasping his wand and just managed to close hisfingers over the small, struggling Snitch.

Madam Hooch’s whistle sounded. Harry turnedaround in midair and saw six scarlet blurs bearingdown on him; next moment, the whole team washugging him so hard he was nearly pulled off hisbroom. Down below he could hear the roars of theGryffindors in the crowd.

“That’s my boy!” Wood kept yelling. Alicia, Angelina,and Katie had all kissed Harry; Fred had him in a gripso tight Harry felt as though his head would come off.In complete disarray, the team managed to make itsway back to the ground. Harry got off his broom andlooked up to see a gaggle of Gryffindor supporterssprinting onto the field, Ron in the lead. Before heknew it, he had been engulfed by the cheering crowd.

“Yes!” Ron yelled, yanking Harry’s arm into the air.“Yes! Yes!”

“Well done, Harry!” said Percy, looking delighted. “TenGalleons to me! Must find Penelope, excuse me —”

“Good for you, Harry!” roared Seamus Finnigan.

Page | 292 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Ruddy brilliant!” boomed Hagrid over the heads ofthe milling Gryffindors.

“That was quite some Patronus,” said a voice inHarry’s ear.

Harry turned around to see Professor Lupin, wholooked both shaken and pleased.

“The dementors didn’t affect me at all!” Harry saidexcitedly. “I didn’t feel a thing!”

“That would be because they — er — weren’tdementors,” said Professor Lupin. “Come and see —”

He led Harry out of the crowd until they were able tosee the edge of the field.

“You gave Mr. Malfoy quite a fright,” said Lupin.

Harry stared. Lying in a crumpled heap on the groundwere Malfoy, Crabbe, Goyle, and Marcus Flint, theSlytherin team Captain, all struggling to removethemselves from long, black, hooded robes. It lookedas though Malfoy had been standing on Goyle’sshoulders. Standing over them, with an expression ofthe utmost fury on her face, was ProfessorMcGonagall.

“An unworthy trick!” she was shouting. “A low andcowardly attempt to sabotage the Gryffindor Seeker!Detention for all of you, and fifty points fromSlytherin! I shall be speaking to ProfessorDumbledore about this, make no mistake! Ah, herehe comes now!”

If anything could have set the seal on Gryffindor’svictory, it was this. Ron, who had fought his waythrough to Harry’s side, doubled up with laughter as

Page | 293 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

they watched Malfoy fighting to extricate himself fromthe robe, Goyle’s head still stuck inside it.

“Come on, Harry!” said George, fighting his way over.“Party! Gryffindor common room, now!”

“Right,” said Harry, and feeling happier than he hadin ages, he and the rest of the team led the way, stillin their scarlet robes, out of the stadium and back upto the castle.

It felt as though they had already won the QuidditchCup; the party went on all day and well into the night.Fred and George Weasley disappeared for a couple ofhours and returned with armfuls of bottles ofbutterbeer, pumpkin fizz, and several bags full ofHoneydukes sweets.

“How did you do that?” squealed Angelina Johnson asGeorge started throwing Peppermint Toads into thecrowd.

“With a little help from Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, andProngs,” Fred muttered in Harry’s ear.

Only one person wasn’t joining in the festivities.Hermione, incredibly, was sitting in a corner,attempting to read an enormous book entitled HomeLife and Social Habits of British Muggles. Harry brokeaway from the table where Fred and George hadstarted juggling butterbeer bottles and went over toher.

“Did you even come to the match?” he asked her.

“Of course I did,” said Hermione in a strangely high-pitched voice, not looking up. “And I’m very glad we

Page | 294 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

won, and I think you did really well, but I need toread this by Monday.”

“Come on, Hermione, come and have some food,”Harry said, looking over at Ron and wonderingwhether he was in a good enough mood to bury thehatchet.

“I can’t, Harry. I’ve still got four hundred and twenty-two pages to read!” said Hermione, now soundingslightly hysterical. “Anyway ...” She glanced over atRon too. “He doesn’t want me to join in.”

There was no arguing with this, as Ron chose thatmoment to say loudly, “If Scabbers hadn’t just beeneaten, he could have had some of those Fudge Flies.He used to really like them —”

Hermione burst into tears. Before Harry could say ordo anything, she tucked the enormous book underher arm, and, still sobbing, ran toward the staircaseto the girls’ dormitories and out of sight.

“Can’t you give her a break?” Harry asked Ronquietly.

“No,” said Ron flatly. “If she just acted like she wassorry — but she’ll never admit she’s wrong, Hermione.She’s still acting like Scabbers has gone on vacationor something.”

The Gryffindor party ended only when ProfessorMcGonagall turned up in her tartan dressing gownand hair net at one in the morning, to insist that theyall go to bed. Harry and Ron climbed the stairs totheir dormitory, still discussing the match. At last,exhausted, Harry climbed into bed, twitched thehangings of his four-poster shut to block out a ray of

Page | 295 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

moonlight, lay back, and felt himself almost instantlydrifting off to sleep. ...

He had a very strange dream. He was walkingthrough a forest, his Firebolt over his shoulder,following something silvery-white. It was winding itsway through the trees ahead, and he could only catchglimpses of it between the leaves. Anxious to catch upwith it, he sped up, but as he moved faster, so did hisquarry. Harry broke into a run, and ahead he heardhooves gathering speed. Now he was running flat out,and ahead he could hear galloping. Then he turned acorner into a clearing and —

“AAAAAAAAAAAAAARRRRRRRRRRRRGGGGGHHHHH! NOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO!”

Harry woke as suddenly as though he’d been hit inthe face. Disoriented in the total darkness, hefumbled with his hangings — he could hearmovements around him, and Seamus Finnigan’s voicefrom the other side of the room: “What’s going on?”

Harry thought he heard the dormitory door slam. Atlast finding the divide in his curtains, he ripped themback, and at the same moment, Dean Thomas lit hislamp.

Ron was sitting up in bed, the hangings torn from oneside, a look of utmost terror on his face.

“Black! Sirius Black! With a knife!”

“What?”

“Here! Just now! Slashed the curtains! Woke me up!”“You sure you weren’t dreaming, Ron?” said Dean.

Page | 296 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Look at the curtains! I tell you, he was here!”

They all scrambled out of bed; Harry reached thedormitory door first, and they sprinted back down thestaircase. Doors opened behind them, and sleepyvoices called after them.

“Who shouted?”

“What’re you doing?”

The common room was lit with the glow of the dyingfire, still littered with the debris from the party. It wasdeserted.

“Are you sure you weren’t dreaming, Ron?”

“I’m telling you, I saw him!”

“What’s all the noise?”

“Professor McGonagall told us to go to bed!”

A few of the girls had come down their staircase,pulling on dressing gowns and yawning. Boys, too,were reappearing.

“Excellent, are we carrying on?” said Fred Weasleybrightly.

“Everyone back upstairs!” said Percy,hurrying into the common room and pinning hisHead Boy badge to his pajamas as he spoke.

“Perce — Sirius Black!” said Ron faintly. “In ourdormitory! With a knife! Woke me up!”

The common room went very still.

Page | 297 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Nonsense!” said Percy, looking startled. “You had toomuch to eat, Ron — had a nightmare —”

“I’m telling you —”

“Now, really, enough’s enough!”

Professor McGonagall was back. She slammed theportrait behind her as she entered the common roomand stared furiously around.

“I am delighted that Gryffindor won the match, butthis is getting ridiculous! Percy, I expected better ofyou!”

“I certainly didn’t authorize this, Professor!” saidPercy, puffing himself up indignantly. “I was justtelling them all to get back to bed! My brother Ronhere had a nightmare —”

“IT WASNT A NIGHTMARE!” Ron yelled.

“PROFESSOR, I WOKE UP, AND SIRIUS BLACK WASSTANDING OVER ME, HOLDING A KNIFE!”

Professor McGonagall stared at him.

“Don’t be ridiculous, Weasley, how could he possiblyhave gotten through the portrait hole?”

“Ask him!” said Ron, pointing a shaking finger at theback of Sir Cadogan’s picture. “Ask him if he saw —”

Glaring suspiciously at Ron, Professor McGonagallpushed the portrait back open and went outside. Thewhole common room listened with bated breath.

“Sir Cadogan, did you just let a man enter GryffindorTower?”

Page | 298 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Certainly, good lady!” cried Sir Cadogan.

There was a stunned silence, both inside and outsidethe common room.

“You — you did?” said Professor McGonagall. “But —but the password!”

“He had ’em!” said Sir Cadogan proudly. “Had thewhole week’s, my lady! Read ’em off a little piece ofpaper!”

Professor McGonagall pulled herself back through theportrait hole to face the stunned crowd. She waswhite as chalk.

“Which person,” she said, her voice shaking, “whichabysmally foolish person wrote down this week’spasswords and left them lying around?”

There was utter silence, broken by the smallest ofterrified squeaks. Neville Longbottom, trembling fromhead to fluffy-slippered toes, raised his hand slowlyinto the air.

Page | 299 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





SNAPE’S GRUDGE

No one in Gryffindor Tower slept that night. Theyknew that the castle was being searched again, andthe whole House stayed awake in the common room,waiting to hear whether Black had been caught.Professor McGonagall came back at dawn, to tellthem that he had again escaped.

Throughout the day, everywhere they went they sawsigns of tighter security; Professor Flitwick could beseen teaching the front doors to recognize a largepicture of Sirius Black; Filch was suddenly bustlingup and down the corridors, boarding up everythingfrom tiny cracks in the walls to mouse holes. SirCadogan had been fired. His portrait had been takenback to its lonely landing on the seventh floor, andthe Fat Lady was back. She had been expertlyrestored, but was still extremely nervous, and hadagreed to return to her job only on condition that shewas given extra protection. A bunch of surly securitytrolls had been hired to guard her. They paced thecorridor in a menacing group, talking in grunts andcomparing the size of their clubs.

Page | 300 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry couldn’t help noticing that the statue of theone-eyed witch on the third floor remained unguardedand unblocked. It seemed that Fred and George hadbeen right in thinking that they — and now Harry,Ron, and Hermione — were the only ones who knewabout the hidden passageway within it.

“D’you reckon we should tell someone?” Harry askedRon.

“We know he’s not coming in through Honey duke’s,”said Ron dismissively “We’d’ve heard if the shop hadbeen broken into.”

Harry was glad Ron took this view. If the one-eyedwitch was boarded up too, he would never be able togo into Hogsmeade again.

Ron had become an instant celebrity. For the firsttime in his life, people were paying more attention tohim than to Harry, and it was clear that Ron wasrather enjoying the experience. Though still severelyshaken by the night’s events, he was happy to tellanyone who asked what had happened, with a wealthof detail.

"... I was asleep, and I heard this ripping noise, and Ithought it was in my dream, you know? But thenthere was this draft ... I woke up and one side of thehangings on my bed had been pulled down. ... I rolledover ... and I saw him standing over me ... like askeleton, with loads of filthy hair ... holding this greatlong knife, must’ve been twelve inches ... and helooked at me, and I looked at him, and then I yelled,and he scampered.

“Why, though?” Ron added to Harry as the group ofsecond-year girls who had been listening to hischilling tale departed. “Why did he run?”

Page | 301 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry had been wondering the same thing. Why hadBlack, having got the wrong bed, not silenced Ronand proceeded to Harry? Black had proved twelveyears ago that he didn’t mind murdering innocentpeople, and this time he had been facing fiveunarmed boys, four of whom were asleep.

“He must’ve known he’d have a job getting back out ofthe castle once you’d yelled and woken people up,”said Harry thoughtfully. “He’d’ve had to kill the wholeHouse to get back through the portrait hole ... thenhe would’ve met the teachers. ...”

Neville was in total disgrace. Professor McGonagallwas so furious with him she had banned him from allfuture Hogsmeade visits, given him a detention, andforbidden anyone to give him the password into thetower. Poor Neville was forced to wait outside thecommon room every night for somebody to let him in,while the security trolls leered unpleasantly at him.None of these punishments, however, came close tomatching the one his grandmother had in store forhim. Two days after Black’s break-in, she sent Nevillethe very worst thing a Hogwarts student could receiveover breakfast — a Howler.

The school owls swooped into the Great Hall carryingthe mail as usual, and Neville choked as a huge barnowl landed in front of him, a scarlet envelope clutchedin its beak. Harry and Ron, who were sitting oppositehim, recognized the letter as a Howler at once — Ronhad got one from his mother the year before.

“Run for it, Neville,” Ron advised.

Neville didn’t need telling twice. He seized theenvelope, and holding it before him like a bomb,sprinted out of the hall, while the Slytherin tableexploded with laughter at the sight of him. They

Page | 302 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

heard the Howler go off in the entrance hall —Neville’s grandmother’s voice, magically magnified toa hundred times its usual volume, shrieking abouthow he had brought shame on the whole family.

Harry was too busy feeling sorry for Neville to noticeimmediately that he had a letter too. Hedwig got hisattention by nipping him sharply on the wrist.

“Ouch! Oh — thanks, Hedwig.”

Harry tore open the envelope while Hedwig helpedherself to some of Neville’s cornflakes. The note insidesaid:

Dear Harry and Ron,

How about having tea with me this afternoon ’roundsix?

I’ll come and collect you from the castle.

WAIT FOR ME IN THE ENTRANCE HALL;

YOU’RE NOT ALLOWED OUT ON YOUR OWNCheers,

Hagrid

“He probably wants to hear all about Black!” saidRon.

So at six o’clock that afternoon, Harry and Ron leftGryffindor Tower, passed the security trolls at a run,and headed down to the entrance hall.

Hagrid was already waiting for them.

Page | 303 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“All right, Hagrid!” said Ron. “S’pose you want to hearabout Saturday night, do you?”

“I’ve already heard all abou’ it,” said Hagrid, openingthe front doors and leading them outside.

“Oh,” said Ron, looking slightly put out.

The first thing they saw on entering Hagrid’s cabinwas Buckbeak, who was stretched out on top ofHagrid’s patchwork quilt, his enormous wings foldedtight to his body, enjoying a large plate of deadferrets. Averting his eyes from this unpleasant sight,Harry saw a gigantic, hairy brown suit and a veryhorrible yellow-and-orange tie hanging from the top ofHagrid’s wardrobe door.

“What are they for, Hagrid?” said Harry.

“Buckbeak’s case against the Committee fer theDisposal o’ Dangerous Creatures,” said Hagrid. “ThisFriday. Him an’ me’ll be goin’ down ter Londontogether. I’ve booked two beds on the Knight Bus. ...”

Harry felt a nasty pang of guilt. He had completelyforgotten that Buckbeak’s trial was so near, andjudging by the uneasy look on Ron’s face, he had too.They had also forgotten their promise about helpinghim prepare Buckbeak’s defense; the arrival of theFirebolt had driven it clean out of their minds.

Hagrid poured them tea and offered them a plate ofBath buns, but they knew better than to accept; theyhad had too much experience with Hagrid’s cooking.

“I got somethin’ ter discuss with you two,” saidHagrid, sitting himself between them and lookinguncharacteristically serious.

Page | 304 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“What?” said Harry.

“Hermione,” said Hagrid.

“What about her?” said Ron.

“She’s in a righ’ state, that’s what. She’s bin cornin’down ter visit me a lot since Chris’mas. Bin feelin’lonely. Firs’ yeh weren’ talking to her because o’ theFirebolt, now yer not talkin’ to her because her cat —”

“— ate Scabbers!” Ron interjected angrily.

“Because her cat acted like all cats do,” Hagridcontinued doggedly. “She’s cried a fair few times, yehknow. Goin’ through a rough time at the moment.Bitten off more’n she can chew, if yeh ask me, all thework she’s tryin’ ter do. Still found time ter help mewith Buckbeak’s case, mind. ... She’s found somereally good stuff fer me ... reckon he’ll stand a goodchance now. ...”

“Hagrid, we should’ve helped as well — sorry —”

Harry began awkwardly.

“I’m not blamin’ yeh!” said Hagrid, waving Harry’sapology aside. “Gawd knows yeh’ve had enough ter begettin’ on with. I’ve seen yeh practicin’ Quidditch ev’ryhour o’ the day an’ night — but I gotta tell yeh, Ithought you two’d value yer friend more’nbroomsticks or rats. Tha’s all.”

Harry and Ron exchanged uncomfortable looks.

“Really upset, she was, when Black nearly stabbedyeh, Ron. She’s got her heart in the right place,Hermione has, an’you two not talkin’ to her —”

Page | 305 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“If she’d just get rid of that cat, I’d speak to heragain!” Ron said angrily. “But she’s still sticking upfor it! It’s a maniac, and she won’t hear a wordagainst it!”

“Ah, well, people can be a bit stupid abou’ their pets,”said Hagrid wisely. Behind him, Buckbeak spat a fewferret bones onto Hagrid’s pillow.

They spent the rest of their visit discussingGryffindor’s improved chances for the Quidditch Cup.At nine o’clock, Hagrid walked them back up to thecastle.

A large group of people was bunched around thebulletin board when they returned to the commonroom.

“Hogsmeade, next weekend!” said Ron, craning overthe heads to read the new notice. “What d’youreckon?” he added quietly to Harry as they went to sitdown.

“Well, Filch hasn’t done anything about the passageinto Honeydukes. ...” Harry said, even more quietly.

“Harry!” said a voice in his right ear. Harry startedand looked around at Hermione, who was sitting atthe table right behind them and clearing a space inthe wall of books that had been hiding her.

“Harry, if you go into Hogsmeade again ... I’ll tellProfessor McGonagall about that map!” saidHermione.

“Can you hear someone talking, Harry?” growled Ron,not looking at Hermione.

Page | 306 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Ron, how can you let him go with you? After whatSirius Black nearly did to youl I mean it, I’ll tell —”

“So now you’re trying to get Harry expelled!” said Ronfuriously. “Haven’t you done enough damage thisyear?”

Hermione opened her mouth to respond, but with asoft hiss, Crookshanks leapt onto her lap. Hermionetook one frightened look at the expression on Ron’sface, gathered up Crookshanks, and hurried awaytoward the girls’ dormitories.

“So how about it?” Ron said to Harry as though therehad been no interruption. “Come on, last time wewent you didn’t see anything. You haven’t even beeninside Zonko’s yet!”

Harry looked around to check that Hermione was wellout of earshot.

“Okay,” he said. “But I’m taking the Invisibility Cloakthis time.”

On Saturday morning, Harry packed his InvisibilityCloak in his bag, slipped the Marauder’s Map into hispocket, and went down to breakfast with everyoneelse. Hermione kept shooting suspicious looks downthe table at him, but he avoided her eye and wascareful to let her see him walking back up the marblestaircase in the entrance hall as everybody elseproceeded to the front doors.

“ ’Bye!” Harry called to Ron. “See you when you getback!”

Ron grinned and winked.

Page | 307 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry hurried up to the third floor, slipping theMarauder’s Map out of his pocket as he went.Crouching behind the one-eyed witch, he smoothed itout. A tiny dot was moving in his direction. Harrysquinted at it. The minuscule writing next to it readNeville Longbottom.

Harry quickly pulled out his wand, muttered,

“Dissendium).” and shoved his bag into the statue, butbefore he could climb in himself, Neville came aroundthe corner.

“Harry! I forgot you weren’t going to Hogsmeadeeither!”

“Hi, Neville,” said Harry, moving swiftly away from thestatue and pushing the map back into his pocket.“What are you up to?”

“Nothing,” shrugged Neville. “Want a game ofExploding Snap?”

“Er — not now — I was going to go to the library anddo that vampire essay for Lupin —”

“I’ll come with you!” said Neville brightly. “I haven’tdone it either!”

“Er — hang on — yeah, I forgot, I finished it lastnight!”

“Great, you can help me!” said Neville, his round faceanxious. “I don’t understand that thing about thegarlic at all — do they have to eat it, or —”

He broke off with a small gasp, looking over Harry’sshoulder.

It was Snape. Neville took a quick step behind Harry.

Page | 308 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“And what are you two doing here?” said Snape,coming to a halt and looking from one to the other.“An odd place to meet —”

To Harry’s immense disquiet, Snape’s black eyesflicked to the doorways on either side of them, andthen to the one-eyed witch.

“We’re not — meeting here,” said Harry. “We just —met here.”

“Indeed?” said Snape. “You have a habit of turning upin unexpected places, Potter, and you are very rarelythere for no good reason. ... I suggest the pair of youreturn to Gryffindor Tower, where you belong.”

Harry and Neville set off without another word. Asthey turned the corner, Harry looked back. Snape wasrunning one of his hands over the one-eyed witch’shead, examining it closely.

Harry managed to shake Neville off at the Fat Lady bytelling him the password, then pretending he’d left hisvampire essay in the library and doubling back. Onceout of sight of the security trolls, he pulled out themap again and held it close to his nose.

The third floor corridor seemed to be deserted. Harryscanned the map carefully and saw, with a leap ofrelief, that the tiny dot labeled Severus Snape wasnow back in its office.

He sprinted back to the one-eyed witch, opened herhump, heaved himself inside, and slid down to meethis bag at the bottom of the stone chute. He wipedthe Marauder’s Map blank again, then set off at arun.

Page | 309 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry, completely hidden beneath the InvisibilityCloak, emerged into the sunlight outside Honeydukesand prodded Ron in the back.

“It’s me,” he muttered.

“What kept you?” Ron hissed.

“Snape was hanging around. ...”

They set off up the High Street.

“Where are you?” Ron kept muttering out of thecorner of his mouth. “Are you still there? This feelsweird. ...”

They went to the post office; Ron pretended to bechecking the price of an owl to Bill in Egypt so thatHarry could have a good look around. The owls sathooting softly down at him, at least three hundred ofthem; from Great Grays right down to tiny little Scopsowls (“Local Deliveries Only”), which were so smallthey could have sat in the palm of Harry’s hand.

Then they visited Zonko’s, which was so packed withstudents Harry had to exercise great care not to treadon anyone and cause a panic. There were jokes andtricks to fulfill even Fred’s and George’s wildestdreams; Harry gave Ron whispered orders and passedhim some gold from under the cloak. They leftZonko’s with their money bags considerably lighterthan they had been on entering, but their pocketsbulging with Dungbombs, Hiccup Sweets, Frog SpawnSoap, and a Nose-Biting Teacup apiece.

The day was fine and breezy, and neither of them feltlike staying indoors, so they walked past the ThreeBroomsticks and climbed a slope to visit theShrieking Shack, the most haunted dwelling in

Page | 310 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Britain. It stood a little way above the rest of thevillage, and even in daylight was slightly creepy, withits boarded windows and dank overgrown garden.

“Even the Hogwarts ghosts avoid it,” said Ron as theyleaned on the fence, looking up at it. “I asked NearlyHeadless Nick ... he says he’s heard a very roughcrowd lives here. No one can get in. Fred and Georgetried, obviously, but all the entrances are sealed shut.

Harry, feeling hot from their climb, was justconsidering taking off the cloak for a few minuteswhen they heard voices nearby. Someone wasclimbing toward the house from the other side of thehill; moments later, Malfoy had appeared, followedclosely by Crabbe and Goyle. Malfoy was speaking.

"... should have an owl from Father any time now. Hehad to go to the hearing to tell them about my arm ...about how I couldn’t use it for three months. ...”

Crabbe and Goyle sniggered.

“I really wish I could hear that great hairy morontrying to defend himself ... There’s no ’arm in ’im,’onest —’ ... that hippogriff’s as good as dead —”

Malfoy suddenly caught sight of Ron. His pale facesplit in a malevolent grin.

“What are you doing, Weasley?”

Malfoy looked up at the crumbling house behind Ron.

“Suppose you’d love to live here, wouldn’t you,Weasley? Dreaming about having your own bedroom?

I heard your family all sleep in one room — is thattrue?”

Page | 311 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry seized the back of Ron’s robes to stop him fromleaping on Malfoy.

“Leave him to me,” he hissed in Ron’s ear.

The opportunity was too perfect to miss. Harry creptsilently around behind Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle,bent down, and scooped a large handful of mud out ofthe path.

“We were just discussing your friend Hagrid,” Malfoysaid to Ron. “Just trying to imagine what he’s sayingto the Committee for the Disposal of DangerousCreatures. D’you think he’ll cry when they cut off hishippogriff’s —”

SPLAT.

Malfoy’s head jerked forward as the mud hit him; hissilver-blond hair was suddenly dripping in muck.

“What the — ?”

Ron had to hold onto the fence to keep himselfstanding, he was laughing so hard. Malfoy, Crabbe,and Goyle spun stupidly on the spot, staring wildlyaround, Malfoy trying to wipe his hair clean.

“What was that? Who did that?”

“Very haunted up here, isn’t it?” said Ron, with theair of one commenting on the weather.

Crabbe and Goyle were looking scared. Their bulgingmuscles were no use against ghosts. Malfoy wasstaring madly around at the deserted landscape.

Page | 312 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry sneaked along the path, where a particularlysloppy puddle yielded some foul-smelling, greensludge.

SPLATTER.

Crabbe and Goyle caught some this time. Goylehopped furiously on the spot, trying to rub it out ofhis small, dull eyes.

“It came from over there!” said Malfoy, wiping hisface, and staring at a spot some six feet to the left ofHarry.

Crabbe blundered forward, his long armsoutstretched like a zombie. Harry dodged around him,picked up a stick, and lobbed it at Crabbe’s back.Harry doubled up with silent laughter as Crabbe did akind of pirouette in midair, trying to see who hadthrown it. As Ron was the only person Crabbe couldsee, it was Ron he started toward, but Harry stuckout his leg. Crabbe stumbled — and his huge, flat footcaught the hem of Harry’s cloak. Harry felt a greattug, then the cloak slid off his face.

For a split second, Malfoy stared at him.

“AAARGH!” he yelled, pointing at Harry’s head. Thenhe turned tail and ran, at breakneck speed, backdown the hill, Crabbe and Goyle behind him.

Harry tugged the cloak up again, but the damage wasdone.

“Harry!” Ron said, stumbling forward and staringhopelessly at the point where Harry had disappeared,“you’d better run for it! If Malfoy tells anyone — you’dbetter get back to the castle, quick —”

Page | 313 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“See you later,” said Harry, and without anotherword, he tore back down the path toward Hogsmeade.

Would Malfoy believe what he had seen? Wouldanyone believe Malfoy? Nobody knew about theInvisibility Cloak — nobody except Dumbledore.Harry’s stomach turned over — Dumbledore wouldknow exactly what had happened, if Malfoy saidanything —

Back into Honeydukes, back down the cellar steps,across the stone floor, through the trapdoor — Harrypulled off the cloak, tucked it under his arm, and ran,flat out, along the passage. ... Malfoy would get backfirst ... how long would it take him to find a teacher?Panting, a sharp pain in his side, Harry didn’t slowdown until he reached the stone slide. He would haveto leave the cloak where it was, it was too much of agiveaway in case Malfoy had tipped off a teacher — hehid it in a shadowy corner, then started to climb, fastas he could, his sweaty hands slipping on the sides ofthe chute. He reached the inside of the witch’s hump,tapped it with his wand, stuck his head through, andhoisted himself out; the hump closed, and just asHarry jumped out from behind the statue, he heardquick footsteps approaching.

It was Snape. He approached Harry at a swift walk,his black robes swishing, then stopped in front ofhim.

“So,” he said.

There was a look of suppressed triumph about him.Harry tried to look innocent, all too aware of hissweaty face and his muddy hands, which he quicklyhid in his pockets.

“Come with me, Potter,” said Snape.

Page | 314 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry followed him downstairs, trying to wipe hishands clean on the inside of his robes without Snapenoticing. They walked down the stairs to thedungeons and then into Snape’s office.

Harry had been in here only once before, and he hadbeen in very serious trouble then too. Snape hadacquired a few more slimy horrible things in jarssince last time, all standing on shelves behind hisdesk, glinting in the firelight and adding to thethreatening atmosphere.

“Sit,” said Snape.

Harry sat. Snape, however, remained standing.

“Mr. Malfoy has just been to see me with a strangestory, Potter,” said Snape.

Harry didn’t say anything.

“He tells me that he was up by the Shrieking Shackwhen he ran into Weasley — apparently alone.”

Still, Harry didn’t speak.

“Mr. Malfoy states that he was standing talking toWeasley, when a large amount of mud hit him in theback of the head. How do you think that could havehappened?”

Harry tried to look mildly surprised.

“I don’t know, Professor.”

Snape’s eyes were boring into Harry’s. It was exactlylike trying to stare down a hippogriff. Harry tried hardnot to blink.

Page | 315 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Mr. Malfoy then saw an extraordinary apparition.

Can you imagine what it might have been, Potter?”

“No,” said Harry, now trying to sound innocentlycurious.

“It was your head, Potter. Floating in midair.”

There was a long silence.

“Maybe he’d better go to Madam Pomfrey,” said Harry.“If he’s seeing things like —”

“What would your head have been doing inHogsmeade, Potter?” said Snape softly. “Your head isnot allowed in Hogsmeade. No part of your body haspermission to be in Hogsmeade.”

“I know that,” said Harry, striving to keep his face freeof guilt or fear. “It sounds like Malfoy’s havinghallucin —”

“Malfoy is not having hallucinations,” snarled Snape,and he bent down, a hand on each arm of Harry’schair, so that their faces were a foot apart. “If yourhead was in Hogsmeade, so was the rest of you.”

“I’ve been up in Gryffindor Tower,” said Harry. “Likeyou told —”

“Can anyone confirm that?”

Harry didn’t say anything. Snape’s thin mouth curledinto a horrible smile.

“So,” he said, straightening up again. “Everyone fromthe Minister of Magic downward has been trying tokeep famous Harry Potter safe from Sirius Black. Butfamous Harry Potter is a law unto himself. Let the

Page | 316 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

ordinary people worry about his safety! Famous HarryPotter goes where he wants to, with no thought forthe consequences.”

Harry stayed silent. Snape was trying to provoke himinto telling the truth. He wasn’t going to do it. Snapehad no proof— yet.

“How extraordinarily like your father you are, Potter,”Snape said suddenly, his eyes glinting. “He too wasexceedingly arrogant. A small amount of talent on theQuidditch field made him think he was a cut abovethe rest of us too. Strutting around the place with hisfriends and admirers ... The resemblance between youis uncanny.”

“My dad didn’t strut,” said Harry, before he could stophimself. “And neither do I.”

“Your father didn’t set much store by rules either,”Snape went on, pressing his advantage, his thin facefull of malice. “Rules were for lesser mortals, notQuidditch Cup-winners. His head was so swollen —”

“SHUT UP!”

Harry was suddenly on his feet. Rage such as he hadnot felt since his last night in Privet Drive wascoursing through him. He didn’t care that Snape’sface had gone rigid, the black eyes flashingdangerously.

“ What did you say to me, Potter?”

“I told you to shut up about my dad!” Harry yelled. “Iknow the truth, all right? He saved your life!Dumbledore told me! You wouldn’t even be here if itwasn’t for my dad!”

Page | 317 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Snape’s sallow skin had gone the color of sour milk.

“And did the headmaster tell you the circumstancesin which your father saved my life?” he whispered.

“Or did he consider the details too unpleasant forprecious Potter’s delicate ears?”

Harry bit his lip. He didn’t know what had happenedand didn’t want to admit it — but Snape seemed tohave guessed the truth.

“I would hate for you to run away with a false idea ofyour father, Potter,” he said, a terrible grin twistinghis face. “Have you been imagining some act ofglorious heroism? Then let me correct you — yoursaintly father and his friends played a highly amusingjoke on me that would have resulted in my death ifyour father hadn’t got cold feet at the last moment.There was nothing brave about what he did. He wassaving his own skin as much as mine. Had their jokesucceeded, he would have been expelled fromHogwarts.”

Snape’s uneven, yellowish teeth were bared.

“Turn out your pockets, Potter!” he spat suddenly.

Harry didn’t move. There was a pounding in his ears.

“Turn out your pockets, or we go straight to theheadmaster! Pull them out, Potter!”

Cold with dread, Harry slowly pulled out the bag ofZonko’s tricks and the Marauder’s Map.

Snape picked up the Zonko’s bag.

Page | 318 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Ron gave them to me,” said Harry, praying he’d get achance to tip Ron off before Snape saw him. “He —brought them back from Hogsmeade last time —”

“Indeed? And you’ve been carrying them around eversince? How very touching ... and what is this?”

Snape had picked up the map. Harry tried with all hismight to keep his face impassive.

“Spare bit of parchment,” he said with a shrug.

Snape turned it over, his eyes on Harry.

“Surely you don’t need such a very old piece ofparchment?” he said. “Why don’t I just — throw thisaway?”

His hand moved toward the fire.

“No!” Harry said quickly.

“So!” said Snape, his long nostrils quivering. “Is thisanother treasured gift from Mr. Weasley? Or is it —something else? A letter, perhaps, written in invisibleink? Or — instructions to get into Hogsmeade withoutpassing the dementors?”

Harry blinked. Snape’s eyes gleamed.

“Let me see, let me see ... ,” he muttered, taking outhis wand and smoothing the map out on his desk.“Reveal your secret!” he said, touching the wand tothe parchment.

Nothing happened. Harry clenched his hands to stopthem from shaking.

Page | 319 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Show yourself!” Snape said, tapping the mapsharply.

It stayed blank. Harry was taking deep, calmingbreaths.

“Professor Severus Snape, master of this school,commands you to yield the information you conceal!”Snape said, hitting the map with his wand.

As though an invisible hand were writing upon it,words appeared on the smooth surface of the map.

“Mr. Moony presents his compliments to ProfessorSnape, and begs him to keep his abnormally largenose out of other people’s business.”

Snape froze. Harry stared, dumbstruck, at themessage. But the map didn’t stop there. More writingwas appearing beneath the first.

“Mr. Prongs agrees with Mr. Moony, and would like toadd that Professor Snape is an ugly git.”

It would have been very funny if the situation hadn’tbeen so serious. And there was more. ...

“Mr. Padfoot would like to register his astonishmentthat an idiot like that ever became a professor.”

Harry closed his eyes in horror. When he’d openedthem, the map had had its last word.

“Mr. Wormtail bids Professor Snape good day, andadvises him to wash his hair, the slimeball.”

Harry waited for the blow to fall.

“So ... ,” said Snape softly. “We’ll see about this. ...”

Page | 320 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He strode across to his fire, seized a fistful ofglittering powder from ajar on the fireplace, andthrew it into the flames.

“Lupin!” Snape called into the fire. “I want a word!”

Utterly bewildered, Harry stared at the fire. A largeshape had appeared in it, revolving very fast. Secondslater, Professor Lupin was clambering out of thefireplace, brushing ash off his shabby robes.

“You called, Severus?” said Lupin mildly.

“I certainly did,” said Snape, his face contorted withfury as he strode back to his desk. “I have just askedPotter to empty his pockets. He was carrying this.”

Snape pointed at the parchment, on which the wordsof Messrs. Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongswere still shining. An odd, closed expression appearedon Lupin’s face.

“Well?” said Snape.

Lupin continued to stare at the map. Harry had theimpression that Lupin was doing some very quickthinking.

“Well?” said Snape again. “This parchment is plainlyfull of Dark Magic. This is supposed to be your area ofexpertise, Lupin. Where do you imagine Potter gotsuch a thing?”

Lupin looked up and, by the merest half-glance inHarry’s direction, warned him not to interrupt.

“Full of Dark Magic?” he repeated mildly. “Do youreally think so, Severus? It looks to me as though it ismerely a piece of parchment that insults anybody who

Page | 321 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

reads it. Childish, but surely not dangerous? Iimagine Harry got it from a joke shop —”

“Indeed?” said Snape. His jaw had gone rigid withanger. “You think a joke shop could supply him withsuch a thing? You don’t think it more likely that hegot it directly from the manufacturers?”

Harry didn’t understand what Snape was talkingabout. Nor, apparently, did Lupin.

“You mean, by Mr. Wormtail or one of these people?”he said. “Harry, do you know any of these men?”

“No,” said Harry quickly.

“You see, Severus?” said Lupin, turning back toSnape. “It looks like a Zonko product to me —”

Right on cue, Ron came bursting into the office. Hewas completely out of breath, and stopped just shortof Snape’s desk, clutching the stitch in his chest andtrying to speak.

“I — gave — Harry — that — stuff,” he choked.“Bought — it ... in Zonko’s ... ages — ago ...”

“Well!” said Lupin, clapping his hands together andlooking around cheerfully. “That seems to clear thatup! Severus, I’ll take this back, shall I?” He folded themap and tucked it inside his robes. “Harry, Ron,come with me, I need a word about my vampire essay— excuse us, Severus —”

Harry didn’t dare look at Snape as they left his office.He, Ron, and Lupin walked all the way back into theentrance hall before speaking. Then Harry turned toLupin.

Page | 322 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Professor, I —”

“I don’t want to hear explanations,” said Lupinshortly. He glanced around the empty entrance halland lowered his voice. “I happen to know that thismap was confiscated by Mr. Filch many years ago.

Yes, I know it’s a map,” he said as Harry and Ronlooked amazed. “I don’t want to know how it fell intoyour possession. I am, however, astounded that youdidn’t hand it in. Particularly after what happened thelast time a student left information about the castlelying around. And I can’t let you have it back, Harry.”

Harry had expected that, and was too keen forexplanations to protest.

“Why did Snape think I’d got it from themanufacturers?”

“Because ... ,” Lupin hesitated, “because thesemapmakers would have wanted to lure you out ofschool. They’d think it extremely entertaining.”

“Do you know them?” said Harry, impressed.

“We’ve met,” he said shortly. He was looking at Harrymore seriously than ever before.

“Don’t expect me to cover up for you again, Harry. Icannot make you take Sirius Black seriously. But Iwould have thought that what you have heard whenthe dementors draw near you would have had more ofan effect on you. Your parents gave their lives to keepyou alive, Harry. A poor way to repay them —gambling their sacrifice for a bag of magic tricks.”

He walked away, leaving Harry feeling worse by farthan he had at any point in Snape’s office. Slowly, heand Ron mounted the marble staircase. As Harry

Page | 323 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

passed the one-eyed witch, he remembered theInvisibility Cloak — it was still down there, but hedidn’t dare go and get it.

“It’s my fault,” said Ron abruptly. “I persuaded you togo. Lupin’s right, it was stupid, we shouldn’t’ve done

it —”

He broke off; they reached the corridor where thesecurity trolls were pacing, and Hermione waswalking toward them. One look at her face convincedHarry that she had heard what had happened. Hisheart plummeted — had she told ProfessorMcGonagall?

“Come to have a good gloat?” said Ron savagely asshe stopped in front of them. “Or have you just beento tell on us?”

“No,” said Hermione. She was holding a letter in herhands and her lip was trembling. “I just thought youought to know ... Hagrid lost his case. Buckbeak isgoing to be executed.”

Page | 324 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





THE QUIDDITCH FINAL

“He — he sent me this,” Hermione said, holding outthe letter.

Harry took it. The parchment was damp, andenormous teardrops had smudged the ink so badly inplaces that it was very difficult to read.

Dear Hermione,

We lost I’m allowed to bring him back to Hogwarts.Execution date to be fixed.

Beaky has enjoyed London.

I won’t forget all the help you gave us.

Hagrid

“They can’t do this,” said Harry. “They can’t.Buckbeak isn’t dangerous.”

Page | 325 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Malfoy’s dad’s frightened the Committee into it,” saidHermione, wiping her eyes. “You know what he’s like.They’re a bunch of doddery old fools, and they werescared. There’ll be an appeal, though, there always is.Only I can’t see any hope. ... Nothing will havechanged.”

“Yeah, it will,” said Ron fiercely. “You won’t have to doall the work alone this time, Hermione. I’ll help.”

“Oh, Ron!”

Hermione flung her arms around Ron’s neck andbroke down completely. Ron, looking quite terrified,patted her very awkwardly on the top of the head.Finally, Hermione drew away.

“Ron, I’m really, really sorry about Scabbers ... ,” shesobbed.

“Oh — well — he was old,” said Ron, lookingthoroughly relieved that she had let go of him. “Andhe was a bit useless. You never know, Mum and Dadmight get me an owl now.”

The safety measures imposed on the students sinceBlack’s second break-in made it impossible for Harry,Ron, and Hermione to go and visit Hagrid in theevenings. Their only chance of talking to him wasduring Care of Magical Creatures lessons.

He seemed numb with shock at the verdict.

“S’all my fault. Got all tongue-tied. They was all sittin’there in black robes an’ I kep’ droppin’ me notes andforgettin’ all them dates yeh looked up fer me,Hermione. An’ then Lucius Malfoy stood up an’ saidhis bit, and the Committee jus’ did exac’ly what hetold ’em. ...”

Page | 326 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“There’s still the appeal!” said Ron fiercely. “Don’t giveup yet, we’re working on it!”

They were walking back up to the castle with the restof the class. Ahead they could see Malfoy, who waswalking with Crabbe and Goyle, and kept lookingback, laughing derisively.

“S’no good, Ron,” said Hagrid sadly as they reachedthe castle steps. “That Committee’s in Lucius Malfoy’spocket. I’m jus’ gonna make sure the rest o’ Beaky’stime is the happiest he’s ever had. I owe him that. ...”

Hagrid turned around and hurried back toward hiscabin, his face buried in his handkerchief.

“Look at him blubber!”

Malfoy, Crabbe, and Goyle had been standing justinside the castle doors, listening.

“Have you ever seen anything quite as pathetic?” saidMalfoy. “And he’s supposed to be our teacher!”

Harry and Ron both made furious moves towardMalfoy, but Hermione got there first — SMACK!

She had slapped Malfoy across the face with all thestrength she could muster. Malfoy staggered. Harry,Ron, Crabbe, and Goyle stood flabbergasted asHermione raised her hand again.

“Don’t you dare call Hagrid pathetic, you foul — youevil —”

“Hermione!” said Ron weakly, and he tried to grab herhand as she swung it back.

“Get off, Ron!”

Page | 327 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione pulled out her wand. Malfoy steppedbackward. Crabbe and Goyle looked at him forinstructions, thoroughly bewildered.

“C’mon,” Malfoy muttered, and in a moment, all threeof them had disappeared into the passageway to thedungeons.

“Hermionel” Ron said again, sounding both stunnedand impressed.

“Harry, you’d better beat him in the Quidditch final!”Hermione said shrilly. “You just better had, because Ican’t stand it if Slytherin wins!”

“We’re due in Charms,” said Ron, still goggling atHermione. “We’d better go.”

They hurried up the marble staircase towardProfessor Flitwick’s classroom.

“You’re late, boys!” said Professor Flitwick reprovinglyas Harry opened the classroom door. “Come along,quickly, wands out, we’re experimenting withCheering Charms today, we’ve already divided intopairs —”

Harry and Ron hurried to a desk at the back andopened their bags. Ron looked behind him.

“Where’s Hermione gone?”

Harry looked around too. Hermione hadn’t enteredthe classroom, yet Harry knew she had been rightnext to him when he had opened the door.

“That’s weird,” said Harry, staring at Ron. “Maybe —maybe she went to the bathroom or something?”

Page | 328 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

But Hermione didn’t turn up all lesson.

“She could’ve done with a Cheering Charm on hertoo,” said Ron as the class left for lunch, all grinningbroadly — the Cheering Charms had left them with afeeling of great contentment.

Hermione wasn’t at lunch either. By the time theyhad finished their apple pie, the after-effects of theCheering Charms were wearing off, and Harry andRon had started to get slightly worried.

“You don’t think Malfoy did something to her?” Ronsaid anxiously as they hurried upstairs towardGryffindor Tower.

They passed the security trolls, gave the Fat Lady thepassword (“Flibbertigibbet”), and scrambled throughthe portrait hole into the common room.

Hermione was sitting at a table, fast asleep, her headresting on an open Arithmancy book. They went to sitdown on either side of her. Harry prodded her awake.

“Wh — what?” said Hermione, waking with a startand staring wildly around. “Is it time to go? W —which lesson have we got now?

“Divination, but it’s not for another twenty minutes,”said Harry. “Hermione, why didn’t you come toCharms?”

“What? Oh no!” Hermione squeaked. “I forgot to go toCharms!”

“But how could you forget?” said Harry. “You werewith us till we were right outside the classroom!”

Page | 329 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t believe it!” Hermione wailed. “Was ProfessorFlitwick angry? Oh, it was Malfoy, I was thinkingabout him and I lost track of things!”

“You know what, Hermione?” said Ron, looking downat the enormous Arithmancy book Hermione hadbeen using as a pillow. “I reckon you’re cracking up.You’re trying to do too much.”

“No, I’m not!” said Hermione, brushing her hair out ofher eyes and staring hopelessly around for her bag. “Ijust made a mistake, that’s all! I’d better go and seeProfessor Flitwick and say sorry. ... I’ll see you inDivination!”

Hermione joined them at the foot of the ladder toProfessor Trelawney’s classroom twenty minutes later,looking extremely harassed.

“I can’t believe I missed Cheering Charms! And I betthey come up in our exams; Professor Flitwick hintedthey might!”

Together they climbed the ladder into the dim, stiflingtower room. Glowing on every little table was a crystalball full of pearly white mist. Harry, Ron, andHermione sat down together at the same rickety table.

“I thought we weren’t starting crystal balls until nextterm,” Ron muttered, casting a wary eye around forProfessor Trelawney, in case she was lurking nearby.

“Don’t complain, this means we’ve finishedpalmistry,” Harry muttered back. “I was getting sickof her flinching every time she looked at my hands.”

“Good day to you!” said the familiar, misty voice, andProfessor Trelawney made her usual dramaticentrance out of the shadows. Parvati and Lavender

Page | 330 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

quivered with excitement, their faces lit by the milkyglow of their crystal ball.

“I have decided to introduce the crystal ball a littleearlier than I had planned,” said Professor Trelawney,sitting with her back to the fire and gazing around.“The fates have informed me that your examination inJune will concern the Orb, and I am anxious to giveyou sufficient practice.”

Hermione snorted.

“Well, honestly ... ‘the fates have informed her’ ... whosets the exam? She does! What an amazingprediction!” she said, not troubling to keep her voicelow. Harry and Ron choked back laughs.

It was hard to tell whether Professor Trelawney hadheard them, as her face was hidden in shadow. Shecontinued, however, as though she had not.

“Crystal gazing is a particularly refined art,” she saiddreamily. “I do not expect any of you to See when firstyou peer into the Orb’s infinite depths. We shall startby practicing relaxing the conscious mind andexternal eyes” — Ron began to snigger uncontrollablyand had to stuff his fist in his mouth to stifle thenoise — “so as to clear the Inner Eye and thesuperconscious. Perhaps, if we are lucky, some of youwill See before the end of the class.”

And so they began. Harry, at least, felt extremelyfoolish, staring blankly at the crystal ball, trying tokeep his mind empty when thoughts such as “this isstupid” kept drifting across it. It didn’t help that Ronkept breaking into silent giggles and Hermione kepttutting.

Page | 331 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Seen anything yet?” Harry asked them after aquarter of an hour’s quiet crystal gazing.

“Yeah, there’s a burn on this table,” said Ron,pointing. “Someone’s spilled their candle.”

“This is such a waste of time,” Hermione hissed. “Icould be practicing something useful. I could becatching up on Cheering Charms —”

Professor Trelawney rustled past.

“Would anyone like me to help them interpret theshadowy portents within their Orb?” she murmuredover the clinking of her bangles.

“I don’t need help,” Ron whispered. “It’s obvious whatthis means. There’s going to be loads of fog tonight.”

Both Harry and Hermione burst out laughing.

“Now, really!” said Professor Trelawney as everyone’sheads turned in their direction. Parvati and Lavenderwere looking scandalized. “You are disturbing theclairvoyant vibrations!” She approached their tableand peered into their crystal ball. Harry felt his heartsinking. He was sure he knew what was coming —

“There is something here!” Professor Trelawneywhispered, lowering her face to the ball, so that it wasreflected twice in her huge glasses. “Somethingmoving ... but what is it?”

Harry was prepared to bet everything he owned,including his Firebolt, that it wasn’t good news,whatever it was. And sure enough —

“My dear ... ,” Professor Trelawney breathed, gazingup at Harry. “It is here, plainer than ever before ... my

Page | 332 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

dear, stalking toward you, growing ever closer ... theGr —”

“Oh, for goodness’ sake!” said Hermione loudly. “Notthat ridiculous Grim again\”

Professor Trelawney raised her enormous eyes toHermione’s face. Parvati whispered something toLavender, and they both glared at Hermione too.Professor Trelawney stood up, surveying Hermionewith unmistakable anger.

“I am sorry to say that from the moment you havearrived in this class, my dear, it has been apparentthat you do not have what the noble art of Divinationrequires. Indeed, I don’t remember ever meeting astudent whose mind was so hopelessly mundane.”

There was a moment’s silence. Then —

“Fine!” said Hermione suddenly, getting up andcramming Unfogging the Future back into her bag.“Fine!” she repeated, swinging the bag over hershoulder and almost knocking Ron off his chair. “Igive up! I’m leaving!”

And to the whole class’s amazement, Hermione strodeover to the trapdoor, kicked it open, and climbeddown the ladder out of sight.

It took a few minutes for the class to settle downagain. Professor Trelawney seemed to have forgottenall about the Grim. She turned abruptly from Harryand Ron’s table, breathing rather heavily as shetugged her gauzy shawl more closely to her.

“Ooooo!” said Lavender suddenly, making everyonestart. “Oooooo, Professor Trelawney, I’ve justremembered! You saw her leaving, didn’t you? Didn’t

Page | 333 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

you, Professor? ‘Around Easter, one of our number willleave us forever*.’ You said it ages ago, Professor!”

Professor Trelawney gave her a dewy smile.

“Yes, my dear, I did indeed know that Miss Grangerwould be leaving us. One hopes, however, that onemight have mistaken the Signs. ... The Inner Eye canbe a burden, you know. ...”

Lavender and Parvati looked deeply impressed, andmoved over so that Professor Trelawney could jointheir table instead.

“Some day Hermione’s having, eh?” Ron muttered toHarry, looking awed.

“Yeah ...”

Harry glanced into the crystal ball but saw nothingbut swirling white mist. Had Professor Trelawneyreally seen the Grim again? Would he? The last thinghe needed was another near-fatal accident, with theQuidditch final drawing ever nearer.

The Easter holidays were not exactly relaxing. Thethird years had never had so much homework. NevilleLongbottom seemed close to a nervous collapse, andhe wasn’t the only one.

“Call this a holiday!” Seamus Finnigan roared at thecommon room one afternoon. “The exams are agesaway, what’re they playing at?”

But nobody had as much to do as Hermione. Evenwithout Divination, she was taking more subjectsthan anybody else. She was usually last to leave thecommon room at night, first to arrive at the library

Page | 334 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

the next morning; she had shadows like Lupin’sunder her eyes, and seemed constantly close to tears.

Ron had taken over responsibility for Buckbeak’sappeal. When he wasn’t doing his own work, he wasporing over enormously thick volumes with nameslike The Handbook of Hippogriff Psychology and Fowlor Foul? A Study of Hippogriff Brutality. He was soabsorbed, he even forgot to be horrible toCrookshanks.

Harry, meanwhile, had to fit in his homework aroundQuidditch practice every day, not to mention endlessdiscussions of tactics with Wood. The Gryffindor-Slytherin match would take place on the firstSaturday after the Easter holidays. Slytherin wasleading the tournament by exactly two hundredpoints. This meant (as Wood constantly reminded histeam) that they needed to win the match by morethan that amount to win the Cup. It also meant thatthe burden of winning fell largely on Harry, becausecapturing the Snitch was worth one hundred and fiftypoints.

“So you must catch it only if we’re more than fiftypoints up,” Wood told Harry constantly. “Only if we’remore than fifty points up, Harry, or we win the matchbut lose the Cup. You’ve got that, haven’t you? Youmust catch the Snitch only if we’re —”

“I KNOW, OLIVER!” Harry yelled.

The whole of Gryffindor House was obsessed with thecoming match. Gryffindor hadn’t won the QuidditchCup since the legendary Charlie Weasley (Ron’ssecond oldest brother) had been Seeker. But Harrydoubted whether any of them, even Wood, wanted towin as much as he did. The enmity between Harryand Malfoy was at its highest point ever. Malfoy wasPage | 335 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

still smarting about the mud-throwing incident inHogsmeade and was even more furious that Harryhad somehow wormed his way out of punishment.Harry hadn’t forgotten Malfoy’s attempt to sabotagehim in the match against Ravenclaw, but it was thematter of Buckbeak that made him most determinedto beat Malfoy in front of the entire school.

Never, in anyone’s memory, had a match approachedin such a highly charged atmosphere. By the time theholidays were over, tension between the two teamsand their Houses was at the breaking point. Anumber of small scuffles broke out in the corridors,culminating in a nasty incident in which a Gryffindorfourth year and a Slytherin sixth year ended up in thehospital wing with leeks sprouting out of their ears.

Harry was having a particularly bad time of it. Hecouldn’t walk to class without Slytherins sticking outtheir legs and trying to trip him up; Crabbe and Goylekept popping up wherever he went, and slouchingaway looking disappointed when they saw himsurrounded by people. Wood had given instructionsthat Harry should be accompanied everywhere hewent, in case the Slytherins tried to put him out ofaction. The whole of Gryffindor House took up thechallenge enthusiastically, so that it was impossiblefor Harry to get to classes on time because he wassurrounded by a vast, chattering crowd. Harry wasmore concerned for his Firebolt’s safety than his own.When he wasn’t flying it, he locked it securely in histrunk and frequently dashed back up to GryffindorTower at break times to check that it was still there.

All usual pursuits were abandoned in the Gryffindorcommon room the night before the match. EvenHermione had put down her books.

“I can’t work, I can’t concentrate,” she said nervously.

Page | 336 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

There was a great deal of noise. Fred and GeorgeWeasley were dealing with the pressure by beinglouder and more exuberant than ever. Oliver Woodwas crouched over a model of a Quidditch field in thecorner, prodding little figures across it with his wandand muttering to himself. Angelina, Alicia, and Katiewere laughing at Fred’s and George’s jokes. Harry wassitting with Ron and Hermione, removed from thecenter of things, trying not to think about the nextday, because every time he did, he had the horriblesensation that something very large was fighting toget out of his stomach.

“You’re going to be fine,” Hermione told him, thoughshe looked positively terrified.

“You’ve got a Firebolti” said Ron.

“Yeah ... ,” said Harry, his stomach writhing.

It came as a relief when Wood suddenly stood up andyelled, “Team! Bed!”

Harry slept badly. First he dreamed that he hadoverslept, and that Wood was yelling, “Where wereyou? We had to use Neville instead!” Then he dreamedthat Malfoy and the rest of the Slytherin team arrivedfor the match riding dragons. He was flying atbreakneck speed, trying to avoid a spurt of flamesfrom Malfoy’s steed’s mouth, when he realized he hadforgotten his Firebolt. He fell through the air andwoke with a start.

It was a few seconds before Harry remembered thatthe match hadn’t taken place yet, that he was safe inbed, and that the Slytherin team definitely wouldn’tbe allowed to play on dragons. He was feeling very

Page | 337 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

thirsty. Quietly as he could, he got out of his four-poster and went to pour himself some water from thesilver jug beneath the window.

The grounds were still and quiet. No breath of winddisturbed the treetops in the Forbidden Forest; theWhomping Willow was motionless and innocent-looking. It looked as though the conditions for thematch would be perfect.

Harry set down his goblet and was about to turn backto his bed when something caught his eye. An animalof some kind was prowling across the silvery lawn.

Harry dashed to his bedside table, snatched up hisglasses, and put them on, then hurried back to thewindow. It couldn’t be the Grim — not now — notright before the match —

He peered out at the grounds again and, after aminute’s frantic searching, spotted it. It was skirtingthe edge of the forest now. ... It wasn’t the Grim at all...it was a cat. ... Harry clutched the window ledge inrelief as he recognized the bottlebrush tail. It was onlyCrookshanks. ...

Or was it only Crookshanks? Harry squinted,pressing his nose flat against the glass. Crookshanksseemed to have come to a halt. Harry was sure hecould see something else moving in the shadow of thetrees too.

And just then, it emerged — a gigantic, shaggy blackdog, moving stealthily across the lawn, Crookshankstrotting at its side. Harry stared. What did this mean?If Crookshanks could see the dog as well, how could itbe an omen of Harry’s death?

“Ron!” Harry hissed. “Ron! Wake up!”

Page | 338 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Huh?”

“I need you to tell me if you can see something!”

“S’all dark, Harry,” Ron muttered thickly. “What’reyou on about?”

“Down here —”

Harry looked quickly back out of the window.

Crookshanks and the dog had vanished. Harryclimbed onto the windowsill to look right down intothe shadows of the castle, but they weren’t there.Where had they gone?

A loud snore told him Ron had fallen asleep again.

Harry and the rest of the Gryffindor team entered theGreat Hall the next day to enormous applause. Harrycouldn’t help grinning broadly as he saw that boththe Ravenclaw and Hufflepuff tables were applaudingthem too. The Slytherin table hissed loudly as theypassed. Harry noticed that Malfoy looked even palerthan usual.

Wood spent the whole of breakfast urging his team toeat, while touching nothing himself. Then he hurriedthem off to the field before anyone else had finished,so they could get an idea of the conditions. As theyleft the Great Hall, everyone applauded again.

“Good luck, Harry!” called Cho. Harry felt himselfblushing.

“Okay — no wind to speak of— sun’s a bit bright,that could impair your vision, watch out for it —

ground’s fairly hard, good, that’ll give us a fast kickoff ??

Page | 339 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Wood paced the field, staring around with the teambehind him. Finally, they saw the front doors of thecastle open in the distance and the rest of the schoolspilling onto the lawn.

“Locker rooms,” said Wood tersely.

None of them spoke as they changed into their scarletrobes. Harry wondered if they were feeling like hewas: as though he’d eaten something extremelywriggly for breakfast. In what seemed like no time atall, Wood was saying, “Okay, it’s time, let’s go —”

They walked out onto the field to a tidal wave of noise.Three-quarters of the crowd was wearing scarletrosettes, waving scarlet flags with the Gryffindor lionupon them, or brandishing banners with slogans like“GO GRYFFINDOR!” and “LIONS FOR THE CUP!”Behind the Slytherin goal posts, however, twohundred people were wearing green; the silver serpentof Slytherin glittered on their flags, and ProfessorSnape sat in the very front row, wearing green likeeveryone else, and a very grim smile.

“And here are the Gryffindors!” yelled Lee Jordan,who was acting as commentator as usual. “Potter,

Bell, Johnson, Spinnet, Weasley, Weasley, and Wood.Widely acknowledged as the best team Hogwarts hasseen in a good few years —”

Lee’s comments were drowned by a tide of “boos” fromthe Slytherin end.

“And here come the Slytherin team, led by CaptainFlint. He’s made some changes in the lineup andseems to be going for size rather than skill —”

More boos from the Slytherin crowd. Harry, however,thought Lee had a point. Malfoy was easily the

Page | 340 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

smallest person on the Slytherin team; the rest ofthem were enormous.

“Captains, shake hands!” said Madam Hooch.

Flint and Wood approached each other and graspedeach other’s hand very tightly; it looked as thougheach was trying to break the other’s fingers.

“Mount your brooms!” said Madam Hooch. “Three ...two ... one ...”

The sound of her whistle was lost in the roar from thecrowd as fourteen brooms rose into the air. Harry felthis hair fly back off his forehead; his nerves left himin the thrill of the flight; he glanced around, sawMalfoy on his tail, and sped off in search of theSnitch.

“And it’s Gryffindor in possession, Alicia Spinnet ofGryffindor with the Quaffle, heading straight for theSlytherin goal posts, looking good, Alicia! Argh, no —Quaffle intercepted by Warrington, Warrington ofSlytherin tearing up the field — WHAM! — niceBludger work there by George Weasley, Warringtondrops the Quaffle, it’s caught by — Johnson,Gryffindor back in possession, come on, Angelina —nice swerve around Montague — duck, Angelina,that’s a Bludger] — SHE SCORES! TEN-ZERO TOGRYFFINDOR!”

Angelina punched the air as she soared around theend of the field; the sea of scarlet below wasscreaming its delight —

“OUCH!”

Angelina was nearly thrown from her broom asMarcus Flint went smashing into her.

Page | 341 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Sorry!” said Flint as the crowd below booed. “Sorry,didn’t see her!”

A moment later, Fred Weasley chucked his Beater’sclub at the back of Flint’s head. Flint’s nose smashedinto the handle of his broom and began to bleed.

“That will do!” shrieked Madam Hooch, zoomingbetween them. “Penalty shot to Gryffindor for anunprovoked attack on their Chaser! Penalty shot toSlytherin for deliberate damage to their Chaser!”

“Come off it, Miss!” howled Fred, but Madam Hoochblew her whistle and Alicia flew forward to take thepenalty.

“Come on, Alicia!” yelled Lee into the silence that haddescended on the crowd. “YES! SHE’S BEATEN THEKEEPER! TWENTY-ZERO TO GRYFFINDOR!”

Harry turned the Firebolt sharply to watch Flint, stillbleeding freely, fly forward to take the Slytherinpenalty. Wood was hovering in front of the Gryffindorgoal posts, his jaw clenched.

“ ’Course, Wood’s a superb Keeper!” Lee Jordan toldthe crowd as Flint waited for Madam Hooch’s whistle.“Superb! Very difficult to pass — very difficult indeed

— YES! I DONT BELIEVE IT! HE’S SAVED IT!”

Relieved, Harry zoomed away, gazing around for theSnitch, but still making sure he caught every word ofLee’s commentary. It was essential that he holdMalfoy off the Snitch until Gryffindor was more thanfifty points up —

“Gryffindor in possession, no, Slytherin in possession

— no! — Gryffindor back in possession and it’s Katie

Page | 342 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Bell, Katie Bell for Gryffindor with the Quaffle, she’sstreaking up the field — THAT WAS DELIBERATE!”

Montague, a Slytherin Chaser, had swerved in front ofKatie, and instead of seizing the Quaffle had grabbedher head. Katie cartwheeled in the air, managed tostay on her broom, but dropped the Quaffle.

Madam Hooch’s whistle rang out again as she soaredover to Montague and began shouting at him. Aminute later, Katie had put another penalty past theSlytherin Seeker.

“THIRTY-ZERO! TAKE THAT, YOU DIRTY, CHEATING

“Jordan, if you can’t commentate in an unbiased way

— !”

“I’m telling it like it is, Professor!”

Harry felt a huge jolt of excitement. He had seen theSnitch — it was shimmering at the foot of one of theGryffindor goal posts — but he mustn’t catch it yet —and if Malfoy saw it —

Faking a look of sudden concentration, Harry pulledhis Firebolt around and sped off toward the Slytherinend — it worked. Malfoy went haring after him,clearly thinking Harry had seen the Snitch there. ...

WHOOSH.

One of the Bludgers came streaking past Harry’s rightear, hit by the gigantic Slytherin Beater, Derrick.

Then again —

WHOOSH.

Page | 343 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The second Bludger grazed Harry’s elbow. The otherBeater, Bole, was closing in.

Harry had a fleeting glimpse of Bole and Derrickzooming toward him, clubs raised —

He turned the Firebolt upward at the last second, andBole and Derrick collided with a sickening crunch.

“Ha haaa!” yelled Lee Jordan as the Slytherin Beaterslurched away from each other, clutching their heads.“Too bad, boys! You’ll need to get up earlier than thatto beat a Firebolt! And it’s Gryffindor in possessionagain, as Johnson takes the Quaffle — Flint alongsideher — poke him in the eye, Angelina! — it was a joke,Professor, it was a joke — oh no — Flint inpossession, Flint flying toward the Gryffindor goalposts, come on now, Wood, save — !”

But Flint had scored; there was an eruption of cheersfrom the Slytherin end, and Lee swore so badly thatProfessor McGonagall tried to tug the magicalmegaphone away from him.

“Sorry, Professor, sorry! Won’t happen again! So,Gryffindor in the lead, thirty points to ten, andGryffindor in possession —”

It was turning into the dirtiest game Harry had everplayed in. Enraged that Gryffindor had taken such anearly lead, the Slytherins were rapidly resorting to anymeans to take the Quaffle. Bole hit Alicia with hisclub and tried to say he’d thought she was a Bludger.George Weasley elbowed Bole in the face inretaliation. Madam Hooch awarded both teamspenalties, and Wood pulled off another spectacularsave, making the score forty-ten to Gryffindor.

Page | 344 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The Snitch had disappeared again. Malfoy was stillkeeping close to Harry as he soared over the match,looking around for it — once Gryffindor was fiftypoints ahead —

Katie scored. Fifty-ten. Fred and George Weasley wereswooping around her, clubs raised, in case any of theSlytherins were thinking of revenge. Bole and Derricktook advantage of Fred’s and George’s absence to aimboth Bludgers at Wood; they caught him in thestomach, one after the other, and he rolled over in theair, clutching his broom, completely winded.

Madam Hooch was beside herself.

“YOU DO NOT ATTACK THE KEEPER UNLESS THEQUAFFLE IS WITHIN THE SCORING AREA!” sheshrieked at Bole and Derrick. “Gryffindor penalty!”

And Angelina scored. Sixty-ten. Moments later, FredWeasley pelted a Bludger at Warrington, knocking theQuaffle out of his hands; Alicia seized it and put itthrough the Slytherin goal — seventy-ten.

The Gryffindor crowd below was screaming itselfhoarse — Gryffindor was sixty points in the lead, andif Harry caught the Snitch now, the Cup was theirs.Harry could almost feel hundreds of eyes followinghim as he soared around the field, high above the restof the game, with Malfoy speeding along behind him.

And then he saw it. The Snitch was sparkling twentyfeet above him.

Harry put on a huge burst of speed; the wind wasroaring in his ears; he stretched out his hand, butsuddenly, the Firebolt was slowing down —

Page | 345 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Horrified, he looked around. Malfoy had thrownhimself forward, grabbed hold of the Firebolt’s tail,and was pulling it back.

“You —”

Harry was angry enough to hit Malfoy, but couldn’treach — Malfoy was panting with the effort of holdingonto the Firebolt, but his eyes were sparklingmaliciously. He had achieved what he’d wanted to do— the Snitch had disappeared again.

“Penalty! Penalty to Gryffindor! I’ve never seen suchtactics!” Madam Hooch screeched, shooting up towhere Malfoy was sliding back onto his Nimbus TwoThousand and One.

“YOU CHEATING SCUM!” Lee Jordan was howlinginto the megaphone, dancing out of ProfessorMcGonagall’s reach. “YOU FILTHY, CHEATING B —”

Professor McGonagall didn’t even bother to tell himoff. She was actually shaking her finger in Malfoy’sdirection, her hat had fallen off, and she too wasshouting furiously.

Alicia took Gryffindor’s penalty, but she was so angryshe missed by several feet. The Gryffindor team waslosing concentration and the Slytherins, delighted byMalfoy’s foul on Harry, were being spurred on togreater heights.

“Slytherin in possession, Slytherin heading for goal —Montague scores —” Lee groaned. “Seventy-twenty toGryffindor. ...”

Harry was now marking Malfoy so closely their kneeskept hitting each other. Harry wasn’t going to letMalfoy anywhere near the Snitch. ...

Page | 346 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Get out of it, Potter!” Malfoy yelled in frustration ashe tried to turn and found Harry blocking him.

“Angelina Johnson gets the Quaffle for Gryffindor,come on, Angelina, COME ON!”

Harry looked around. Every single Slytherin playerapart from Malfoy was streaking up the pitch towardAngelina, including the Slytherin Keeper — they wereall going to block her —

Harry wheeled the Firebolt around, bent so low hewas lying flat along the handle, and kicked it forward.Like a bullet, he shot toward the Slytherins.

“AAAAAAARRRGH! ”

They scattered as the Firebolt zoomed toward them;Angelina’s way was clear.

“SHE SCORES! SHE SCORES! Gryffindor leads byeighty points to twenty!”

Harry, who had almost pelted headlong into thestands, skidded to a halt in midair, reversed, andzoomed back into the middle of the field.

And then he saw something to make his heart standstill. Malfoy was diving, a look of triumph on his face— there, a few feet above the grass below, was a tiny,golden glimmer —

Harry urged the Firebolt downward, but Malfoy wasmiles ahead —

“Go! Go! Go!” Harry urged his broom. He was gainingon Malfoy — Harry flattened himself to the broomhandle as Bole sent a Bludger at him — he was atMalfoy’s ankles — he was level —

Page | 347 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry threw himself forward, took both hands off hisbroom. He knocked Malfoy’s arm out of the way and

“YES!”

He pulled out of his dive, his hand in the air, and thestadium exploded. Harry soared above the crowd, anodd ringing in his ears. The tiny golden ball was heldtight in his fist, beating its wings hopelessly againsthis fingers.

Then Wood was speeding toward him, half-blinded bytears; he seized Harry around the neck and sobbedunrestrainedly into his shoulder. Harry felt two largethumps as Fred and George hit them; thenAngelina’s, Alicia’s, and Katie’s voices, “We’ve won theCup\ We’ve won the Cup\” Tangled together in amany-armed hug, the Gryffindor team sank, yellinghoarsely, back to earth.

Wave upon wave of crimson supporters was pouringover the barriers onto the field. Hands were rainingdown on their backs. Harry had a confusedimpression of noise and bodies pressing in on him.Then he, and the rest of the team, were hoisted ontothe shoulders of the crowd. Thrust into the light, hesaw Hagrid, plastered with crimson rosettes — “Yehbeat ’em, Harry, yeh beat ’em! Wait till I tellBuckbeak!” There was Percy, jumping up and downlike a maniac, all dignity forgotten. ProfessorMcGonagall was sobbing harder even than Wood,wiping her eyes with an enormous Gryffindor flag;and there, fighting their way toward Harry, were Ronand Hermione. Words failed them. They simplybeamed as Harry was borne toward the stands, whereDumbledore stood waiting with the enormousQuidditch Cup.

Page | 348 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

If only there had been a dementor around. ... As asobbing Wood passed Harry the Cup, as he lifted itinto the air, Harry felt he could have produced theworld’s best Patronus.

Page | 349 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





PROFESSOR TRELAWNEY’SPREDICTION

Harry’s euphoria at finally winning the Quidditch Cuplasted at least a week. Even the weather seemed to becelebrating; as June approached, the days becamecloudless and sultry, and all anybody felt like doingwas strolling onto the grounds and flopping down onthe grass with several pints of iced pumpkin juice,perhaps playing a casual game of Gobstones orwatching the giant squid propel itself dreamily acrossthe surface of the lake.

But they couldn’t. Exams were nearly upon them, andinstead of lazing around outside, the students wereforced to remain inside the castle, trying to bully theirbrains into concentrating while enticing wafts ofsummer air drifted in through the windows. EvenFred and George Weasley had been spotted working;they were about to take their O.W.L.s (OrdinaryWizarding Levels). Percy was getting ready to take hisN.E.W.T.s (Nastily Exhausting Wizarding Tests), thehighest qualification Hogwarts offered. As Percy

Page | 350 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

hoped to enter the Ministry of Magic, he needed topgrades. He was becoming increasingly edgy, and gavevery severe punishments to anybody who disturbedthe quiet of the common room in the evenings. In fact,the only person who seemed more anxious than Percywas Hermione.

Harry and Ron had given up asking her how she wasmanaging to attend several classes at once, but theycouldn’t restrain themselves when they saw the examschedule she had drawn up for herself. The firstcolumn read:

Monday

9 o’clock, Arithmancy9 o’clock, TransfigurationLunch

1 o’clock, Charms1 o’clock, Ancient Runes

“Hermione?” Ron said cautiously, because she wasliable to explode when interrupted these days. “Er —are you sure you’ve copied down these times right?”

“What?” snapped Hermione, picking up the examschedule and examining it. “Yes, of course I have.”

“Is there any point asking how you’re going to sit fortwo exams at once?” said Harry.

“No,” said Hermione shortly. “Have either of you seenmy copy of Numerology and Gramatica?”

Page | 351 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, yeah, I borrowed it for a bit of bedtime reading,”said Ron, but very quietly. Hermione started shiftingheaps of parchment around on her table, looking forthe book. Just then, there was a rustle at the windowand Hedwig fluttered through it, a note clutched tightin her beak.

“It’s from Hagrid,” said Harry, ripping the note open.“Buckbeak’s appeal — it’s set for the sixth.”

“That’s the day we finish our exams,” said Hermione,still looking everywhere for her Arithmancy book.

“And they’re coming up here to do it,” said Harry, stillreading from the letter. “Someone from the Ministry ofMagic and — and an executioner.”

Hermione looked up, startled.

“They’re bringing the executioner to the appeal! Butthat sounds as though they’ve already decided!”

“Yeah, it does,” said Harry slowly.

“They can’t!” Ron howled. “I’ve spent ages reading upon stuff for him; they can’t just ignore it all!”

But Harry had a horrible feeling that the Committeefor the Disposal of Dangerous Creatures had had itsmind made up for it by Mr. Malfoy. Draco, who hadbeen noticeably subdued since Gryffindor’s triumphin the Quidditch final, seemed to regain some of hisold swagger over the next few days. From sneeringcomments Harry overheard, Malfoy was certainBuckbeak was going to be killed, and seemedthoroughly pleased with himself for bringing it about.It was all Harry could do to stop himself imitatingHermione and hitting Malfoy in the face on theseoccasions. And the worst thing of all was that theyPage | 352 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

had no time or opportunity to go and see Hagrid,because the strict new security measures had notbeen lifted, and Harry didn’t dare retrieve hisInvisibility Cloak from below the one-eyed witch.

k k k

Exam week began and an unnatural hush fell overthe castle. The third years emerged fromTransfiguration at lunchtime on Monday, limp andashen-faced, comparing results and bemoaning thedifficulty of the tasks they had been set, which hadincluded turning a teapot into a tortoise. Hermioneirritated the rest by fussing about how her tortoisehad looked more like a turtle, which was the least ofeveryone else’s worries.

“Mine still had a spout for a tail, what a nightmare.

“Were the tortoises supposed to breathe steam?”

“It still had a willow-patterned shell, d’you thinkthat 11 count against me?”

Then, after a hasty lunch, it was straight backupstairs for the Charms exam. Hermione had beenright; Professor Flitwick did indeed test them onCheering Charms. Harry slightly overdid his out ofnerves and Ron, who was partnering him, ended upin fits of hysterical laughter and had to be led away toa quiet room for an hour before he was ready toperform the charm himself. After dinner, the studentshurried back to their common rooms, not to relax,but to start studying for Care of Magical Creatures,Potions, and Astronomy.

Page | 353 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid presided over the Care of Magical Creaturesexam the following morning with a very preoccupiedair indeed; his heart didn’t seem to be in it at all. Hehad provided a large tub of fresh flobberworms for theclass, and told them that to pass the test, theirflobberworm had to still be alive at the end of onehour. As flobberworms flourished best if left to theirown devices, it was the easiest exam any of them hadever taken, and also gave Harry, Ron, and Hermioneplenty of opportunity to speak to Hagrid.

“Beaky’s gettin’ a bit depressed,” Hagrid told them,bending low on the pretense of checking that Harry’sflobberworm was still alive. “Bin cooped up too long.But still ... we’ll know day after tomorrow — one wayor the other —”

They had Potions that afternoon, which was anunqualified disaster. Try as Harry might, he couldn’tget his Confusing Concoction to thicken, and Snape,standing watch with an air of vindictive pleasure,scribbled something that looked suspiciously like azero onto his notes before moving away.

Then came Astronomy at midnight, up on the tallesttower; History of Magic on Wednesday morning, inwhich Harry scribbled everything Florean Fortescuehad ever told him about medieval witch-hunts, whilewishing he could have had one of Fortescue’s choco-nut sundaes with him in the stifling classroom.Wednesday afternoon meant Herbology, in thegreenhouses under a baking-hot sun; then back tothe common room once more, with sunburnt necks,thinking longingly of this time next day, when itwould all be over.

Their second to last exam, on Thursday morning, wasDefense Against the Dark Arts. Professor Lupin hadcompiled the most unusual exam any of them had

Page | 354 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

ever taken; a sort of obstacle course outside in thesun, where they had to wade across a deep paddlingpool containing a grindylow, cross a series of potholesfull of Red Caps, squish their way across a patch ofmarsh while ignoring misleading directions from ahinkypunk, then climb into an old trunk and battlewith a new boggart.

“Excellent, Harry,” Lupin muttered as Harry climbedout of the trunk, grinning. “Full marks.”

Flushed with his success, Harry hung around towatch Ron and Hermione. Ron did very well until hereached the hinkypunk, which successfully confusedhim into sinking waist-high into the quagmire.Hermione did everything perfectly until she reachedthe trunk with the boggart in it. After about a minuteinside it, she burst out again, screaming.

“Hermione!” said Lupin, startled. “What’s the matter?”

“P — P — Professor McGonagall!” Hermione gasped,pointing into the trunk. “Sh — she said I’d failedeverything!”

It took a little while to calm Hermione down. When atlast she had regained a grip on herself, she, Harry,and Ron went back to the castle. Ron was still slightlyinclined to laugh at Hermione’s boggart, but anargument was averted by the sight that met them onthe top of the steps.

Cornelius Fudge, sweating slightly in his pinstripedcloak, was standing there staring out at the grounds.He started at the sight of Harry.

“Hello there, Harry!” he said. “Just had an exam, Iexpect? Nearly finished?”

Page | 355 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Yes,” said Harry. Hermione and Ron, not being onspeaking terms with the Minister of Magic, hoveredawkwardly in the background.

“Lovely day,” said Fudge, casting an eye over the lake.“Pity ... pity ...”

He sighed deeply and looked down at Harry.

“I’m here on an unpleasant mission, Harry. TheCommittee for the Disposal of Dangerous Creaturesrequired a witness to the execution of a madhippogriff. As I needed to visit Hogwarts to check onthe Black situation, I was asked to step in.”

“Does that mean the appeal’s already happened?” Roninterrupted, stepping forward.

“No, no, it’s scheduled for this afternoon,” said Fudge,looking curiously at Ron.

“Then you might not have to witness an execution atall!” said Ron stoutly. “The hippogriff might get off!”

Before Fudge could answer, two wizards camethrough the castle doors behind him. One was soancient he appeared to be withering before their veryeyes; the other was tall and strapping, with a thinblack mustache. Harry gathered that they wererepresentatives of the Committee for the Disposal ofDangerous Creatures, because the very old wizardsquinted toward Hagrid’s cabin and said in a feeblevoice, “Dear, dear, I’m getting too old for this. ... Twoo’clock, isn’t it, Fudge?”

The black-mustached man was fingering something inhis belt; Harry looked and saw that he was runningone broad thumb along the blade of a shining axe.

Ron opened his mouth to say something, but

Page | 356 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione nudged him hard in the ribs and jerked herhead toward the entrance hall.

“Why’d you stop me?” said Ron angrily as theyentered the Great Hall for lunch. “Did you see them?They’ve even got the axe ready! This isn’t justice!”

“Ron, your dad works for the Ministry, you can’t gosaying things like that to his boss!” said Hermione,but she too looked very upset. “As long as Hagridkeeps his head this time, and argues his caseproperly, they can’t possibly execute Buckbeak. ...”

But Harry could tell Hermione didn’t really believewhat she was saying. All around them, people weretalking excitedly as they ate their lunch, happilyanticipating the end of the exams that afternoon, butHarry, Ron, and Hermione, lost in worry about Hagridand Buckbeak, didn’t join in.

Harry’s and Ron’s last exam was Divination;Hermione’s, Muggle Studies. They walked up themarble staircase together; Hermione left them on thefirst floor and Harry and Ron proceeded all the wayup to the seventh, where many of their class weresitting on the spiral staircase to Professor Trelawney’sclassroom, trying to cram in a bit of last-minutestudying.

“She’s seeing us all separately,” Neville informed themas they went to sit down next to him. He had his copyof Unfogging the Future open on his lap at the pagesdevoted to crystal gazing. “Have either of you everseen anything in a crystal ball?” he asked themunhappily.

“Nope,” said Ron in an offhand voice. He keptchecking his watch; Harry knew that he was countingdown the time until Buckbeak’s appeal started.

Page | 357 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The line of people outside the classroom shortenedvery slowly. As each person climbed back down thesilver ladder, the rest of the class hissed, “What didshe ask? Was it okay?”

But they all refused to say.

“She says the crystal ball’s told her that if I tell you,

I’ll have a horrible accident!” squeaked Neville as heclambered back down the ladder toward Harry andRon, who had now reached the landing.

“That’s convenient,” snorted Ron. “You know, I’mstarting to think Hermione was right about her” — hejabbed his thumb toward the trapdoor overhead —“she’s a right old fraud.”

“Yeah,” said Harry, looking at his own watch. It wasnow two o’clock. “Wish she’d hurry up ...”

Parvati came back down the ladder glowing withpride.

“She says I’ve got all the makings of a true Seer,” sheinformed Harry and Ron. “I saw loads of stuff. ... Well,good luck!”

She hurried off down the spiral staircase towardLavender.

“Ronald Weasley,” said the familiar, misty voice fromover their heads. Ron grimaced at Harry and climbedthe silver ladder out of sight. Harry was now the onlyperson left to be tested. He settled himself on the floorwith his back against the wall, listening to a flybuzzing in the sunny window, his mind across thegrounds with Hagrid.

Page | 358 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Finally, after about twenty minutes, Ron’s large feetreappeared on the ladder.

“How’d it go?” Harry asked him, standing up.

“Rubbish,” said Ron. “Couldn’t see a thing, so I madesome stuff up. Don’t think she was convinced,though. ...”

“Meet you in the common room,” Harry muttered asProfessor Trelawney’s voice called, “Harry Potter!”

The tower room was hotter than ever before; thecurtains were closed, the fire was alight, and theusual sickly scent made Harry cough as he stumbledthrough the clutter of chairs and tables to whereProfessor Trelawney sat waiting for him before a largecrystal ball.

“Good day, my dear,” she said softly. “If you wouldkindly gaze into the Orb. ... Take your time, now ...then tell me what you see within it. ...”

Harry bent over the crystal ball and stared, stared ashard as he could, willing it to show him somethingother than swirling white fog, but nothing happened.

“Well?” Professor Trelawney prompted delicately.“What do you see?”

The heat was overpowering and his nostrils werestinging with the perfumed smoke wafting from thefire beside them. He thought of what Ron had justsaid, and decided to pretend.

“Er —” said Harry, “a dark shape ... um ...”

“What does it resemble?” whispered ProfessorTrelawney. “Think, now ...”

Page | 359 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry cast his mind around and it landed onBuckbeak.

“A hippogriff,” he said firmly.

“Indeed!” whispered Professor Trelawney, scribblingkeenly on the parchment perched upon her knees.“My boy, you may well be seeing the outcome of poorHagrid’s trouble with the Ministry of Magic! Lookcloser. ... Does the hippogriff appear to ... have itshead?”

“Yes,” said Harry firmly.

“Are you sure?” Professor Trelawney urged him. “Areyou quite sure, dear? You don’t see it writhing on theground, perhaps, and a shadowy figure raising an axebehind it?”

“No!” said Harry, starting to feel slightly sick.

“No blood? No weeping Hagrid?”

“No!” said Harry again, wanting more than ever toleave the room and the heat. “It looks fine, it’s —flying away. ...”

Professor Trelawney sighed.

“Well, dear, I think we’ll leave it there. ... A littledisappointing ... but I’m sure you did your best.”

Relieved, Harry got up, picked up his bag and turnedto go, but then a loud, harsh voice spoke behind him.

“It will happen tonight.”

Page | 360 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry wheeled around. Professor Trelawney had gonerigid in her armchair; her eyes were unfocused andher mouth sagging.

“S — sorry?” said Harry.

But Professor Trelawney didn’t seem to hear him. Hereyes started to roll. Harry sat there in a panic. Shelooked as though she was about to have some sort ofseizure. He hesitated, thinking of running to thehospital wing — and then Professor Trelawney spokeagain, in the same harsh voice, quite unlike her own:

“The Dark Lord lies alone and friendless, abandonedby his followers. His servant has been chained thesetwelve years. Tonight, before midnight ... the servantwill break free and set out to rejoin his master. TheDark Lord will rise again with his servant’s aid,greater and more terrible than ever he was. Tonight ...before midnight ... the servant ... will set out ... torejoin ... his master. ...”

Professor Trelawney’s head fell forward onto herchest. She made a grunting sort of noise. Harry satthere, staring at her. Then, quite suddenly, ProfessorTrelawney’s head snapped up again.

“I’m so sorry, dear boy,” she said dreamily, “the heatof the day, you know ... I drifted off for a moment. ...”

Harry sat there, staring at her.

“Is there anything wrong, my dear?”

“You — you just told me that the — the Dark Lord’sgoing to rise again ... that his servant’s going to goback to him. ...”

Professor Trelawney looked thoroughly startled.

Page | 361 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“The Dark Lord? He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named? Mydear boy, that’s hardly something to joke about. ...Rise again, indeed —”

“But you just said it! You said the Dark Lord —”

“I think you must have dozed off too, dear!” saidProfessor Trelawney. “I would certainly not presumeto predict anything quite as far-fetched as that\”

Harry climbed back down the ladder and the spiralstaircase, wondering ... had he just heard ProfessorTrelawney make a real prediction? Or had that beenher idea of an impressive end to the test?

Five minutes later he was dashing past the securitytrolls outside the entrance to Gryffindor Tower,Professor Trelawney’s words still resounding in hishead. People were striding past him in the oppositedirection, laughing and joking, heading for thegrounds and a bit of long-awaited freedom; by thetime he had reached the portrait hole and entered thecommon room, it was almost deserted. Over in thecorner, however, sat Ron and Hermione.

“Professor Trelawney,” Harry panted, “just told me —”

But he stopped abruptly at the sight of their faces.

“Buckbeak lost,” said Ron weakly. “Hagrid’s just sentthis.”

Hagrid’s note was dry this time, no tears hadsplattered it, yet his hand seemed to have shaken somuch as he wrote that it was hardly legible.

Lost appeal. They’re going to execute at sunset

Nothing you can do. Don’t come down.

Page | 362 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

I don’t want you to see itHagrid

“We’ve got to go,” said Harry at once. “He can’t just sitthere on his own, waiting for the executioner!”

“Sunset, though,” said Ron, who was staring out thewindow in a glazed sort of way. “We’d never beallowed ... ’specially you, Harry. ...”

Harry sank his head into his hands, thinking.

“If we only had the Invisibility Cloak. ...”

“Where is it?” said Hermione.

Harry told her about leaving it in the passagewayunder the one-eyed witch.

"... if Snape sees me anywhere near there again, I’min serious trouble,” he finished.

“That’s true,” said Hermione, getting to her feet. “If hesees you. ... How do you open the witch’s humpagain?”

“You — you tap it and say, ‘Dissendium,’ ” said Harry.“But —”

Hermione didn’t wait for the rest of his sentence; shestrode across the room, pushed open the Fat Lady’sportrait and vanished from sight.

“She hasn’t gone to get it?” Ron said, staring afterher.

Page | 363 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

She had. Hermione returned a quarter of an hourlater with the silvery cloak folded carefully under herrobes.

“Hermione, I don’t know what’s gotten into youlately!” said Ron, astounded. “First you hit Malfoy,then you walk out on Professor Trelawney —”

Hermione looked rather flattered.

They went down to dinner with everybody else, butdid not return to Gryffindor Tower afterward. Harryhad the cloak hidden down the front of his robes; hehad to keep his arms folded to hide the lump. Theyskulked in an empty chamber off the entrance hall,listening, until they were sure it was deserted. Theyheard a last pair of people hurrying across the halland a door slamming. Hermione poked her headaround the door.

“Okay,” she whispered, “no one there — cloak on —”

Walking very close together so that nobody would seethem, they crossed the hall on tiptoe beneath thecloak, then walked down the stone front steps intothe grounds. The sun was already sinking behind theForbidden Forest, gilding the top branches of thetrees.

They reached Hagrid’s cabin and knocked. He was aminute in answering, and when he did, he looked allaround for his visitor, pale-faced and trembling.

“It’s us,” Harry hissed. “We’re wearing the InvisibilityCloak. Let us in and we can take it off.”

“Yeh shouldn’ve come!” Hagrid whispered, but hestood back, and they stepped inside. Hagrid shut thedoor quickly and Harry pulled off the cloak.

Page | 364 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid was not crying, nor did he throw himself upontheir necks. He looked like a man who did not knowwhere he was or what to do. This helplessness wasworse to watch than tears.

“Wan’ some tea?” he said. His great hands wereshaking as he reached for the kettle.

“Where’s Buckbeak, Hagrid?” said Hermionehesitantly.

“I — I took him outside,” said Hagrid, spilling milk allover the table as he filled up the jug. “He’s tethered inme pumpkin patch. Thought he oughta see the treesan’ — an’ smell fresh air — before —”

Hagrid’s hand trembled so violently that the milk jugslipped from his grasp and shattered all over thefloor.

“I’ll do it, Hagrid,” said Hermione quickly, hurryingover and starting to clean up the mess.

“There’s another one in the cupboard,” Hagrid said,sitting down and wiping his forehead on his sleeve.Harry glanced at Ron, who looked back hopelessly.

“Isn’t there anything anyone can do, Hagrid?” Harryasked fiercely, sitting down next to him. “Dumbledore

“He’s tried,” said Hagrid. “He’s got no power teroverrule the Committee. He told ’em Buckbeak’s allright, but they’re scared. ... Yeh know what LuciusMalfoy’s like ... threatened ’em, I expect ... an’ theexecutioner, Macnair, he’s an old pal o’ Malfoy’s ...but it’ll be quick an’ clean ... an’ I’ll be beside him. ...”

Page | 365 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hagrid swallowed. His eyes were darting all over thecabin as though looking for some shred of hope orcomfort.

“Dumbledore’s gonna come down while it — while ithappens. Wrote me this mornin’. Said he wants ter —ter be with me. Great man, Dumbledore. ...”

Hermione, who had been rummaging in Hagrid’scupboard for another milk jug, let out a small, quicklystifled sob. She straightened up with the new jug inher hands, fighting back tears.

“Well stay with you too, Hagrid,” she began, butHagrid shook his shaggy head.

“Yeh’re ter go back up ter the castle. I told yeh, I don’wan’ yeh watchin’. An’ yeh shouldn’ be down hereanyway. ... If Fudge an’ Dumbledore catch yeh outwithout permission, Harry, yehll be in big trouble.”

Silent tears were now streaming down Hermione’sface, but she hid them from Hagrid, bustling aroundmaking tea. Then, as she picked up the milk bottle topour some into the jug, she let out a shriek.

“Ron! I — I don’t believe it — it’s Scabbersl”

Ron gaped at her.

“What are you talking about?”

Hermione carried the milk jug over to the table andturned it upside down. With a frantic squeak, andmuch scrambling to get back inside, Scabbers the ratcame sliding out onto the table.

“Scabbers!” said Ron blankly. “Scabbers, what areyou doing here?”

Page | 366 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He grabbed the struggling rat and held him up to thelight. Scabbers looked dreadful. He was thinner thanever, large tufts of hair had fallen out leaving widebald patches, and he writhed in Ron’s hands asthough desperate to free himself.

“It’s okay, Scabbers!” said Ron. “No cats! There’snothing here to hurt you!”

Hagrid suddenly stood up, his eyes fixed on thewindow. His normally ruddy face had gone the colorof parchment.

“They’re cornin’. ...”

Harry, Ron, and Hermione whipped around. A groupof men was walking down the distant castle steps. Infront was Albus Dumbledore, his silver beardgleaming in the dying sun. Next to him trottedCornelius Fudge. Behind them came the feeble oldCommittee member and the executioner, Macnair.

“Yeh gotta go,” said Hagrid. Every inch of him wastrembling. “They mustn’ find yeh here. ... Go now. ...”

Ron stuffed Scabbers into his pocket and Hermionepicked up the cloak.

“I’ll let yeh out the back way,” said Hagrid.

They followed him to the door into his back garden.Harry felt strangely unreal, and even more so whenhe saw Buckbeak a few yards away, tethered to a treebehind Hagrid’s pumpkin patch. Buckbeak seemed toknow something was happening. He turned his sharphead from side to side and pawed the groundnervously.

Page | 367 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It’s okay, Beaky,” said Hagrid softly. “It’s okay ...” Heturned to Harry, Ron, and Hermione. “Go on,” hesaid. “Get goin’.”

But they didn’t move.

“Hagrid, we can’t —”

“Well tell them what really happened —”

“They can’t kill him —”

“Go!” said Hagrid fiercely. “It’s bad enough withoutyou lot in trouble an’ all!”

They had no choice. As Hermione threw the cloakover Harry and Ron, they heard voices at the front ofthe cabin. Hagrid looked at the place where they hadjust vanished from sight.

“Go quick,” he said hoarsely. “Don’ listen. ...”

And he strode back into his cabin as someoneknocked at the front door.

Slowly, in a kind of horrified trance, Harry, Ron, andHermione set off silently around Hagrid’s house. Asthey reached the other side, the front door closed witha sharp snap.

“Please, let’s hurry,” Hermione whispered. “I can’tstand it, I can’t bear it. ...”

They started up the sloping lawn toward the castle.The sun was sinking fast now; the sky had turned toa clear, purple-tinged grey, but to the west there wasa ruby-red glow.

Ron stopped dead.

Page | 368 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Oh, please, Ron,” Hermione began.

“It’s Scabbers — he won’t — stay put —”

Ron was bent over, trying to keep Scabbers in hispocket, but the rat was going berserk; squeakingmadly, twisting and flailing, trying to sink his teethinto Ron’s hand.

“Scabbers, it’s me, you idiot, it’s Ron,” Ron hissed.

They heard a door open behind them and men’svoices.

“Oh, Ron, please let’s move, they’re going to do it!”Hermione breathed.

“Okay — Scabbers, stay put —”

They walked forward; Harry, like Hermione, wastrying not to listen to the rumble of voices behindthem. Ron stopped again.

“I can’t hold him — Scabbers, shut up, everyone’llhear us —”

The rat was squealing wildly, but not loudly enoughto cover up the sounds drifting from Hagrid’s garden.There was a jumble of indistinct male voices, asilence, and then, without warning, the unmistakableswish and thud of an axe.

Hermione swayed on the spot.

“They did it!” she whispered to Harry. “I d — don’tbelieve it — they did it!”

Page | 369 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





CAT, RAT, AND DOG

Harry’s mind had gone blank with shock. The three ofthem stood transfixed with horror under theInvisibility Cloak. The very last rays of the setting sunwere casting a bloody light over the long-shadowedgrounds. Then, behind them, they heard a wildhowling.

“Hagrid,” Harry muttered. Without thinking aboutwhat he was doing, he made to turn back, but bothRon and Hermione seized his arms.

“We can’t,” said Ron, who was paper-white. “He’ll bein worse trouble if they know we’ve been to see him.

Hermione’s breathing was shallow and uneven.

“How — could — they?” she choked. “How couldthey?”

“Come on,” said Ron, whose teeth seemed to bechattering.

Page | 370 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

They set off back toward the castle, walking slowly tokeep themselves hidden under the cloak. The lightwas fading fast now. By the time they reached openground, darkness was settling like a spell aroundthem.

“Scabbers, keep still,” Ron hissed, clamping his handover his chest. The rat was wriggling madly. Roncame to a sudden halt, trying to force Scabbersdeeper into his pocket. “What’s the matter with you,you stupid rat? Stay still — OUCH! He bit me!”

“Ron, be quiet!” Hermione whispered urgently.“Fudge’ll be out here in a minute —”

“He won’t — stay — put —”

Scabbers was plainly terrified. He was writhing withall his might, trying to break free of Ron’s grip.

“What’s the matter with him?”

But Harry had just seen — slinking toward them, hisbody low to the ground, wide yellow eyes glintingeerily in the darkness — Crookshanks. Whether hecould see them or was following the sound ofScabbers’s squeaks, Harry couldn’t tell.

“Crookshanks!” Hermione moaned. “No, go away,Crookshanks! Go away!”

But the cat was getting nearer —

“Scabbers — NO!”

Too late — the rat had slipped between Ron’sclutching fingers, hit the ground, and scamperedaway. In one bound, Crookshanks sprang after him,and before Harry or Hermione could stop him, Ron

Page | 371 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

had thrown the Invisibility Cloak off himself andpelted away into the darkness.

“Ron\” Hermione moaned.

She and Harry looked at each other, then followed ata sprint; it was impossible to run full out under thecloak; they pulled it off and it streamed behind themlike a banner as they hurtled after Ron; they couldhear his feet thundering along ahead and his shoutsat Crookshanks.

“Get away from him — get away — Scabbers, comehere —”

There was a loud thud.

“Gotchal Get off, you stinking cat —”

Harry and Hermione almost fell over Ron; theyskidded to a stop right in front of him. He wassprawled on the ground, but Scabbers was back inhis pocket; he had both hands held tight over thequivering lump.

“Ron — come on — back under the cloak —”

Hermione panted. “Dumbledore — the Minister —they’ll be coming back out in a minute —”

But before they could cover themselves again, beforethey could even catch their breath, they heard thesoft pounding of gigantic paws. ... Something wasbounding toward them, quiet as a shadow — anenormous, pale-eyed, jet-black dog.

Harry reached for his wand, but too late — the doghad made an enormous leap and the front paws hithim on the chest; he keeled over backward in a whirlof hair; he felt its hot breath, saw inch-long teeth —

Page | 372 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

But the force of its leap had carried it too far; it rolledoff him. Dazed, feeling as though his ribs werebroken, Harry tried to stand up; he could hear itgrowling as it skidded around for a new attack.

Ron was on his feet. As the dog sprang back towardthem he pushed Harry aside; the dog’s jaws fastenedinstead around Ron’s outstretched arm. Harry lungedforward, he seized a handful of the brute’s hair, but itwas dragging Ron away as easily as though he were arag doll —

Then, out of nowhere, something hit Harry so hardacross the face he was knocked off his feet again. Heheard Hermione shriek with pain and fall too.

Harry groped for his wand, blinking blood out of hiseyes —

“Lumos\” he whispered.

The wandlight showed him the trunk of a thick tree;they had chased Scabbers into the shadow of theWhomping Willow and its branches were creaking asthough in a high wind, whipping backward andforward to stop them going nearer.

And there, at the base of the trunk, was the dog,dragging Ron backward into a large gap in the roots— Ron was fighting furiously, but his head and torsowere slipping out of sight —

“Ron!” Harry shouted, trying to follow, but a heavybranch whipped lethally through the air and he wasforced backward again.

All they could see now was one of Ron’s legs, whichhe had hooked around a root in an effort to stop thedog from pulling him farther underground — but a

Page | 373 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

horrible crack cut the air like a gunshot; Ron’s leghad broken, and a moment later, his foot vanishedfrom sight.

“Harry — we’ve got to go for help —” Hermionegasped; she was bleeding too; the Willow had cut heracross the shoulder.

“No! That thing’s big enough to eat him; we haven’tgot time —”

“Harry — we’re never going to get through withouthelp —”

Another branch whipped down at them, twigsclenched like knuckles.

“If that dog can get in, we can,” Harry panted, dartinghere and there, trying to find a way through thevicious, swishing branches, but he couldn’t get aninch nearer to the tree roots without being in range ofthe tree’s blows.

“Oh, help, help,” Hermione whispered frantically,dancing uncertainly on the spot, “please ...”

Crookshanks darted forward. He slithered betweenthe battering branches like a snake and placed hisfront paws upon a knot on the trunk.

Abruptly, as though the tree had been turned tomarble, it stopped moving. Not a leaf twitched orshook.

“Crookshanks!” Hermione whispered uncertainly. Shenow grasped Harry’s arm painfully hard. “How did heknow — ?”

Page | 374 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“He’s friends with that dog,” said Harry grimly. “I’veseen them together. Come on — and keep your wandout —”

They covered the distance to the trunk in seconds,but before they had reached the gap in the roots,Crookshanks had slid into it with a flick of hisbottlebrush tail. Harry went next; he crawled forward,headfirst, and slid down an earthy slope to thebottom of a very low tunnel. Crookshanks was a littleway along, his eyes flashing in the light from Harry’swand. Seconds later, Hermione slithered down besidehim.

“Where’s Ron?” she whispered in a terrified voice.

“This way,” said Harry, setting off, bent-backed, afterCrookshanks.

“Where does this tunnel come out?” Hermione askedbreathlessly from behind him.

“I don’t know. ... It’s marked on the Marauder’s Mapbut Fred and George said no one’s ever gotten into it....It goes off the edge of the map, but it looked like itwas heading for Hogsmeade. ...”

They moved as fast as they could, bent almost double;ahead of them, Crookshanks’s tail bobbed in and outof view. On and on went the passage; it felt at least aslong as the one to Honeydukes. ... All Harry couldthink of was Ron and what the enormous dog mightbe doing to him. ... He was drawing breath in sharp,painful gasps, running at a crouch. ...

And then the tunnel began to rise; moments later ittwisted, and Crookshanks had gone. Instead, Harrycould see a patch of dim light through a smallopening.

Page | 375 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He and Hermione paused, gasping for breath, edgingforward. Both raised their wands to see what laybeyond.

It was a room, a very disordered, dusty room. Paperwas peeling from the walls; there were stains all overthe floor; every piece of furniture was broken asthough somebody had smashed it. The windows wereall boarded up.

Harry glanced at Hermione, who looked veryfrightened but nodded.

Harry pulled himself out of the hole, staring around.The room was deserted, but a door to their right stoodopen, leading to a shadowy hallway. Hermionesuddenly grabbed Harry’s arm again. Her wide eyeswere traveling around the boarded windows.

“Harry,” she whispered, “I think we’re in the ShriekingShack.”

Harry looked around. His eyes fell on a wooden chairnear them. Large chunks had been torn out of it; oneof the legs had been ripped off entirely.

“Ghosts didn’t do that,” he said slowly.

At that moment, there was a creak overhead.Something had moved upstairs. Both of them lookedup at the ceiling. Hermione’s grip on Harry’s arm wasso tight he was losing feeling in his fingers. He raisedhis eyebrows at her; she nodded again and let go.

Quietly as they could, they crept out into the hall andup the crumbling staircase. Everything was coveredin a thick layer of dust except the floor, where a wideshiny stripe had been made by something beingdragged upstairs.

Page | 376 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

They reached the dark landing.

“Nox,” they whispered together, and the lights at theend of their wands went out. Only one door was open.As they crept toward it, they heard movement frombehind it; a low moan, and then a deep, loud purring.They exchanged a last look, a last nod.

Wand held tightly before him, Harry kicked the doorwide open.

On a magnificent four-poster bed with dusty hangingslay Crookshanks, purring loudly at the sight of them.On the floor beside him, clutching his leg, whichstuck out at a strange angle, was Ron.

Harry and Hermione dashed across to him.

“Ron — are you okay?”

“Where’s the dog?”

“Not a dog,” Ron moaned. His teeth were gritted withpain. “Harry, it’s a trap —”

“What —”

“He’s the dog ... he’s an Animagus. ...”

Ron was staring over Harry’s shoulder. Harry wheeledaround. With a snap, the man in the shadows closedthe door behind them.

A mass of filthy, matted hair hung to his elbows. Ifeyes hadn’t been shining out of the deep, darksockets, he might have been a corpse. The waxy skinwas stretched so tightly over the bones of his face, itlooked like a skull. His yellow teeth were bared in agrin. It was Sirius Black.

Page | 377 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“ExpelliarmusV’ he croaked, pointing Ron’s wand atthem.

Harry’s and Hermione’s wands shot out of theirhands, high in the air, and Black caught them. Thenhe took a step closer. His eyes were fixed on Harry.

“I thought you’d come and help your friend,” he saidhoarsely. His voice sounded as though he had longsince lost the habit of using it. “Your father wouldhave done the same for me. Brave of you, not to runfor a teacher. I’m grateful ... it will make everythingmuch easier. ...”

The taunt about his father rang in Harry’s ears asthough Black had bellowed it. A boiling hate eruptedin Harry’s chest, leaving no place for fear. For the firsttime in his life, he wanted his wand back in his hand,not to defend himself, but to attack ... to kill. Withoutknowing what he was doing, he started forward, butthere was a sudden movement on either side of himand two pairs of hands grabbed him and held himback. ... “No, Harry!” Hermione gasped in a petrifiedwhisper; Ron, however, spoke to Black.

“If you want to kill Harry, you’ll have to kill us too!”he said fiercely, though the effort of standing uprightwas draining him of still more color, and he swayedslightly as he spoke.

Something flickered in Black’s shadowed eyes.

“Lie down,” he said quietly to Ron. “You will damagethat leg even more.”

“Did you hear me?” Ron said weakly, though he wasclinging painfully to Harry to stay upright. “You’llhave to kill all three of us!”

Page | 378 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“There’ll be only one murder here tonight,” said Black,and his grin widened.

“Why’s that?” Harry spat, trying to wrench himselffree of Ron and Hermione. “Didn’t care last time, didyou? Didn’t mind slaughtering all those Muggles toget at Pettigrew. ... What’s the matter, gone soft inAzkaban?”

“Harry!” Hermione whimpered. “Be quiet!”

“HE KILLED MY MUM AND DAD!” Harry roared, andwith a huge effort he broke free of Hermione’s andRon’s restraint and lunged forward —

He had forgotten about magic — he had forgotten thathe was short and skinny and thirteen, whereas Blackwas a tall, full-grown man — all Harry knew was thathe wanted to hurt Black as badly as he could andthat he didn’t care how much he got hurt in return —

Perhaps it was the shock of Harry doing something sostupid, but Black didn’t raise the wands in time —one of Harry’s hands fastened over his wasted wrist,forcing the wand tips away; the knuckles of Harry’sother hand collided with the side of Black’s head andthey fell, backward, into the wall —

Hermione was screaming; Ron was yelling; there wasa blinding flash as the wands in Black’s hand sent ajet of sparks into the air that missed Harry’s face byinches; Harry felt the shrunken arm under his fingerstwisting madly, but he clung on, his other handpunching every part of Black it could find.

But Black’s free hand had found Harry’s throat —

“No,” he hissed, “I’ve waited too long —”

Page | 379 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The fingers tightened, Harry choked, his glassesaskew.

Then he saw Hermione’s foot swing out of nowhere.Black let go of Harry with a grunt of pain; Ron hadthrown himself on Black’s wand hand and Harryheard a faint clatter —

He fought free of the tangle of bodies and saw his ownwand rolling across the floor; he threw himself towardit but —

“Argh!”

Crookshanks had joined the fray; both sets of frontclaws had sunk themselves deep into Harry’s arm;Harry threw him off, but Crookshanks now dartedtoward Harry’s wand —

“NO YOU DONT!” roared Harry, and he aimed a kickat Crookshanks that made the cat leap aside,spitting; Harry snatched up his wand and turned —

“Get out of the way!” he shouted at Ron andHermione.

They didn’t need telling twice. Hermione, gasping forbreath, her lip bleeding, scrambled aside, snatchingup her and Ron’s wands. Ron crawled to the four-poster and collapsed onto it, panting, his white facenow tinged with green, both hands clutching hisbroken leg.

Black was sprawled at the bottom of the wall. His thinchest rose and fell rapidly as he watched Harrywalking slowly nearer, his wand pointing straight atBlack’s heart.

“Going to kill me, Harry?” he whispered.

Page | 380 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry stopped right above him, his wand still pointingat Black’s chest, looking down at him. A livid bruisewas rising around Black’s left eye and his nose wasbleeding.

“You killed my parents,” said Harry, his voice shakingslightly, but his wand hand quite steady.

Black stared up at him out of those sunken eyes.

“I don’t deny it,” he said very quietly. “But if you knewthe whole story.”

“The whole story?” Harry repeated, a furiouspounding in his ears. “You sold them to Voldemort.That’s all I need to know.”

“You’ve got to listen to me,” Black said, and there wasa note of urgency in his voice now. “You’ll regret it ifyou don’t. ... You don’t understand. ...”

“I understand a lot better than you think,” said Harry,and his voice shook more than ever. “You never heardher, did you? My mum ... trying to stop Voldemortkilling me ... and you did that ... you did it. ...”

Before either of them could say another word,something ginger streaked past Harry; Crookshanksleapt onto Black’s chest and settled himself there,right over Black’s heart. Black blinked and lookeddown at the cat.

“Get off,” he murmured, trying to push Crookshanksoff him.

But Crookshanks sank his claws into Black’s robesand wouldn’t shift. He turned his ugly, squashed faceto Harry and looked up at him with those great yelloweyes. To his right, Hermione gave a dry sob.

Page | 381 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry stared down at Black and Crookshanks, hisgrip tightening on the wand. So what if he had to killthe cat too? It was in league with Black. ... If it wasprepared to die, trying to protect Black, that wasn’tHarry’s business. ... If Black wanted to save it, thatonly proved he cared more for Crookshanks than forHarry’s parents. ...

Harry raised the wand. Now was the moment to do it.Now was the moment to avenge his mother andfather. He was going to kill Black. He had to killBlack. This was his chance. ...

The seconds lengthened. And still Harry stood frozenthere, wand poised, Black staring up at him,Crookshanks on his chest. Ron’s ragged breathingcame from near the bed; Hermione was quite silent.

And then came a new sound —

Muffled footsteps were echoing up through the floor— someone was moving downstairs.

“WE’RE UP HERE!” Hermione screamed suddenly.“WE’RE UP HERE — SIRIUS BLACK — QUICK!”

Black made a startled movement that almostdislodged Crookshanks; Harry gripped his wandconvulsively — Do it nouA said a voice in his head —but the footsteps were thundering up the stairs andHarry still hadn’t done it.

The door of the room burst open in a shower of redsparks and Harry wheeled around as Professor Lupincame hurtling into the room, his face bloodless, hiswand raised and ready. His eyes flickered over Ron,lying on the floor, over Hermione, cowering next to thedoor, to Harry, standing there with his wand covering

Page | 382 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Black, and then to Black himself, crumpled andbleeding at Harry’s feet.

“ExpelliarmusV’ Lupin shouted.

Harry’s wand flew once more out of his hand; so didthe two Hermione was holding. Lupin caught them alldeftly, then moved into the room, staring at Black,who still had Crookshanks lying protectively acrosshis chest.

Harry stood there, feeling suddenly empty. He hadn’tdone it. His nerve had failed him. Black was going tobe handed back to the dementors.

Then Lupin spoke, in a very tense voice.

“Where is he, Sirius?”

Harry looked quickly at Lupin. He didn’t understandwhat Lupin meant. Who was Lupin talking about? Heturned to look at Black again.

Black’s face was quite expressionless. For a fewseconds, he didn’t move at all. Then, very slowly, heraised his empty hand and pointed straight at Ron.Mystified, Harry glanced around at Ron, who lookedbewildered.

“But then ... ,” Lupin muttered, staring at Black sointently it seemed he was trying to read his mind, "...why hasn’t he shown himself before now? Unless” —Lupin’s eyes suddenly widened, as though he wasseeing something beyond Black, something none ofthe rest could see, “— unless he was the one ...unless you switched ... without telling me?”

Very slowly, his sunken gaze never leaving Lupin’sface, Black nodded.

Page | 383 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Professor,” Harry interrupted loudly, “what’s goingon — ?”

But he never finished the question, because what hesaw made his voice die in his throat. Lupin waslowering his wand, gazing fixedly at Black. TheProfessor walked to Black’s side, seized his hand,pulled him to his feet so that Crookshanks fell to thefloor, and embraced Black like a brother.

Harry felt as though the bottom had dropped out ofhis stomach.

“I DONT BELIEVE IT!” Hermione screamed.

Lupin let go of Black and turned to her. She hadraised herself off the floor and was pointing at Lupin,wild-eyed. “You — you —”

“Hermione —”

“ — you and him!”

“Hermione, calm down —”

“I didn’t tell anyone!” Hermione shrieked. “I’ve beencovering up for you —”

“Hermione, listen to me, please!” Lupin shouted. “Ican explain —”

Harry could feel himself shaking, not with fear, butwith a fresh wave of fury.

“I trusted you,” he shouted at Lupin, his voicewavering out of control, “and all the time you’ve beenhis friend!”

Page | 384 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You’re wrong,” said Lupin. “I haven’t been Sirius’sfriend, but I am now — Let me explain. ...”

“NO!” Hermione screamed. “Harry, don’t trust him,he’s been helping Black get into the castle, he wantsyou dead too — he’s a werewolf.”

There was a ringing silence. Everyone’s eyes were nowon Lupin, who looked remarkably calm, though ratherpale.

“Not at all up to your usual standard, Hermione,” hesaid. “Only one out of three, I’m afraid. I have notbeen helping Sirius get into the castle and I certainlydon’t want Harry dead. ...” An odd shiver passed overhis face. “But I won’t deny that I am a werewolf.”

Ron made a valiant effort to get up again but fell backwith a whimper of pain. Lupin made toward him,looking concerned, but Ron gasped,

“Get away from me, werewolf”

Lupin stopped dead. Then, with an obvious effort, heturned to Hermione and said, “How long have youknown?”

“Ages,” Hermione whispered. “Since I did ProfessorSnape’s essay. ...”

“He’ll be delighted,” said Lupin coolly. “He assignedthat essay hoping someone would realize what mysymptoms meant. ... Did you check the lunar chartand realize that I was always ill at the full moon? Ordid you realize that the boggart changed into themoon when it saw me?”

“Both,” Hermione said quietly.

Page | 385 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Lupin forced a laugh.

“You’re the cleverest witch of your age I’ve ever met,Hermione.”

“I’m not,” Hermione whispered. “If I’d been a bitcleverer, I’d have told everyone what you are!”

“But they already know,” said Lupin. “At least, thestaff do.”

“Dumbledore hired you when he knew you were awerewolf?” Ron gasped. “Is he mad?”

“Some of the staff thought so,” said Lupin. “He had towork very hard to convince certain teachers that I’mtrustworthy —”

“AND HE WAS WRONG!” Harry yelled. “YOU VE BEENHELPING HIM ALL THE TIME!” He was pointing atBlack, who suddenly crossed to the four-poster bedand sank onto it, his face hidden in one shakinghand. Crookshanks leapt up beside him and steppedonto his lap, purring. Ron edged away from both ofthem, dragging his leg.

“I have not been helping Sirius,” said Lupin. “If you’llgive me a chance, I’ll explain. Look —”

He separated Harry’s, Ron’s and Hermione’s wandsand threw each back to its owner; Harry caught his,stunned.

“There,” said Lupin, sticking his own wand back intohis belt. “You’re armed, we’re not. Now will youlisten?”

Harry didn’t know what to think. Was it a trick?

Page | 386 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“If you haven’t been helping him,” he said, with afurious glance at Black, “how did you know he washere?”

“The map,” said Lupin. “The Marauder’s Map. I was inmy office examining it —”

“You know how to work it?” Harry said suspiciously.

“Of course I know how to work it,” said Lupin, wavinghis hand impatiently. “I helped write it. I’m Moony —that was my friends’ nickname for me at school.”

“You wrote — ?”

“The important thing is, I was watching it carefullythis evening, because I had an idea that you, Ron,and Hermione might try and sneak out of the castle tovisit Hagrid before his hippogriff was executed. And Iwas right, wasn’t I?”

He had started to pace up and down, looking at them.Little patches of dust rose at his feet.

“You might have been wearing your father’s old cloak,Harry —”

“How d’you know about the cloak?”

“The number of times I saw James disappearingunder it... ,” said Lupin, waving an impatient handagain. “The point is, even if you’re wearing anInvisibility Cloak, you still show up on the Marauder’sMap. I watched you cross the grounds and enterHagrid’s hut. Twenty minutes later, you left Hagrid,and set off back toward the castle. But you were nowaccompanied by somebody else.”

“What?” said Harry. “No, we weren’t!”

Page | 387 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I couldn’t believe my eyes,” said Lupin, still pacing,and ignoring Harry’s interruption. “I thought the mapmust be malfunctioning. How could he be with you?”

“No one was with us!” said Harry.

“And then I saw another dot, moving fast toward you,labeled Sirius Black. ... I saw him collide with you; Iwatched as he pulled two of you into the WhompingWillow —”

“One of us!” Ron said angrily.

“No, Ron,” said Lupin. “Two of you.”

He had stopped his pacing, his eyes moving over Ron.

“Do you think I could have a look at the rat?” he saidevenly.

“What?” said Ron. “What’s Scabbers got to do withit?”

“Everything,” said Lupin. “Could I see him, please?”

Ron hesitated, then put a hand inside his robes.Scabbers emerged, thrashing desperately; Ron had toseize his long bald tail to stop him escaping.Crookshanks stood up on Black’s leg and made a softhissing noise.

Lupin moved closer to Ron. He seemed to be holdinghis breath as he gazed intently at Scabbers.

“What?” Ron said again, holding Scabbers close tohim, looking scared. “What’s my rat got to do withanything?”

“That’s not a rat,” croaked Sirius Black suddenly.

Page | 388 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“What d’you mean — of course he’s a rat —”

“No, he’s not,” said Lupin quietly. “He’s a wizard.”

“An Animagus,” said Black, “by the name of PeterPettigrew.”

Page | 389 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





MOONY, WORMTAIL, PADFOOT, AND

PRONGS

It took a few seconds for the absurdity of thisstatement to sink in. Then Ron voiced what Harrywas thinking.

“You’re both mental.”

“Ridiculous!” said Hermione faintly.

“Peter Pettigrew’s dead!” said Harry. “He killed himtwelve years ago!” He pointed at Black, whose facetwitched convulsively.

“I meant to,” he growled, his yellow teeth bared, “butlittle Peter got the better of me ... not this time,though!”

And Crookshanks was thrown to the floor as Blacklunged at Scabbers; Ron yelled with pain as Black’sweight fell on his broken leg.

Page | 390 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



“Sirius, NO!” Lupin yelled, launching himself forwardsand dragging Black away from Ron again, “WAIT! Youcan’t do it just like that — they need to understand —we’ve got to explain —”

“We can explain afterwards!” snarled Black, trying tothrow Lupin off. One hand was still clawing the air asit tried to reach Scabbers, who was squealing like apiglet, scratching Ron’s face and neck as he tried toescape.

“They’ve — got — a — right — to — know —everything!” Lupin panted, still trying to restrainBlack. “Ron’s kept him as a pet! There are parts of iteven I don’t understand! And Harry — you owe Harrythe truth, Sirius!”

Black stopped struggling, though his hollowed eyeswere still fixed on Scabbers, who was clamped tightlyunder Ron’s bitten, scratched, and bleeding hands.

“All right, then,” Black said, without taking his eyesoff the rat. “Tell them whatever you like. But make itquick, Remus. I want to commit the murder I wasimprisoned for. ...”

“You’re nutters, both of you,” said Ron shakily,looking round at Harry and Hermione for support.

“I’ve had enough of this. I’m off.”

He tried to heave himself up on his good leg, butLupin raised his wand again, pointing it at Scabbers.

“You’re going to hear me out, Ron,” he said quietly.“Just keep a tight hold on Peter while you listen.”

“HE’S NOT PETER, HE’S SCABBERS!” Ron yelled,trying to force the rat back into his front pocket, butScabbers was fighting too hard; Ron swayed and

Page | 391 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

overbalanced, and Harry caught him and pushed himback down to the bed. Then, ignoring Black, Harryturned to Lupin.

“There were witnesses who saw Pettigrew die,” hesaid. “A whole street full of them ...”

“They didn’t see what they thought they saw!” saidBlack savagely, still watching Scabbers struggling inRon’s hands.

“Everyone thought Sirius killed Peter,” said Lupin,nodding. “I believed it myself — until I saw the maptonight. Because the Marauder’s map never lies ...Peter’s alive. Ron’s holding him, Harry.”

Harry looked down at Ron, and as their eyes met,they agreed, silently: Black and Lupin were both outof their minds. Their story made no sense whatsoever.How could Scabbers be Peter Pettigrew? Azkabanmust have unhinged Black after all — but why wasLupin playing along with him?

Then Hermione spoke, in a trembling, would-be calmsort of voice, as though trying to will Professor Lupinto talk sensibly.

“But Professor Lupin ... Scabbers can’t be Pettigrew... it just can’t be true, you know it can’t ...”

“Why can’t it be true?” Lupin said calmly, as thoughthey were in class, and Hermione had simply spotteda problem in an experiment with grindylows.

“Because ... because people would know if PeterPettigrew had been an Animagus. We did Animagi inclass with Professor McGonagall. And I looked themup when I did my homework — the Ministry of Magickeeps tabs on witches and wizards who can becomePage | 392 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

animals; there’s a register showing what animal theybecome, and their markings and things ... and I wentand looked Professor McGonagall up on the register,and there have been only seven Animagi this century,and Pettigrew’s name wasn’t on the list —”

Harry had barely had time to marvel inwardly at theeffort Hermione put into her homework, when Lupinstarted to laugh. “Right again, Hermione!” he said.“But the Ministry never knew that there used to bethree unregistered Animagi running aroundHogwarts.”

“If you’re going to tell them the story, get a move on,Remus,” snarled Black, who was still watchingScabbers’s every desperate move. “I’ve waited twelveyears, I’m not going to wait much longer.”

“All right ... but you’ll need to help me, Sirius,” saidLupin, “I only know how it began ...”

Lupin broke off. There had been a loud creak behindhim. The bedroom door had opened of its own accord.All five of them stared at it. Then Lupin strode towardit and looked out into the landing.

“No one there ...”

“This place is haunted!” said Ron.

“It’s not,” said Lupin, still looking at the door in apuzzled way. “The Shrieking Shack was neverhaunted. ... The screams and howls the villagers usedto hear were made by me.”

He pushed his graying hair out of his eyes, thoughtfor a moment, then said, “That’s where all of thisstarts — with my becoming a werewolf. None of this

Page | 393 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

could have happened if I hadn’t been bitten ... and if Ihadn’t been so foolhardy. ...”

He looked sober and tired. Ron started to interrupt,but Hermione said, “Shh!” She was watching Lupinvery intently.

“I was a very small boy when I received the bite. Myparents tried everything, but in those days there wasno cure. The potion that Professor Snape has beenmaking for me is a very recent discovery. It makes mesafe, you see. As long as I take it in the weekpreceding the full moon, I keep my mind when Itransform. ... I am able to curl up in my office, aharmless wolf, and wait for the moon to wane again.

“Before the Wolfsbane Potion was discovered,however, I became a fully fledged monster once amonth. It seemed impossible that I would be able tocome to Hogwarts. Other parents weren’t likely towant their children exposed to me.

“But then Dumbledore became Headmaster, and hewas sympathetic. He said that as long as we tookcertain precautions, there was no reason I shouldn’tcome to school. ...” Lupin sighed, and looked directlyat Harry. “I told you, months ago, that the WhompingWillow was planted the year I came to Hogwarts. Thetruth is that it was planted because I came toHogwarts. This house” — Lupin looked miserablyaround the room, — “the tunnel that leads to it —they were built for my use. Once a month, I wassmuggled out of the castle, into this place, totransform. The tree was placed at the tunnel mouthto stop anyone coming across me while I wasdangerous.”

Harry couldn’t see where this story was going, but hewas listening raptly all the same. The only sound

Page | 394 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

apart from Lupin’s voice was Scabbers’s frightenedsqueaking.

“My transformations in those days were — wereterrible. It is very painful to turn into a werewolf. Iwas separated from humans to bite, so I bit andscratched myself instead. The villagers heard thenoise and the screaming and thought they werehearing particularly violent spirits. Dumbledoreencouraged the rumor. ... Even now, when the househas been silent for years, the villagers don’t dareapproach it. ...

“But apart from my transformations, I was happierthan I had ever been in my life. For the first time ever,I had friends, three great friends. Sirius Black ...

Peter Pettigrew ... and, of course, your father, Harry— James Potter.

“Now, my three friends could hardly fail to notice thatI disappeared once a month. I made up all sorts ofstories. I told them my mother was ill, and that I hadto go home to see her. ... I was terrified they woulddesert me the moment they found out what I was. Butof course, they, like you, Hermione, worked out thetruth. ...

“And they didn’t desert me at all. Instead, they didsomething for me that would make mytransformations not only bearable, but the best timesof my life. They became Animagi.”

“My dad too?” said Harry, astounded.

“Yes, indeed,” said Lupin. “It took them the best partof three years to work out how to do it. Your fatherand Sirius here were the cleverest students in theschool, and lucky they were, because the Animagustransformation can go horribly wrong — one reasonPage | 395 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

the Ministry keeps a close watch on those attemptingto do it. Peter needed all the help he could get fromJames and Sirius. Finally, in our fifth year, theymanaged it. They could each turn into a differentanimal at will.”

“But how did that help you?” said Hermione,sounding puzzled.

“They couldn’t keep me company as humans, so theykept me company as animals,” said Lupin. “Awerewolf is only a danger to people. They sneaked outof the castle every month under James’s InvisibilityCloak. They transformed ... Peter, as the smallest,could slip beneath the Willow’s attacking branchesand touch the knot that freezes it. They would thenslip down the tunnel and join me. Under theirinfluence, I became less dangerous. My body was stillwolfish, but my mind seemed to become less so whileI was with them.”

“Hurry up, Remus,” snarled Black, who was stillwatching Scabbers with a horrible sort of hunger onhis face.

“I’m getting there, Sirius, I’m getting there ... well,highly exciting possibilities were open to us now thatwe could all transform. Soon we were leaving theShrieking Shack and roaming the school grounds andthe village by night. Sirius and James transformedinto such large animals, they were able to keep awerewolf in check. I doubt whether any Hogwartsstudents ever found out more about the Hogwartsgrounds and Hogsmeade than we did. ... And that’show we came to write the Marauder’s Map, and sign itwith our nicknames. Sirius is Padfoot. Peter isWormtail. James was Prongs.”

Page | 396 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“What sort of animal — ?” Harry began, but Hermionecut him off.

“That was still really dangerous! Running around inthe dark with a werewolf! What if you’d given theothers the slip, and bitten somebody?”

“A thought that still haunts me,” said Lupin heavily.“And there were near misses, many of them. Welaughed about them afterwards. We were young,thoughtless — carried away with our own cleverness.”

“I sometimes felt guilty about betraying Dumbledore’strust, of course ... he had admitted me to Hogwartswhen no other headmaster would have done so, andhe had no idea I was breaking the rules he had setdown for my own and others’ safety. He never knew Ihad led three fellow students into becoming Animagiillegally. But I always managed to forget my guiltyfeelings every time we sat down to plan our nextmonth’s adventure. And I haven’t changed ...”

Lupin’s face had hardened, and there was self-disgustin his voice. “All this year, I have been battling withmyself, wondering whether I should tell Dumbledorethat Sirius was an Animagus. But I didn’t do it. Why?Because I was too cowardly. It would have meantadmitting that I’d betrayed his trust while I was atschool, admitting that I’d led others along with me ...and Dumbledore’s trust has meant everything to me.He let me into Hogwarts as a boy, and he gave me ajob when I have been shunned all my adult life,unable to find paid work because of what I am. Andso I convinced myself that Sirius was getting into theschool using dark arts he learned from Voldemort,that being an Animagus had nothing to do with it ...so, in a way, Snape’s been right about me all along.”

Page | 397 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Snape?” said Black harshly, taking his eyes offScabbers for the first time in minutes and looking upat Lupin. “What’s Snape got to do with it?”

“He’s here, Sirius,” said Lupin heavily. “He’s teachinghere as well.” He looked up at Harry, Ron, andHermione.

“Professor Snape was at school with us. He foughtvery hard against my appointment to the DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts job. He has been tellingDumbledore all year that I am not to be trusted. Hehas his reasons ... you see, Sirius here played a trickon him which nearly killed him, a trick whichinvolved me —”

Black made a derisive noise.

“It served him right,” he sneered. “Sneaking around,trying to find out what we were up to ... hoping hecould get us expelled. ...”

“Severus was very interested in where I went everymonth.” Lupin told Harry, Ron, and Hermione. “Wewere in the same year, you know, and we — er —didn’t like each other very much. He especiallydisliked James. Jealous, I think, of James’s talent onthe Quidditch field ... anyway Snape had seen mecrossing the grounds with Madam Pomfrey oneevening as she led me toward the Whomping Willowto transform. Sirius thought it would be — er —amusing, to tell Snape all he had to do was prod theknot on the tree trunk with a long stick, and he’d beable to get in after me. Well, of course, Snape tried it— if he’d got as far as this house, he’d have met afully grown werewolf— but your father, who’d heardwhat Sirius had done, went after Snape and pulledhim back, at great risk to his life ... Snape glimpsedme, though, at the end of the tunnel. He wasPage | 398 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

forbidden by Dumbledore to tell anybody, but fromthat time on he knew what I was. ...”

“So that’s why Snape doesn’t like you,” said Harryslowly, “because he thought you were in on the joke?”

“That’s right,” sneered a cold voice from the wallbehind Lupin.

Severus Snape was pulling off the Invisibility Cloak,his wand pointing directly at Lupin.

Page | 399 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



THE SERVANT OF LORDVOLDERMORT

Hermione screamed. Black leapt to his feet. Harry feltas though he’d received a huge electric shock.

“I found this at the base of the Whomping Willow,”said Snape, throwing the cloak aside, careful to keepthis wand pointing directly at Lupin’s chest. “Veryuseful, Potter, I thank you. ...”

Snape was slightly breathless, but his face was full ofsuppressed triumph. “You’re wondering, perhaps,how I knew you were here?” he said, his eyesglittering. “I’ve just been to your office, Lupin. Youforgot to take your potion tonight, so I took a gobletfulalong. And very lucky I did ... lucky for me, I mean.Lying on your desk was a certain map. One glance atit told me all I needed to know. I saw you runningalong this passageway and out of sight.”

“Severus —” Lupin began, but Snape overrode him.

Page | 400 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I’ve told the headmaster again and again that you’rehelping your old friend Black into the castle, Lupin,and here’s the proof. Not even I dreamed you wouldhave the nerve to use this old place as your hideout

“Severus, you’re making a mistake,” said Lupinurgently. “You haven’t heard everything — I canexplain — Sirius is not here to kill Harry —”

“Two more for Azkaban tonight,” said Snape, his eyesnow gleaming fanatically. “I shall be interested to seehow Dumbledore takes this. ... He was quiteconvinced you were harmless, you know, Lupin ... atame werewolf —”

“You fool,” said Lupin softly. “Is a schoolboy grudgeworth putting an innocent man back insideAzkaban?”

BANG! Thin, snakelike cords burst from the end ofSnape’s wand and twisted themselves around Lupin’smouth, wrists, and ankles; he overbalanced and fellto the floor, unable to move. With a roar of rage,

Black started toward Snape, but Snape pointed hiswand straight between Black’s eyes.

“Give me a reason,” he whispered. “Give me a reasonto do it, and I swear I will.”

Black stopped dead. It would have been impossible tosay which face showed more hatred.

Harry stood there, paralyzed, not knowing what to door whom to believe. He glanced around at Ron andHermione. Ron looked just as confused as he did, stillfighting to keep hold on the struggling Scabbers.Hermione, however, took an uncertain step towardSnape and said, in a very breathless voice, “ProfessorPage | 401 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Snape — it — it wouldn’t hurt to hear what they’vegot to say, w — would it?”

“Miss Granger, you are already facing suspensionfrom this school,” Snape spat. “You, Potter, andWeasley are out-of-bounds, in the company of aconvicted murderer and a werewolf. For once in yourlife, hold your tongue.”

“But if — if there was a mistake —”

“KEEP QUIET, YOU STUPID GIRL!” Snape shouted,looking suddenly quite deranged. “DONT TALKABOUT WHAT YOU DONT UNDERSTAND!” A fewsparks shot out of the end of his wand, which wasstill pointed at Black’s face. Hermione fell silent.

“Vengeance is very sweet,” Snape breathed at Black.“How I hoped I would be the one to catch you. ...”

“The joke’s on you again, Severus,” Black snarled. “Aslong as this boy brings his rat up to the castle” — hejerked his head at Ron — “I’ll come quietly. ...”

“Up to the castle?” said Snape silkily. “I don’t thinkwe need to go that far. All I have to do is call thedementors once we get out of the Willow. They’ll bevery pleased to see you, Black ... pleased enough togive you a little kiss, I daresay. ...”

What little color there was in Black’s face left it.

“You — you’ve got to hear me out,” he croaked. “Therat — look at the rat —”

But there was a mad glint in Snape’s eyes that Harryhad never seen before. He seemed beyond reason.

Page | 402 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Come on, all of you,” he said. He clicked his fingers,and the ends of the cords that bound Lupin flew tohis hands. “Ill drag the werewolf. Perhaps thedementors will have a kiss for him too —”

Before he knew what he was doing, Harry had crossedthe room in three strides and blocked the door.

“Get out of the way, Potter, you’re in enough troublealready,” snarled Snape. “If I hadn’t been here to saveyour skin —”

“Professor Lupin could have killed me about ahundred times this year,” Harry said. “I’ve been alonewith him loads of times, having defense lessonsagainst the dementors. If he was helping Black, whydidn’t he just finish me off then?”

“Don’t ask me to fathom the way a werewolf’s mindworks,” hissed Snape. “Get out of the way, Potter.”

“YOU’RE PATHETIC!” Harry yelled. “JUST BECAUSETHEY MADE A FOOL OF YOU AT SCHOOL YOUWONT EVEN LISTEN —”

“SILENCE! I WILL NOT BE SPOKEN TO LIKE THAT!”Snape shrieked, looking madder than ever. “Likefather, like son, Potter! I have just saved your neck;you should be thanking me on bended knee! Youwould have been well served if he’d killed you! You’dhave died like your father, too arrogant to believe youmight be mistaken in Black — now get out of the way,or I will make you. GET OUT OF THE WAY, POTTER!”

Harry made up his mind in a split second. BeforeSnape could take even one step toward him, he hadraised his wand.

Page | 403 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Expelliarmus\” he yelled — except that his wasn’t theonly voice that shouted. There was a blast that madethe door rattle on its hinges; Snape was lifted off hisfeet and slammed into the wall, then slid down it tothe floor, a trickle of blood oozing from under his hair.He had been knocked out.

Harry looked around. Both Ron and Hermione hadtried to disarm Snape at exactly the same moment.Snape’s wand soared in a high arc and landed on thebed next to Crookshanks.

“You shouldn’t have done that,” said Black, looking atHarry. “You should have left him to me. ...”

Harry avoided Black’s eyes. He wasn’t sure, even now,that he’d done the right thing.

“We attacked a teacher. ... We attacked a teacher ... ,”Hermione whimpered, staring at the lifeless Snapewith frightened eyes. “Oh, we’re going to be in somuch trouble —”

Lupin was struggling against his bonds. Black bentdown quickly and untied him. Lupin straightened up,rubbing his arms where the ropes had cut into them.

“Thank you, Harry,” he said.

“I’m still not saying I believe you,” he told Lupin.

“Then it’s time we offered you some proof,” saidLupin. “You, boy — give me Peter, please. Now.”

Ron clutched Scabbers closer to his chest.

“Come off it,” he said weakly. “Are you trying to sayhe broke out of Azkaban just to get his hands onScabbers? I mean ...” He looked up at Harry and

Page | 404 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione for support, “Okay, say Pettigrew couldturn into a rat — there are millions of rats — how’s hesupposed to know which one he’s after if he waslocked up in Azkaban?”

“You know, Sirius, that’s a fair question,” said Lupin,turning to Black and frowning slightly. “How did youfind out where he was?”

Black put one of his clawlike hands inside his robesand took out a crumpled piece of paper, which hesmoothed flat and held out to show the others.

It was the photograph of Ron and his family that hadappeared in the Daily Prophet the previous summer,and there, on Ron’s shoulder, was Scabbers.

“How did you get this?” Lupin asked Black,thunderstruck.

“Fudge,” said Black. “When he came to inspectAzkaban last year, he gave me his paper. And therewas Peter, on the front page ... on this boy’s shoulder.... I knew him at once ... how many times had I seenhim transform? And the caption said the boy wouldbe going back to Hogwarts ... to where Harry was. ...”

“My God,” said Lupin softly, staring from Scabbers tothe picture in the paper and back again. “His frontpaw ...”

“What about it?” said Ron defiantly.

“He’s got a toe missing,” said Black.

“Of course,” Lupin breathed. “So simple ... so brilliant... he cut it off himself?”

Page | 405 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Just before he transformed,” said Black. “When Icornered him, he yelled for the whole street to hearthat I’d betrayed Lily and James. Then, before I couldcurse him, he blew apart the street with the wandbehind his back, killed everyone within twenty feet ofhimself — and sped down into the sewer with theother rats. ...”

“Didn’t you ever hear, Ron?” said Lupin. “The biggestbit of Peter they found was his finger.”

“Look, Scabbers probably had a fight with another rator something! He’s been in my family for ages, right —

“Twelve years, in fact,” said Lupin. “Didn’t you everwonder why he was living so long?”

“We — we’ve been taking good care of him!” said Ron.

“Not looking too good at the moment, though, is he?”said Lupin. “I’d guess he’s been losing weight eversince he heard Sirius was on the loose again. ...”

“He’s been scared of that mad cat!” said Ron, noddingtoward Crookshanks, who was still purring on thebed.

But that wasn’t right, Harry thought suddenly. ...Scabbers had been looking ill before he metCrookshanks ... ever since Ron’s return from Egypt ...since the time when Black had escaped. ...

“This cat isn’t mad,” said Black hoarsely. He reachedout a bony hand and stroked Crookshanks’s fluffyhead. “He’s the most intelligent of his kind I’ve evermet. He recognized Peter for what he was right away.And when he met me, he knew I was no dog. It was awhile before he trusted me. ... Finally, I managed toPage | 406 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

communicate to him what I was after, and he’s beenhelping me. ...”

“What do you mean?” breathed Hermione.

“He tried to bring Peter to me, but couldn’t ... so hestole the passwords into Gryffindor Tower for me. ...

As I understand it, he took them from a boy’s bedsidetable. ...”

Harry’s brain seemed to be sagging under the weightof what he was hearing. It was absurd ... and yet ...

“But Peter got wind of what was going on and ran forit. ...” croaked Black. “This cat — Crookshanks, didyou call him? — told me Peter had left blood on thesheets. ... I supposed he bit himself. ... Well, fakinghis own death had worked once. ...”

These words jolted Harry to his senses.

“And why did he fake his death?” he said furiously.“Because he knew you were about to kill him like youkilled my parents!”

“No,” said Lupin, “Harry —”

“And now you’ve come to finish him off!”

“Yes, I have,” said Black, with an evil look atScabbers.

“Then I should’ve let Snape take you!” Harry shouted.

“Harry,” said Lupin hurriedly, “don’t you see? All thistime we’ve thought Sirius betrayed your parents, andPeter tracked him down — but it was the other wayaround, don’t you see? Peter betrayed your motherand father — Sirius tracked Peter down —”

Page | 407 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“THAT’S NOT TRUE!” Harry yelled. “HE WAS THEIRSECRET-KEEPER! HE SAID SO BEFORE YOUTURNED UP. HE SAID HE KILLED THEM!”

He was pointing at Black, who shook his head slowly;the sunken eyes were suddenly overbright.

“Harry ... I as good as killed them,” he croaked. “Ipersuaded Lily and James to change to Peter at thelast moment, persuaded them to use him as Secret-Keeper instead of me. ... I’m to blame, I know it. ...The night they died, I’d arranged to check on Peter,make sure he was still safe, but when I arrived at hishiding place, he’d gone. Yet there was no sign of astruggle. It didn’t feel right. I was scared. I set out foryour parents’ house straight away. And when I sawtheir house, destroyed, and their bodies ... I realizedwhat Peter must’ve done ... what I’d done. ...”

His voice broke. He turned away.

“Enough of this,” said Lupin, and there was a steelynote in his voice Harry had never heard before.“There’s one certain way to prove what reallyhappened. Ron, give me that rat”

“What are you going to do with him if I give him toyou?” Ron asked Lupin tensely.

“Force him to show himself,” said Lupin. “If he reallyis a rat, it won’t hurt him.”

Ron hesitated. Then at long last, he held outScabbers and Lupin took him. Scabbers began tosqueak without stopping, twisting and turning, histiny black eyes bulging in his head.

“Ready, Sirius?” said Lupin.

Page | 408 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Black had already retrieved Snape’s wand from thebed. He approached Lupin and the struggling rat, andhis wet eyes suddenly seemed to be burning in hisface.

“Together?” he said quietly.

“I think so,” said Lupin, holding Scabbers tightly inone hand and his wand in the other. “On the count ofthree. One — two — THREE!”

A flash of blue-white light erupted from both wands;for a moment, Scabbers was frozen in midair, hissmall gray form twisting madly — Ron yelled — therat fell and hit the floor. There was another blindingflash of light and then —

It was like watching a speeded-up film of a growingtree. A head was shooting upward from the ground;limbs were sprouting; a moment later, a man wasstanding where Scabbers had been, cringing andwringing his hands. Crookshanks was spitting andsnarling on the bed; the hair on his back wasstanding up.

He was a very short man, hardly taller than Harryand Hermione. His thin, colorless hair was unkemptand there was a large bald patch on top. He had theshrunken appearance of a plump man who has lost alot of weight in a short time. His skin looked grubby,almost like Scabbers’s fur, and something of the ratlingered around his pointed nose and his very small,watery eyes. He looked around at them all, hisbreathing fast and shallow. Harry saw his eyes dart tothe door and back again.

“Well, hello, Peter,” said Lupin pleasantly, as thoughrats frequently erupted into old school friends aroundhim. “Long time, no see.”

Page | 409 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“S — Sirius ... R — Remus ...” Even Pettigrew’s voicewas squeaky. Again, his eyes darted toward the door.“My friends ... my old friends ...”

Black’s wand arm rose, but Lupin seized him aroundthe wrist, gave him a warning look, then turned againto Pettigrew, his voice light and casual.

“We’ve been having a little chat, Peter, about whathappened the night Lily and James died. You mighthave missed the finer points while you weresqueaking around down there on the bed —”

“Remus,” gasped Pettigrew, and Harry could seebeads of sweat breaking out over his pasty face, “youdon’t believe him, do you... ? He tried to kill me,Remus. ...”

“So we’ve heard,” said Lupin, more coldly. “I’d like toclear up one or two little matters with you, Peter, ifyou’d be so —”

“He’s come to try and kill me again!” Pettigrewsqueaked suddenly, pointing at Black, and Harry sawthat he used his middle finger, because his index wasmissing. “He killed Lily and James and now he’s goingto kill me too. ... You’ve got to help me, Remus. ...”

Black’s face looked more skull-like than ever as hestared at Pettigrew with his fathomless eyes.

“No one’s going to try and kill you until we’ve sorted afew things out,” said Lupin.

“Sorted things out?” squealed Pettigrew, lookingwildly about him once more, eyes taking in theboarded windows and, again, the only door. “I knewhe’d come after me! I knew he’d be back for me! I’vebeen waiting for this for twelve years!”

Page | 410 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You knew Sirius was going to break out of Azkaban?”said Lupin, his brow furrowed. “When nobody hasever done it before?”

“He’s got dark powers the rest of us can only dreamof!” Pettigrew shouted shrilly. “How else did he get outof there? I suppose He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Namedtaught him a few tricks!”

Black started to laugh, a horrible, mirthless laughthat filled the whole room.

“Voldemort, teach me tricks?” he said.

Pettigrew flinched as though Black had brandished awhip at him.

“What, scared to hear your old master’s name?” saidBlack. “I don’t blame you, Peter. His lot aren’t veryhappy with you, are they?”

“Don’t know what you mean, Sirius —” mutteredPettigrew, his breathing faster than ever. His wholeface was shining with sweat now.

“You haven’t been hiding from me for twelve years,”said Black. “You’ve been hiding from Voldemort’s oldsupporters. I heard things in Azkaban, Peter. ... Theyall think you’re dead, or you’d have to answer tothem. ... I’ve heard them screaming all sorts of thingsin their sleep. Sounds like they think the double-crosser double-crossed them. Voldemort went to thePotters’ on your information ... and Voldemort met hisdownfall there. And not all Voldemort’s supportersended up in Azkaban, did they? There are still plentyout here, biding their time, pretending they’ve seenthe error of their ways. ... If they ever got wind thatyou were still alive, Peter —”

Page | 411 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Don’t know ... what you’re talking about... saidPettigrew again, more shrilly than ever. He wiped hisface on his sleeve and looked up at Lupin. “You don’tbelieve this — this madness, Remus —”

“I must admit, Peter, I have difficulty inunderstanding why an innocent man would want tospend twelve years as a rat,” said Lupin evenly.

“Innocent, but scared!” squealed Pettigrew. “IfVoldemort’s supporters were after me, it was becauseI put one of their best men in Azkaban — the spy,Sirius Black!”

Black’s face contorted.

“How dare you,” he growled, sounding suddenly likethe bear-sized dog he had been. “I, a spy forVoldemort? When did I ever sneak around people whowere stronger and more powerful than myself? Butyou, Peter — I’ll never understand why I didn’t seeyou were the spy from the start. You always liked bigfriends who’d look after you, didn’t you? It used to beus ... me and Remus ... and James. ...”

Pettigrew wiped his face again; he was almost pantingfor breath.

“Me, a spy ... must be out of your mind ... never ...don’t know how you can say such a —”

“Lily and James only made you Secret-Keeperbecause I suggested it,” Black hissed, so venomouslythat Pettigrew took a step backward. “I thought it wasthe perfect plan ... a bluff. ... Voldemort would besure to come after me, would never dream they’d usea weak, talentless thing like you. ... It must have beenthe finest moment of your miserable life, tellingVoldemort you could hand him the Potters.”

Page | 412 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Pettigrew was muttering distractedly; Harry caughtwords like “far-fetched” and “lunacy,” but he couldn’thelp paying more attention to the ashen color ofPettigrew’s face and the way his eyes continued todart toward the windows and door.

“Professor Lupin?” said Hermione timidly. “Can — canI say something?”

“Certainly, Hermione,” said Lupin courteously.

“Well — Scabbers — I mean, this — this man — he’sbeen sleeping in Harry’s dormitory for three years. Ifhe’s working for You-Know-Who, how come he nevertried to hurt Harry before now?”

“There!” said Pettigrew shrilly, pointing at Ron withhis maimed hand. “Thank you! You see, Remus? Ihave never hurt a hair of Harry’s head! Why shouldI?”

“I’ll tell you why,” said Black. “Because you never didanything for anyone unless you could see what was init for you. Voldemort’s been in hiding for fifteen years,they say he’s half dead. You weren’t about to commitmurder right under Albus Dumbledore’s nose, for awreck of a wizard who’d lost all of his power, wereyou? You’d want to be quite sure he was the biggestbully in the playground before you went back to him,wouldn’t you? Why else did you find a wizard familyto take you in? Keeping an ear out for news, weren’tyou, Peter? Just in case your old protector regainedstrength, and it was safe to rejoin him. ...”

Pettigrew opened his mouth and closed it severaltimes. He seemed to have lost the ability to talk.

“Er — Mr. Black — Sirius?” said Hermione.

Page | 413 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Black jumped at being addressed like this and staredat Hermione as though he had never seen anythingquite like her.

“If you don’t mind me asking, how — how did you getout of Azkaban, if you didn’t use Dark Magic?”

“Thank you!” gasped Pettigrew, nodding frantically ather. “Exactly! Precisely what I —”

But Lupin silenced him with a look. Black wasfrowning slightly at Hermione, but not as though hewere annoyed with her. He seemed to be ponderinghis answer.

“I don’t know how I did it,” he said slowly. “I think theonly reason I never lost my mind is that I knew I wasinnocent. That wasn’t a happy thought, so thedementors couldn’t suck it out of me ... but it kept mesane and knowing who I am ... helped me keep mypowers ... so when it all became ... too much ... Icould transform in my cell ... become a dog.Dementors can’t see, you know. ...” He swallowed.“They feel their way toward people by feeding off theiremotions. ... They could tell that my feelings were less— less human, less complex when I was a dog ... butthey thought, of course, that I was losing my mindlike everyone else in there, so it didn’t trouble them.But I was weak, very weak, and I had no hope ofdriving them away from me without a wand. ...

“But then I saw Peter in that picture ... I realized hewas at Hogwarts with Harry ... perfectly positioned toact, if one hint reached his ears that the Dark Sidewas gathering strength again. ...”

Pettigrew was shaking his head, mouthingnoiselessly, but staring all the while at Black asthough hypnotized.

Page | 414 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

"... ready to strike at the moment he could be sure ofallies ... and to deliver the last Potter to them. If hegave them Harry, who’d dare say he’d betrayed LordVoldemort? He’d be welcomed back with honors. ...

“So you see, I had to do something. I was the only onewho knew Peter was still alive. ...”

Harry remembered what Mr. Weasley had told Mrs.Weasley. “The guards say he’s been talking in hissleep ... always the same words ... ‘He’s at Hog warts.’

“It was as if someone had lit a fire in my head, andthe dementors couldn’t destroy it. ... It wasn’t ahappy feeling ... it was an obsession ... but it gave mestrength, it cleared my mind. So, one night when theyopened my door to bring food, I slipped past them asa dog. ... It’s so much harder for them to senseanimal emotions that they were confused. ... I wasthin, very thin ... thin enough to slip through thebars. ... I swam as a dog back to the mainland. ... Ijourneyed north and slipped into the Hogwartsgrounds as a dog. I’ve been living in the forest eversince, except when I came to watch the Quidditch, ofcourse. You fly as well as your father did, Harry. ...”

He looked at Harry, who did not look away.

“Believe me,” croaked Black. “Believe me, Harry. Inever betrayed James and Lily. I would have diedbefore I betrayed them.”

And at long last, Harry believed him. Throat too tightto speak, he nodded.

“No!”

Page | 415 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Pettigrew had fallen to his knees as though Harry’snod had been his own death sentence. He shuffledforward on his knees, groveling, his hands clasped infront of him as though praying.

“Sirius — it’s me ... it’s Peter ... your friend ... youwouldn’t ...”

Black kicked out and Pettigrew recoiled.

“There’s enough filth on my robes without youtouching them,” said Black.

“Remus!” Pettigrew squeaked, turning to Lupininstead, writhing imploringly in front of him. “Youdon’t believe this ... wouldn’t Sirius have told youthey’d changed the plan?”

“Not if he thought I was the spy, Peter,” said Lupin. “Iassume that’s why you didn’t tell me, Sirius?” he saidcasually over Pettigrew’s head.

“Forgive me, Remus,” said Black.

“Not at all, Padfoot, old friend,” said Lupin, who wasnow rolling up his sleeves. “And will you, in turn,forgive me for believing you were the spy?”

“Of course,” said Black, and the ghost of a grin flittedacross his gaunt face. He, too, began rolling up hissleeves. “Shall we kill him together?”

“Yes, I think so,” said Lupin grimly.

“You wouldn’t ... you won’t... ,” gasped Pettigrew. Andhe scrambled around to Ron.

Page | 416 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Ron ... haven’t I been a good friend ... a good pet?

You won’t let them kill me, Ron, will you ... you’re onmy side, aren’t you?”

But Ron was staring at Pettigrew with the utmostrevulsion.

“I let you sleep in my bed\” he said.

“Kind boy ... kind master ...” Pettigrew crawled towardRon, “you won’t let them do it. ... I was your rat. ... Iwas a good pet. ...”

“If you made a better rat than a human, it’s not muchto boast about, Peter,” said Black harshly. Ron, goingstill paler with pain, wrenched his broken leg out ofPettigrew’s reach. Pettigrew turned on his knees,staggered forward, and seized the hem of Hermione’srobes.

“Sweet girl ... clever girl ... you — you won’t let them.... Help me. ...”

Hermione pulled her robes out of Pettigrew’sclutching hands and backed away against the wall,looking horrified.

Pettigrew knelt, trembling uncontrollably, and turnedhis head slowly toward Harry.

“Harry ... Harry ... you look just like your father ...just like him. ...”

“HOW DARE YOU SPEAK TO HARRY?” roared Black.“HOW DARE YOU FACE HIM? HOW DARE YOU TALKABOUT JAMES IN FRONT OF HIM?”

“Harry,” whispered Pettigrew, shuffling toward him,hands outstretched. “Harry, James wouldn’t have

Page | 417 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

wanted me killed. ... James would have understood,Harry ... he would have shown me mercy. ...”

Both Black and Lupin strode forward, seizedPettigrew’s shoulders, and threw him backward ontothe floor. He sat there, twitching with terror, staringup at them.

“You sold Lily and James to Voldemort,” said Black,who was shaking too. “Do you deny it?”

Pettigrew burst into tears. It was horrible to watch,like an oversized, balding baby, cowering on the floor.

“Sirius, Sirius, what could I have done? The DarkLord ... you have no idea ... he has weapons you can’timagine. ... I was scared, Sirius, I was never bravelike you and Remus and James. I never meant it tohappen. ... He-Who-Must-Not-Be-Named forced me —

“DONT LIE!” bellowed Black. “YOU’D BEEN PASSINGINFORMATION TO HIM FOR A YEAR BEFORE LILYAND JAMES DIED! YOU WERE HIS SPY!”

“He — he was taking over everywhere!” gaspedPettigrew. “Wh — what was there to be gained byrefusing him?”

“What was there to be gained by fighting the most evilwizard who has ever existed?” said Black, with aterribly fury in his face. “Only innocent lives, Peter!”

“You don’t understand!” whined Pettigrew. “He wouldhave killed me, Sirius!”

“THEN YOU SHOULD HAVE DIED!” roared Black.“DIED RATHER THAN BETRAY YOUR FRIENDS, ASWE WOULD HAVE DONE FOR YOU!”

Page | 418 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Black and Lupin stood shoulder to shoulder, wandsraised.

“You should have realized,” said Lupin quietly, “ifVoldemort didn’t kill you, we would. Good-bye, Peter.”

Hermione covered her face with her hands and turnedto the wall.

“NO!” Harry yelled. He ran forward, placing himself infront of Pettigrew, facing the wands. “You can’t killhim,” he said breathlessly. “You can’t.”

Black and Lupin both looked staggered.

“Harry, this piece of vermin is the reason you have noparents,” Black snarled. “This cringing bit of filthwould have seen you die too, without turning a hair.You heard him. His own stinking skin meant more tohim than your whole family.”

“I know,” Harry panted. “We’ll take him up to thecastle. We’ll hand him over to the dementors. ... Hecan go to Azkaban ... but don’t kill him.”

“Harry!” gasped Pettigrew, and he flung his armsaround Harry’s knees. “You — thank you — it’s morethan I deserve — thank you —”

“Get off me,” Harry spat, throwing Pettigrew’s handsoff him in disgust. “I’m not doing this for you. I’mdoing it because — I don’t reckon my dad would’vewanted them to become killers —just for you.”

No one moved or made a sound except Pettigrew,whose breath was coming in wheezes as he clutchedhis chest. Black and Lupin were looking at eachother. Then, with one movement, they lowered theirwands.

Page | 419 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You’re the only person who has the right to decide,Harry,” said Black. “But think ... think what he did.

“He can go to Azkaban,” Harry repeated. “If anyonedeserves that place, he does. ...”

Pettigrew was still wheezing behind him.

“Very well,” said Lupin. “Stand aside, Harry.”

Harry hesitated.

“I’m going to tie him up,” said Lupin. “That’s all, Iswear.”

Harry stepped out of the way. Thin cords shot fromLupin’s wand this time, and next moment, Pettigrewwas wriggling on the floor, bound and gagged.

“But if you transform, Peter,” growled Black, his ownwand pointing at Pettigrew too, “we will kill you. Youagree, Harry?”

Harry looked down at the pitiful figure on the floorand nodded so that Pettigrew could see him.

“Right,” said Lupin, suddenly businesslike. “Ron, Ican’t mend bones nearly as well as Madam Pomfrey,so I think it’s best if we just strap your leg up until wecan get you to the hospital wing.”

He hurried over to Ron, bent down, tapped Ron’s legwith his wand, and muttered, “Ferula.” Bandagesspun up Ron’s leg, strapping it tightly to a splint.Lupin helped him to his feet; Ron put his weightgingerly on the leg and didn’t wince.

“That’s better,” he said. “Thanks.”

Page | 420 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“What about Professor Snape?” said Hermione in asmall voice, looking down at Snape’s prone figure.

“There’s nothing seriously wrong with him,” saidLupin, bending over Snape and checking his pulse.“You were just a little — overenthusiastic. Still outcold. Er — perhaps it will be best if we don’t revivehim until we’re safely back in the castle. We can takehim like this. ...”

He muttered, “Mobilicorpus.” As though invisiblestrings were tied to Snape’s wrists, neck, and knees,he was pulled into a standing position, head stilllolling unpleasantly, like a grotesque puppet. He hunga few inches above the ground, his limp feet dangling.Lupin picked up the Invisibility Cloak and tucked itsafely into his pocket.

“And two of us should be chained to this,” said Black,nudging Pettigrew with his toe. “Just to make sure.”

“I’ll do it,” said Lupin.

“And me,” said Ron savagely, limping forward.

Black conjured heavy manacles from thin air; soonPettigrew was upright again, left arm chained toLupin’s right, right arm to Ron’s left. Ron’s face wasset. He seemed to have taken Scabbers’s true identityas a personal insult. Crookshanks leapt lightly off thebed and led the way out of the room, his bottlebrushtail held jauntily high.

Page | 421 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





THE DEMENTOR’S KISS

Harry had never been part of a stranger group.Crookshanks led the way down the stairs; Lupin,Pettigrew, and Ron went next, looking like entrants ina six-legged race. Next came Professor Snape, driftingcreepily along, his toes hitting each stair as theydescended, held up by his own wand, which wasbeing pointed at him by Sirius. Harry and Hermionebrought up the rear.

Getting back into the tunnel was difficult. Lupin,Pettigrew, and Ron had to turn sideways to manageit; Lupin still had Pettigrew covered with his wand.Harry could see them edging awkwardly along thetunnel in single file. Crookshanks was still in thelead. Harry went right after Black, who was stillmaking Snape drift along ahead of them; he keptbumping his lolling head on the low ceiling. Harryhad the impression Black was making no effort toprevent this.

Page | 422 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“You know what this means?” Black said abruptly toHarry as they made their slow progress along thetunnel. “Turning Pettigrew in?”

“You’re free,” said Harry.

“Yes ... ,” said Black. “But I’m also — I don’t know ifanyone ever told you — I’m your godfather.”

“Yeah, I knew that,” said Harry.

“Well ... your parents appointed me your guardian,”said Black stiffly. “If anything happened to them ...”

Harry waited. Did Black mean what he thought hemeant?

“I’ll understand, of course, if you want to stay withyour aunt and uncle,” said Black. “But ... well ...think about it. Once my name’s cleared ... if youwanted a ... a different home ...”

Some sort of explosion took place in the pit of Harry’sstomach.

“What — live with you?” he said, accidentally crackinghis head on a bit of rock protruding from the ceiling.“Leave the Dursleys?”

“Of course, I thought you wouldn’t want to,” saidBlack quickly. “I understand, I just thought I’d —”

“Are you insane?” said Harry, his voice easily ascroaky as Black’s. “Of course I want to leave theDursleys! Have you got a house? When can I movein?”

Page | 423 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Black turned right around to look at him; Snape’shead was scraping the ceiling but Black didn’t seemto care.

“You want to?” he said. “You mean it?”

“Yeah, I mean it!” said Harry.

Black’s gaunt face broke into the first true smileHarry had seen upon it. The difference it made wasstartling, as though a person ten years younger wereshining through the starved mask; for a moment, hewas recognizable as the man who had laughed atHarry’s parents’wedding.

They did not speak again until they had reached theend of the tunnel. Crookshanks darted up first; hehad evidently pressed his paw to the knot on thetrunk, because Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron clamberedupward without any sound of savaging branches.

Black saw Snape up through the hole, then stoodback for Harry and Hermione to pass. At last, all ofthem were out.

The grounds were very dark now; the only light camefrom the distant windows of the castle. Without aword, they set off. Pettigrew was still wheezing andoccasionally whimpering. Harry’s mind was buzzing.He was going to leave the Dursleys. He was going tolive with Sirius Black, his parents’ best friend. ... Hefelt dazed. ... What would happen when he told theDursleys he was going to live with the convict they’dseen on television... !

“One wrong move, Peter,” said Lupin threateninglyahead. His wand was still pointed sideways atPettigrew’s chest.

Page | 424 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Silently they tramped through the grounds, the castlelights growing slowly larger. Snape was still driftingweirdly ahead of Black, his chin bumping on hischest. And then —

A cloud shifted. There were suddenly dim shadows onthe ground. Their party was bathed in moonlight.

Snape collided with Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron, whohad stopped abruptly. Black froze. He flung out onearm to make Harry and Hermione stop.

Harry could see Lupin’s silhouette. He had gone rigid.Then his limbs began to shake.

“Oh, my —” Hermione gasped. “He didn’t take hispotion tonight! He’s not safe!”

“Run,” Black whispered. “Run. Now.”

But Harry couldn’t run. Ron was chained to Pettigrewand Lupin. He leapt forward but Black caught himaround the chest and threw him back.

“Leave it to me — RUN!”

There was a terrible snarling noise. Lupin’s head waslengthening. So was his body. His shoulders werehunching. Hair was sprouting visibly on his face andhands, which were curling into clawed paws.Crookshanks’s hair was on end again; he was backingaway —

As the werewolf reared, snapping its long jaws, Siriusdisappeared from Harry’s side. He had transformed.The enormous, bearlike dog bounded forward. As thewerewolf wrenched itself free of the manacle bindingit, the dog seized it about the neck and pulled it

Page | 425 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

backward, away from Ron and Pettigrew. They werelocked, jaw to jaw, claws ripping at each other —

Harry stood, transfixed by the sight, too intent uponthe battle to notice anything else. It was Hermione’sscream that alerted him —

Pettigrew had dived for Lupin’s dropped wand. Ron,unsteady on his bandaged leg, fell. There was a bang,a burst of light — and Ron lay motionless on theground. Another bang — Crookshanks flew into theair and back to the earth in a heap.

“ExpelliarmusV’ Harry yelled, pointing his own wandat Pettigrew; Lupin’s wand flew high into the air andout of sight. “Stay where you are!” Harry shouted,running forward.

Too late. Pettigrew had transformed. Harry saw hisbald tail whip through the manacle on Ron’soutstretched arm and heard a scurrying through thegrass.

There was a howl and a rumbling growl; Harry turnedto see the werewolf taking flight; it was galloping intothe forest —

“Sirius, he’s gone, Pettigrew transformed!” Harryyelled.

Black was bleeding; there were gashes across hismuzzle and back, but at Harry’s words he scrambledup again, and in an instant, the sound of his pawsfaded to silence as he pounded away across thegrounds.

Harry and Hermione dashed over to Ron.

Page | 426 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“What did he do to him?” Hermione whispered. Ron’seyes were only half-closed, his mouth hung open; hewas definitely alive, they could hear him breathing,but he didn’t seem to recognize them.

“I don’t know. ...”

Harry looked desperately around. Black and Lupinboth gone ... they had no one but Snape for company,still hanging, unconscious, in midair.

“We’d better get them up to the castle and tellsomeone,” said Harry, pushing his hair out of hiseyes, trying to think straight. Come —”

But then, from beyond the range of their vision, theyheard a yelping, a whining: a dog in pain. ...

“Sirius,” Harry muttered, staring into the darkness.

He had a moment’s indecision, but there was nothingthey could do for Ron at the moment, and by thesound of it, Black was in trouble —

Harry set off at a run, Hermione right behind him.

The yelping seemed to be coming from the groundnear the edge of the lake. They pelted toward it, andHarry, running flat out, felt the cold without realizingwhat it must mean —

The yelping stopped abruptly. As they reached thelakeshore, they saw why — Sirius had turned backinto a man. He was crouched on all fours, his handsover his head.

“iVooo,” he moaned. “Noooo ... please. ...”

And then Harry saw them. Dementors, at least ahundred of them, gliding in a black mass around the

Page | 427 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

lake toward them. He spun around, the familiar, icycold penetrating his insides, fog starting to obscurehis vision; more were appearing out of the darknesson every side; they were encircling them. ...

“Hermione, think of something happy!” Harry yelled,raising his wand, blinking furiously to try and clearhis vision, shaking his head to rid it of the faintscreaming that had started inside it —

I’m going to live with my godfather. I’m leaving theDursleys.

He forced himself to think of Black, and only Black,and began to chant: “Expecto patronum). Expectopatronum).”

Black gave a shudder, rolled over, and lay motionlesson the ground, pale as death.

Hell be all right. I’m going to go and live with him.

“Expecto patronum). Hermione, help me! Expectopatronum).”

“Expecto —” Hermione whispered, “expecto — expecto

But she couldn’t do it. The dementors were closing in,barely ten feet from them. They formed a solid wallaround Harry and Hermione, and were getting closer.

“EXPECTO PATRONUM” Harry yelled, trying to blotthe screaming from his ears. “EXPECTO PATRONUM.”

A thin wisp of silver escaped his wand and hoveredlike mist before him. At the same moment, Harry felt

Page | 428 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Hermione collapse next to him. He was alone ...completely alone. ...

“Expecto — expecto patronum —”

Harry felt his knees hit the cold grass. Fog wasclouding his eyes. With a huge effort, he fought toremember — Sirius was innocent — innocent — We’llbe okay — I’m going to live with him —

“Expecto patronumJ” he gasped.

By the feeble light of his formless Patronus, he saw adementor halt, very close to him. It couldn’t walkthrough the cloud of silver mist Harry had conjured.

A dead, slimy hand slid out from under the cloak. Itmade a gesture as though to sweep the Patronusaside.

“No — no —” Harry gasped. “He’s innocent ... expecto— expecto patronum —”

He could feel them watching him, hear their rattlingbreath like an evil wind around him. The nearestdementor seemed to be considering him. Then itraised both its rotting hands — and lowered its hood.

Where there should have been eyes, there was onlythin, gray scabbed skin, stretched blankly over emptysockets. But there was a mouth ... a gaping,shapeless hole, sucking the air with the sound of adeath rattle.

A paralyzing terror filled Harry so that he couldn’tmove or speak. His Patronus flickered and died.

White fog was blinding him. He had to fight ... expectopatronum ... he couldn’t see ... and in the distance, heheard the familiar screaming ... expecto patronum ...

Page | 429 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

he groped in the mist for Sirius, and found his arm ...they weren’t going to take him. ...

But a pair of strong, clammy hands suddenlyattached themselves around Harry’s neck. They wereforcing his face upward. ... He could feel its breath. ...It was going to get rid of him first. ... He could feel itsputrid breath. ... His mother was screaming in hisears. ... She was going to be the last thing he everheard —

And then, through the fog that was drowning him, hethought he saw a silvery light growing brighter andbrighter. ... He felt himself fall forward onto the grass.... Facedown, too weak to move, sick and shaking,Harry opened his eyes. The dementor must havereleased him. The blinding light was illuminating thegrass around him. ... The screaming had stopped, thecold was ebbing away. ...

Something was driving the dementors back. ... It wascircling around him and Black and Hermione. ... Theywere leaving. ... The air was warm again. ...

With every ounce of strength he could muster, Harryraised his head a few inches and saw an animal amidthe light, galloping away across the lake. ... Eyesblurred with sweat, Harry tried to make out what itwas. ... It was as bright as a unicorn. ... Fighting tostay conscious, Harry watched it canter to a halt as itreached the opposite shore. For a moment, Harrysaw, by its brightness, somebody welcoming it back... raising his hand to pat it ... someone who lookedstrangely familiar ... but it couldn’t be ...

Harry didn’t understand. He couldn’t think anymore.He felt the last of his strength leave him, and his headhit the ground as he fainted.

Page | 430 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



HERMIONE’S SECRET

“Shocking business ... shocking ... miracle none ofthem died ... never heard the like ... by thunder, itwas lucky you were there, Snape. ...”

“Thank you, Minister.”

“Order of Merlin, Second Class, I’d say. First Class, ifI can wangle it!”

“Thank you very much indeed, Minister.”

“Nasty cut you’ve got there. ... Black’s work, Isuppose?”

“As a matter of fact, it was Potter, Weasley, andGranger, Minister. ...”

“iVo!”

“Black had bewitched them, I saw it immediately. AConfundus Charm, to judge by their behavior. Theyseemed to think there was a possibility he was

Page | 431 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

innocent. They weren’t responsible for their actions.On the other hand, their interference might havepermitted Black to escape. ... They obviously thoughtthey were going to catch Black single-handed. They’vegot away with a great deal before now. ... I’m afraidit’s given them a rather high opinion of themselves ...and of course Potter has always been allowed anextraordinary amount of license by the headmaster —

“Ah, well, Snape ... Harry Potter, you know ... we’veall got a bit of a blind spot where he’s concerned.”

“And yet — is it good for him to be given so muchspecial treatment? Personally, I try and treat him likeany other student. And any other student would besuspended — at the very least — for leading hisfriends into such danger. Consider, Minister —against all school rules — after all the precautionsput in place for his protection — out-of-bounds, atnight, consorting with a werewolf and a murderer —and I have reason to believe he has been visitingHogsmeade illegally too —”

“Well, well ... we shall see, Snape, we shall see. ... Theboy has undoubtedly been foolish. ...”

Harry lay listening with his eyes tight shut. He feltvery groggy. The words he was hearing seemed to betraveling very slowly from his ears to his brain, sothat it was difficult to understand. ... His limbs feltlike lead; his eyelids too heavy to lift. ... He wanted tolie here, on this comfortable bed, forever. ...

“What amazes me most is the behavior of thedementors ... you’ve really no idea what made themretreat, Snape?”

Page | 432 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“No, Minister ... by the time I had come ’round theywere heading back to their positions at the entrances.

“Extraordinary. And yet Black, and Harry, and the girl

“All unconscious by the time I reached them. I boundand gagged Black, naturally, conjured stretchers, andbrought them all straight back to the castle.”

There was a pause. Harry’s brain seemed to bemoving a little faster, and as it did, a gnawingsensation grew in the pit of his stomach. ...

He opened his eyes.

Everything was slightly blurred. Somebody hadremoved his glasses. He was lying in the dark hospitalwing. At the very end of the ward, he could make outMadam Pomfrey with her back to him, bending over abed. Harry squinted. Ron’s red hair was visiblebeneath Madam Pomfrey’s arm.

Harry moved his head over on the pillow. In the bedto his right lay Hermione. Moonlight was fallingacross her bed. Her eyes were open too. She lookedpetrified, and when she saw that Harry was awake,pressed a finger to her lips, then pointed to thehospital wing door. It was ajar, and the voices ofCornelius Fudge and Snape were coming through itfrom the corridor outside.

Madam Pomfrey now came walking briskly up thedark ward to Harry’s bed. He turned to look at her.She was carrying the largest block of chocolate hehad ever seen in his life. It looked like a smallboulder.

Page | 433 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Ah, you’re awake!” she said briskly. She placed thechocolate on Harry’s bedside table and beganbreaking it apart with a small hammer.

“How’s Ron?” said Harry and Hermione together.

“He’ll live,” said Madam Pomfrey grimly. “As for youtwo ... you’ll be staying here until I’m satisfied you’re— Potter, what do you think you’re doing?”

Harry was sitting up, putting his glasses back on, andpicking up his wand.

“I need to see the headmaster,” he said.

“Potter,” said Madam Pomfrey soothingly, “it’s allright. They’ve got Black. He’s locked away upstairs.The dementors will be performing the kiss anymoment now —”

“WHAT?”

Harry jumped up out of bed; Hermione had done thesame. But his shout had been heard in the corridoroutside; next second, Cornelius Fudge and Snape hadentered the ward.

“Harry, Harry, what’s this?” said Fudge, lookingagitated. “You should be in bed — has he had anychocolate?” he asked Madam Pomfrey anxiously.

“Minister, listen!” Harry said. “Sirius Black’s innocent!Peter Pettigrew faked his own death! We saw himtonight! You can’t let the dementors do that thing toSirius, he’s —”

But Fudge was shaking his head with a small smileon his face.

Page | 434 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Harry, Harry, you’re very confused, you’ve beenthrough a dreadful ordeal, lie back down, now, we’vegot everything under control. ...”

“YOU HAVEN’T!” Harry yelled. “YOU VE GOT THEWRONG MAN!”

“Minister, listen, please,” Hermione said; she hadhurried to Harry’s side and was gazing imploringlyinto Fudge’s face. “I saw him too. It was Ron’s rat,he’s an Animagus, Pettigrew, I mean, and —”

“You see, Minister?” said Snape. “Confunded, both ofthem. ... Black’s done a very good job on them. ...”

“WE’RE NOT CONFUNDED!” Harry roared.

“Minister! Professor!” said Madam Pomfrey angrily. “Imust insist that you leave. Potter is my patient, andhe should not be distressed!”

“I’m not distressed, I’m trying to tell them whathappened!” Harry said furiously. “If they’d just listen

But Madam Pomfrey suddenly stuffed a large chunkof chocolate into Harry’s mouth; he choked, and sheseized the opportunity to force him back onto the bed.

“Now, please, Minister, these children need care.Please leave —”

The door opened again. It was Dumbledore. Harryswallowed his mouthful of chocolate with greatdifficulty and got up again.

“Professor Dumbledore, Sirius Black —”

Page | 435 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“For heaven’s sake!” said Madam Pomfreyhysterically. “Is this a hospital wing or not?Headmaster, I must insist —”

“My apologies, Poppy, but I need a word with Mr.Potter and Miss Granger,” said Dumbledore calmly. “Ihave just been talking to Sirius Black —”

“I suppose he’s told you the same fairy tale he’splanted in Potter’s mind?” spat Snape. “Somethingabout a rat, and Pettigrew being alive —”

“That, indeed, is Black’s story,” said Dumbledore,surveying Snape closely through his half-moonspectacles.

“And does my evidence count for nothing?” snarledSnape. “Peter Pettigrew was not in the ShriekingShack, nor did I see any sign of him on the grounds.”

“That was because you were knocked out, Professor!”said Hermione earnestly. “You didn’t arrive in time tohear —”

“Miss Granger, HOLD YOUR TONGUE!”

“Now, Snape,” said Fudge, startled, “the young lady isdisturbed in her mind, we must make allowances —”

“I would like to speak to Harry and Hermione alone,”said Dumbledore abruptly. “Cornelius, Severus,

Poppy — please leave us.”

“Headmaster!” sputtered Madam Pomfrey “They needtreatment, they need rest —”

“This cannot wait,” said Dumbledore. “I must insist.”

Page | 436 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Madam Pomfrey pursed her lips and strode away intoher office at the end of the ward, slamming the doorbehind her. Fudge consulted the large gold pocketwatch dangling from his waistcoat.

“The dementors should have arrived by now,” he said.“Ill go and meet them. Dumbledore, 111 see youupstairs.”

He crossed to the door and held it open for Snape,but Snape hadn’t moved.

“You surely don’t believe a word of Black’s story?”Snape whispered, his eyes fixed on Dumbledore’sface.

“I wish to speak to Harry and Hermione alone,”Dumbledore repeated.

Snape took a step toward Dumbledore.

“Sirius Black showed he was capable of murder at theage of sixteen,” he breathed. “You haven’t forgottenthat, Headmaster? You haven’t forgotten that he oncetried to kill me?”

“My memory is as good as it ever was, Severus,” saidDumbledore quietly.

Snape turned on his heel and marched through thedoor Fudge was still holding. It closed behind them,and Dumbledore turned to Harry and Hermione. Theyboth burst into speech at the same time.

“Professor, Black’s telling the truth — we sawPettigrew —”

“— he escaped when Professor Lupin turned into awerewolf —”

Page | 437 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“— he’s a rat —”

“— Pettigrew’s front paw, I mean, finger, he cut it off

“— Pettigrew attacked Ron, it wasn’t Sirius —”

But Dumbledore held up his hand to stem the flood ofexplanations.

“It is your turn to listen, and I beg you will notinterrupt me, because there is very little time,” hesaid quietly. “There is not a shred of proof to supportBlack’s story, except your word — and the word oftwo thirteen-year-old wizards will not convinceanybody. A street full of eyewitnesses swore they sawSirius murder Pettigrew. I myself gave evidence to theMinistry that Sirius had been the Potters’ Secret-Keeper.”

“Professor Lupin can tell you —” Harry said, unable tostop himself.

“Professor Lupin is currently deep in the forest,unable to tell anyone anything. By the time he ishuman again, it will be too late, Sirius will be worsethan dead. I might add that werewolves are somistrusted by most of our kind that his support willcount for very little — and the fact that he and Siriusare old friends —”

“But —”

“Listen to me, Harry. It is too late, you understandme? You must see that Professor Snape’s version ofevents is far more convincing than yours.”

“He hates Sirius,” Hermione said desperately. “Allbecause of some stupid trick Sirius played on him —”

Page | 438 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Sirius has not acted like an innocent man. Theattack on the Fat Lady — entering Gryffindor Towerwith a knife — without Pettigrew, alive or dead, wehave no chance of overturning Sirius’s sentence.”

“But you believe us.”

“Yes, I do,” said Dumbledore quietly. “But I have nopower to make other men see the truth, or to overrulethe Minister of Magic. ...”

Harry stared up into the grave face and felt as thoughthe ground beneath him were falling sharply away. Hehad grown used to the idea that Dumbledore couldsolve anything. He had expected Dumbledore to pullsome amazing solution out of the air. But no ... theirlast hope was gone.

“What we need,” said Dumbledore slowly, and hislight blue eyes moved from Harry to Hermione, “ismore time.”

“But —” Hermione began. And then her eyes becamevery round. “OH!”

“Now, pay attention,” said Dumbledore, speaking verylow, and very clearly. “Sirius is locked in ProfessorFlitwick’s office on the seventh floor. Thirteenthwindow from the right of the West Tower. If all goeswell, you will be able to save more than one innocentlife tonight. But remember this, both of you: you mustnot be seen. Miss Granger, you know the law — youknow what is at stake. ... You — must— not— be —seen.”

Harry didn’t have a clue what was going on.Dumbledore had turned on his heel and looked backas he reached the door.

Page | 439 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I am going to lock you in. It is —” he consulted hiswatch, “five minutes to midnight. Miss Granger, threeturns should do it. Good luck.”

“Good luck?” Harry repeated as the door closedbehind Dumbledore. “Three turns? What’s he talkingabout? What are we supposed to do?”

But Hermione was fumbling with the neck of herrobes, pulling from beneath them a very long, veryfine gold chain.

“Harry, come here,” she said urgently. “Quick).”

Harry moved toward her, completely bewildered. Shewas holding the chain out. He saw a tiny, sparklinghourglass hanging from it.

“Here —”

She had thrown the chain around his neck too.

“Ready?” she said breathlessly.

“What are we doing?” Harry said, completely lost.

Hermione turned the hourglass over three times.

The dark ward dissolved. Harry had the sensationthat he was flying very fast, backward. A blur ofcolors and shapes rushed past him, his ears werepounding, he tried to yell but couldn’t hear his ownvoice —

And then he felt solid ground beneath his feet, andeverything came into focus again —

He was standing next to Hermione in the desertedentrance hall and a stream of golden sunlight was

Page | 440 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

falling across the paved floor from the open frontdoors. He looked wildly around at Hermione, thechain of the hourglass cutting into his neck.

“Hermione, what — ?”

“In here!” Hermione seized Harry’s arm and draggedhim across the hall to the door of a broom closet; sheopened it, pushed him inside among the buckets andmops, then slammed the door behind them.

“What — how — Hermione, what happened?”

“We’ve gone back in time,” Hermione whispered,lifting the chain off Harry’s neck in the darkness.“Three hours back ...”

Harry found his own leg and gave it a very hardpinch. It hurt a lot, which seemed to rule out thepossibility that he was having a very bizarre dream.

“But —”

“Shh! Listen! Someone’s coming! I think — I think itmight be us!”

Hermione had her ear pressed against the cupboarddoor.

“Footsteps across the hall ... yes, I think it’s us goingdown to Hagrid’s!”

“Are you telling me,” Harry whispered, “that we’rehere in this cupboard and we’re out there too?”

“Yes,” said Hermione, her ear still glued to thecupboard door. “I’m sure it’s us. It doesn’t sound likemore than three people ... and we’re walking slowlybecause we’re under the Invisibility Cloak —”

Page | 441 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

She broke off, still listening intently.

“We’ve gone down the front steps. ...”

Hermione sat down on an upturned bucket, lookingdesperately anxious, but Harry wanted a fewquestions answered.

“Where did you get that hourglass thing?”

“It’s called a Time-Turner,” Hermione whispered, “andI got it from Professor McGonagall on our first dayback. I’ve been using it all year to get to all mylessons. Professor McGonagall made me swear Iwouldn’t tell anyone. She had to write all sorts ofletters to the Ministry of Magic so I could have one.She had to tell them that I was a model student, andthat I’d never, ever use it for anything except mystudies. ... I’ve been turning it back so I could dohours over again, that’s how I’ve been doing severallessons at once, see? But ...

“Harry, I don’t understand what Dumbledore wants usto do. Why did he tell us to go back three hours?

How’s that going to help Sirius?”

Harry stared at her shadowy face.

“There must be something that happened around nowhe wants us to change,” he said slowly. “Whathappened? We were walking down to Hagrid’s threehours ago. ...”

“This is three hours ago, and we are walking down toHagrid’s,” said Hermione. “We just heard ourselvesleaving. ...”

Harry frowned; he felt as though he were screwing uphis whole brain in concentration.

Page | 442 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Dumbledore just said —just said we could savemore than one innocent life. ...” And then it hit him.“Hermione, we’re going to save Buckbeak!”

“But — how will that help Sirius?”

“Dumbledore said — he just told us where thewindow is — the window of Flitwick’s office! Wherethey’ve got Sirius locked up! We’ve got to flyBuckbeak up to the window and rescue Sirius! Siriuscan escape on Buckbeak — they can escape together!”

From what Harry could see of Hermione’s face, shelooked terrified.

“If we manage that without being seen, it’ll be amiracle!”

“Well, we’ve got to try, haven’t we?” said Harry. Hestood up and pressed his ear against the door.

“Doesn’t sound like anyone’s there. ... Come on, let’s

go. ...”

Harry pushed open the closet door. The entrance hallwas deserted. As quietly and quickly as they could,they darted out of the closet and down the stonesteps. The shadows were already lengthening, thetops of the trees in the Forbidden Forest gilded oncemore with gold.

“If anyone’s looking out of the window —” Hermionesqueaked, looking up at the castle behind them.

“Well run for it,” said Harry determinedly. “Straightinto the forest, all right? We’ll have to hide behind atree or something and keep a lookout —”

Page | 443 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Okay, but well go around by the greenhouses!” saidHermione breathlessly. “We need to keep out of sightof Hagrid’s front door, or well see us! We must benearly at Hagrid’s by now!”

Still working out what she meant, Harry set off at asprint, Hermione behind him. They tore across thevegetable gardens to the greenhouses, paused for amoment behind them, then set off again, fast as theycould, skirting around the Whomping Willow, tearingtoward the shelter of the forest. ...

Safe in the shadows of the trees, Harry turnedaround; seconds later, Hermione arrived beside him,panting.

“Right,” she gasped. “We need to sneak over toHagrid’s. ... Keep out of sight, Harry. ...”

They made their way silently through the trees,keeping to the very edge of the forest. Then, as theyglimpsed the front of Hagrid’s house, they heard aknock upon his door. They moved quickly behind awide oak trunk and peered out from either side.

Hagrid had appeared in his doorway, shaking andwhite, looking around to see who had knocked. AndHarry heard his own voice.

“It’s us. We’re wearing the Invisibility Cloak. Let us inand we can take it off.”

“Yeh shouldn’ve come!” Hagrid whispered. He stoodback, then shut the door quickly.

“This is the weirdest thing we’ve ever done,” Harrysaid fervently.

“Let’s move along a bit,” Hermione whispered. “Weneed to get nearer to Buckbeak!”

Page | 444 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

They crept through the trees until they saw thenervous hippogriff, tethered to the fence aroundHagrid’s pumpkin patch.

“Now?” Harry whispered.

“No!” said Hermione. “If we steal him now, thoseCommittee people will think Hagrid set him free!

We’ve got to wait until they’ve seen he’s tied outside!”

“That’s going to give us about sixty seconds,” saidHarry. This was starting to seem impossible.

At that moment, there was a crash of breaking chinafrom inside Hagrid’s cabin.

“That’s Hagrid breaking the milk jug,” Hermionewhispered. “I’m going to find Scabbers in a moment —

Sure enough, a few minutes later, they heardHermione’s shriek of surprise.

“Hermione,” said Harry suddenly, “what if we — wejust run in there and grab Pettigrew —”

“No!” said Hermione in a terrified whisper. “Don’t youunderstand? We’re breaking one of the mostimportant wizarding laws! Nobody’s supposed tochange time, nobody! You heard Dumbledore, if we’reseen —”

“We’d only be seen by ourselves and Hagrid!”

“Harry, what do you think you’d do if you sawyourself bursting into Hagrid’s house?” saidHermione.

Page | 445 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I’d — I’d think I’d gone mad,” said Harry, “or I’d thinkthere was some Dark Magic going on —”

“Exactly! You wouldn’t understand, you might evenattack yourself! Don’t you see? Professor McGonagalltold me what awful things have happened whenwizards have meddled with time. ... Loads of themended up killing their past or future selves bymistake!”

“Okay!” said Harry. “It was just an idea, I just thought

But Hermione nudged him and pointed toward thecastle. Harry moved his head a few inches to get aclear view of the distant front doors. Dumbledore,Fudge, the old Committee member, and Macnair theexecutioner were coming down the steps.

“We’re about to come out!” Hermione breathed.

And sure enough, moments later, Hagrid’s back dooropened, and Harry saw himself, Ron, and Hermionewalking out of it with Hagrid. It was, without a doubt,the strangest sensation of his life, standing behindthe tree, and watching himself in the pumpkin patch.

“It’s okay, Beaky, it’s okay ... ,” Hagrid said toBuckbeak. Then he turned to Harry, Ron, andHermione. “Go on. Get goin’.”

“Hagrid, we can’t —”

“Well tell them what really happened —”

“They can’t kill him —”

“Go! It’s bad enough without you lot in trouble an’all!”

Page | 446 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry watched the Hermione in the pumpkin patchthrow the Invisibility Cloak over him and Ron.

“Go quick. Don’ listen. ...”

There was a knock on Hagrid’s front door. Theexecution party had arrived. Hagrid turned aroundand headed back into his cabin, leaving the back doorajar. Harry watched the grass flatten in patches allaround the cabin and heard three pairs of feetretreating. He, Ron, and Hermione had gone ... butthe Harry and Hermione hidden in the trees couldnow hear what was happening inside the cabinthrough the back door.

“Where is the beast?” came the cold voice of Macnair.

“Out — outside,” Hagrid croaked.

Harry pulled his head out of sight as Macnair’s faceappeared at Hagrid’s window, staring out atBuckbeak. Then they heard Fudge.

“We — er — have to read you the official notice ofexecution, Hagrid. I’ll make it quick. And then youand Macnair need to sign it. Macnair, you’resupposed to listen too, that’s procedure —”

Macnair’s face vanished from the window. It was nowor never.

“Wait here,” Harry whispered to Hermione. “I’ll do it.”

As Fudge’s voice started again, Harry darted out frombehind his tree, vaulted the fence into the pumpkinpatch, and approached Buckbeak.

“It is the decision of the Committee for the Disposal ofDangerous Creatures that the hippogriff Buckbeak,

Page | 447 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

hereafter called the condemned, shall be executed onthe sixth of June at sundown —”

Careful not to blink, Harry stared up into Buckbeak’sfierce orange eyes once more and bowed. Buckbeaksank to his scaly knees and then stood up again.Harry began to fumble with the knot of rope tyingBuckbeak to the fence.

"... sentenced to execution by beheading, to be carriedout by the Committee’s appointed executioner, WaldenMacnair...”

“Come on, Buckbeak,” Harry murmured, “come on,we’re going to help you. Quietly ... quietly ...”

"... as witnessed below. Hagrid, you sign here. ...”

Harry threw all his weight onto the rope, butBuckbeak had dug in his front feet.

“Well, let’s get this over with,” said the reedy voice ofthe Committee member from inside Hagrid’s cabin.“Hagrid, perhaps it will be better if you stay inside —”

“No, I — I wan’ ter be with him. ... I don’ wan’ him terbe alone —”

Footsteps echoed from within the cabin.

“Buckbeak, move\” Harry hissed.

Harry tugged harder on the rope around Buckbeak’sneck. The hippogriff began to walk, rustling its wingsirritably. They were still ten feet away from the forest,in plain view of Hagrid’s back door.

“One moment, please, Macnair,” came Dumbledore’svoice. “You need to sign too.” The footsteps stopped.

Page | 448 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry heaved on the rope. Buckbeak snapped hisbeak and walked a little faster.

Hermione’s white face was sticking out from behind atree.

“Harry, hurry!” she mouthed.

Harry could still hear Dumbledore’s voice talking fromwithin the cabin. He gave the rope another wrench.Buckbeak broke into a grudging trot. They hadreached the trees. ...

“Quick! Quick!” Hermione moaned, darting out frombehind her tree, seizing the rope too and adding herweight to make Buckbeak move faster. Harry lookedover his shoulder; they were now blocked from sight;they couldn’t see Hagrid’s garden at all.

“Stop!” he whispered to Hermione. “They might hearus —”

Hagrid’s back door had opened with a bang. Harry,Hermione, and Buckbeak stood quite still; even thehippogriff seemed to be listening intently.

Silence ... then —

“Where is it?” said the reedy voice of the Committeemember. “Where is the beast?”

“It was tied here!” said the executioner furiously. “Isaw it! Just here!”

“How extraordinary,” said Dumbledore. There was anote of amusement in his voice.

“Beaky!” said Hagrid huskily.

Page | 449 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

There was a swishing noise, and the thud of an axe.The executioner seemed to have swung it into thefence in anger. And then came the howling, and thistime they could hear Hagrid’s words through his sobs.

“Gone! Gone! Bless his little beak, he’s gone\ Mustapulled himself free! Beaky, yeh clever boy!”

Buckbeak started to strain against the rope, trying toget back to Hagrid. Harry and Hermione tightenedtheir grip and dug their heels into the forest floor tostop him.

“Someone untied him!” the executioner was snarling.“We should search the grounds, the forest —”

“Macnair, if Buckbeak has indeed been stolen, do youreally think the thief will have led him away on foot?”said Dumbledore, still sounding amused. “Search theskies, if you will. ... Hagrid, I could do with a cup oftea. Or a large brandy.”

“O’ — o’ course, Professor,” said Hagrid, who soundedweak with happiness. “Come in, come in. ...”

Harry and Hermione listened closely. They heardfootsteps, the soft cursing of the executioner, thesnap of the door, and then silence once more.

“Now what?” whispered Harry, looking around.

“Well have to hide in here,” said Hermione, wholooked very shaken. “We need to wait until they’vegone back to the castle. Then we wait until it’s safe tofly Buckbeak up to Sirius’s window. He won’t be therefor another couple of hours. ... Oh, this is going to bedifficult. ...”

Page | 450 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

She looked nervously over her shoulder into thedepths of the forest. The sun was setting now.

“We’re going to have to move,” said Harry, thinkinghard. “We’ve got to be able to see the WhompingWillow, or we won’t know what’s going on.”

“Okay,” said Hermione, getting a firmer grip onBuckbeak’s rope. “But we’ve got to keep out of sight,Harry, remember. ...”

They moved around the edge of the forest, darknessfalling thickly around them, until they were hiddenbehind a clump of trees through which they couldmake out the Willow.

“There’s Ron!” said Harry suddenly.

A dark figure was sprinting across the lawn and itsshout echoed through the still night air.

“Get away from him — get away — Scabbers, comehere —”

And then they saw two more figures materialize out ofnowhere. Harry watched himself and Hermionechasing after Ron. Then he saw Ron dive.

“Gotchcd Get off, you stinking cat —”

“There’s Sirius!” said Harry. The great shape of thedog had bounded out from the roots of the Willow.They saw him bowl Harry over, then seize Ron. ...

“Looks even worse from here, doesn’t it?” said Harry,watching the dog pulling Ron into the roots. “Ouch —look, I just got walloped by the tree — and so did you— this is weird —”

Page | 451 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

The Whomping Willow was creaking and lashing outwith its lower branches; they could see themselvesdarting here and there, trying to reach the trunk. Andthen the tree froze.

“That was Crookshanks pressing the knot,” saidHermione.

“And there we go ... ,” Harry muttered. “We’re in.”

The moment they disappeared, the tree began to moveagain. Seconds later, they heard footsteps quite closeby. Dumbledore, Macnair, Fudge, and the oldCommittee member were making their way up to thecastle.

“Right after we’d gone down into the passage!” saidHermione. “If only Dumbledore had come with us ...”

“Macnair and Fudge would’ve come too,” said Harrybitterly. “I bet you anything Fudge would’ve toldMacnair to murder Sirius on the spot. ...”

They watched the four men climb the castle steps anddisappear from view. For a few minutes the scene wasdeserted. Then —

“Here comes Lupin!” said Harry as they saw anotherfigure sprinting down the stone steps and haringtoward the Willow. Harry looked up at the sky. Cloudswere obscuring the moon completely.

They watched Lupin seize a broken branch from theground and prod the knot on the trunk. The treestopped fighting, and Lupin, too, disappeared into thegap in its roots.

“If he’d only grabbed the cloak,” said Harry. “It’s justlying there. ...”

Page | 452 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

He turned to Hermione.

“If I just dashed out now and grabbed it, Snape’dnever be able to get it and —”

“Harry, we mustn’t be seen!”

“How can you stand this?” he asked Hermionefiercely. “Just standing here and watching it happen?”He hesitated. “I’m going to grab the cloak!”

“Harry, no!”

Hermione seized the back of Harry’s robes not amoment too soon. Just then, they heard a burst ofsong. It was Hagrid, making his way up to the castle,singing at the top of his voice, and weaving slightly ashe walked. A large bottle was swinging from hishands.

“See?” Hermione whispered. “See what would havehappened? We’ve got to keep out of sight! No,Buckbeak).”

The hippogriff was making frantic attempts to get toHagrid again; Harry seized his rope too, straining tohold Buckbeak back. They watched Hagrid meandertipsily up to the castle. He was gone. Buckbeakstopped fighting to get away. His head drooped sadly.

Barely two minutes later, the castle doors flew openyet again, and Snape came charging out of them,running toward the Willow.

Harry’s fists clenched as they watched Snape skid toa halt next to the tree, looking around. He grabbedthe cloak and held it up.

Page | 453 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Get your filthy hands off it,” Harry snarled under hisbreath.

“Shh!”

Snape seized the branch Lupin had used to freeze thetree, prodded the knot, and vanished from view as heput on the cloak.

“So that’s it,” said Hermione quietly. “We’re all downthere ... and now we’ve just got to wait until we comeback up again. ...”

She took the end of Buckbeak’s rope and tied itsecurely around the nearest tree, then sat down onthe dry ground, arms around her knees.

“Harry, there’s something I don’t understand. ... Whydidn’t the dementors get Sirius? I remember themcoming, and then I think I passed out ... there wereso many of them. ...”

Harry sat down too. He explained what he’d seen;how, as the nearest dementor had lowered its mouthto Harry’s, a large silver something had comegalloping across the lake and forced the dementors toretreat.

Hermione’s mouth was slightly open by the timeHarry had finished.

“But what was it?”

“There’s only one thing it could have been, to makethe dementors go,” said Harry. “A real Patronus. Apowerful one.”

“But who conjured it?”

Page | 454 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry didn’t say anything. He was thinking back tothe person he’d seen on the other bank of the lake. Heknew who he thought it had been ... but how could ithave been?

“Didn’t you see what they looked like?” said Hermioneeagerly. “Was it one of the teachers?”

“No,” said Harry. “He wasn’t a teacher.”

“But it must have been a really powerful wizard, todrive all those dementors away. ... If the Patronuswas shining so brightly, didn’t it light him up?Couldn’t you see — ?”

“Yeah, I saw him,” said Harry slowly. “But ... maybe Iimagined it. ... I wasn’t thinking straight. ... I passedout right afterward. ...”

“ Who did you think it was?”

“I think —” Harry swallowed, knowing how strangethis was going to sound. “I think it was my dad.”

Harry glanced up at Hermione and saw that hermouth was fully open now. She was gazing at himwith a mixture of alarm and pity.

“Harry, your dad’s — well — dead,” she said quietly.

“I know that,” said Harry quickly.

“You think you saw his ghost?”

“I don’t know ... no ... he looked solid. ...”

“But then —”

Page | 455 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Maybe I was seeing things,” said Harry. “But ... fromwhat I could see ... it looked like him. ... I’ve gotphotos of him. ...”

Hermione was still looking at him as though worriedabout his sanity.

“I know it sounds crazy,” said Harry flatly. He turnedto look at Buckbeak, who was digging his beak intothe ground, apparently searching for worms. But hewasn’t really watching Buckbeak.

He was thinking about his father and about hisfather’s three oldest friends ... Moony, Wormtail,Padfoot, and Prongs. ... Had all four of them been outon the grounds tonight? Wormtail had reappearedthis evening when everyone had thought he was dead.... Was it so impossible his father had done the same?Had he been seeing things across the lake? The figurehad been too far away to see distinctly ... yet he hadfelt sure, for a moment, before he’d lostconsciousness. ...

The leaves overhead rustled faintly in the breeze. Themoon drifted in and out of sight behind the shiftingclouds. Hermione sat with her face turned toward theWillow, waiting.

And then, at last, after over an hour ...

“Here we come!” Hermione whispered.

She and Harry got to their feet. Buckbeak raised hishead. They saw Lupin, Pettigrew, and Ron clamberingawkwardly out of the hole in the roots ... followed bythe unconscious Snape, drifting weirdly upward. Nextcame Harry, Hermione, and Black. They all began towalk toward the castle.

Page | 456 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry’s heart was starting to beat very fast. Heglanced up at the sky. Any moment now, that cloudwas going to move aside and show the moon. ...

“Harry,” Hermione muttered as though she knewexactly what he was thinking, “we’ve got to stay put.We mustn’t be seen. There’s nothing we can do. ...”

“So we’re just going to let Pettigrew escape all overagain. ...” said Harry quietly.

“How do you expect to find a rat in the dark?”snapped Hermione. “There’s nothing we can do! Wecame back to help Sirius; we’re not supposed to bedoing anything else!”

“All right'.”

The moon slid out from behind its cloud. They sawthe tiny figures across the grounds stop. Then theysaw movement —

“There goes Lupin,” Hermione whispered. “He’stransforming —”

“Hermione!” said Harry suddenly. “We’ve got to move!”

“We mustn’t, I keep telling you —”

“Not to interfere! Lupin’s going to run into the forest,right at us!”

Hermione gasped.

“Quick!” she moaned, dashing to untie Buckbeak.“Quick! Where are we going to go? Where are we goingto hide? The dementors will be coming any moment —

Page | 457 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Back to Hagrid’s!” Harry said. “It’s empty now —come on!”

They ran as fast as they could, Buckbeak canteringalong behind them. They could hear the werewolfhowling behind them. ...

The cabin was in sight; Harry skidded to the door,wrenched it open, and Hermione and Buckbeakflashed past him; Harry threw himself in after themand bolted the door. Fang the boarhound barkedloudly.

“Shh, Fang, it’s us!” said Hermione, hurrying over andscratching his ears to quieten him. “That was reallyclose!” she said to Harry.

“Yeah ...”

Harry was looking out of the window. It was muchharder to see what was going on from here. Buckbeakseemed very happy to find himself back insideHagrid’s house. He lay down in front of the fire, foldedhis wings contentedly, and seemed ready for a goodnap.

“I think I’d better go outside again, you know,” saidHarry slowly. “I can’t see what’s going on — we won’tknow when it’s time —”

Hermione looked up. Her expression was suspicious.

“I’m not going to try and interfere,” said Harryquickly. “But if we don’t see what’s going on, how’rewe going to know when it’s time to rescue Sirius?”

“Well ... okay, then ... I’ll wait here with Buckbeak ...but Harry, be careful — there’s a werewolf out there— and the dementors —”

Page | 458 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry stepped outside again and edged around thecabin. He could hear yelping in the distance. Thatmeant the dementors were closing in on Sirius. ... Heand Hermione would be running to him any moment.

Harry stared out toward the lake, his heart doing akind of drumroll in his chest. ... Whoever had sentthat Patronus would be appearing at any moment. ...

For a fraction of a second he stood, irresolute, in frontof Hagrid’s door. You must not be seen. But he didn’twant to be seen. He wanted to do the seeing. ... Hehad to know. ...

And there were the dementors. They were emergingout of the darkness from every direction, glidingaround the edges of the lake. ... They were movingaway from where Harry stood, to the opposite bank.

... He wouldn’t have to get near them. ...

Harry began to run. He had no thought in his headexcept his father. ... If it was him ... if it really washim ... he had to know, had to find out. ...

The lake was coming nearer and nearer, but therewas no sign of anybody. On the opposite bank, hecould see tiny glimmers of silver — his own attemptsat a Patronus —

There was a bush at the very edge of the water. Harrythrew himself behind it, peering desperately throughthe leaves. On the opposite bank, the glimmers ofsilver were suddenly extinguished. A terrifiedexcitement shot through him — any moment now —

“Come on!” he muttered, staring about. “Where areyou? Dad, come on —”

Page | 459 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

But no one came. Harry raised his head to look at thecircle of dementors across the lake. One of them waslowering its hood. It was time for the rescuer toappear — but no one was coming to help this time —

And then it hit him — he understood. He hadn’t seenhis father — he had seen himself—

Harry flung himself out from behind the bush andpulled out his wand.

“EXPECTO PATRONUM” he yelled.

And out of the end of his wand burst, not a shapelesscloud of mist, but a blinding, dazzling, silver animal.He screwed up his eyes, trying to see what it was. Itlooked like a horse. It was galloping silently awayfrom him, across the black surface of the lake. Hesaw it lower its head and charge at the swarmingdementors. ... Now it was galloping around andaround the black shapes on the ground, and thedementors were falling back, scattering, retreatinginto the darkness. ... They were gone.

The Patronus turned. It was cantering back towardHarry across the still surface of the water. It wasn’t ahorse. It wasn’t a unicorn, either. It was a stag. It wasshining brightly as the moon above ... it was comingback to him. ...

It stopped on the bank. Its hooves made no mark onthe soft ground as it stared at Harry with its large,silver eyes. Slowly, it bowed its antlered head. AndHarry realized ...

“Prongs,” he whispered.

But as his trembling fingertips stretched toward thecreature, it vanished.

Page | 460 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Harry stood there, hand still outstretched. Then, witha great leap of his heart, he heard hooves behind him— he whirled around and saw Hermione dashingtoward him, dragging Buckbeak behind her.

“What did you do?” she said fiercely. “You said youwere only going to keep a lookout!”

“I just saved all our lives ... ,” said Harry. “Get behindhere — behind this bush — I’ll explain.”

Hermione listened to what had just happened withher mouth open yet again.

“Did anyone see you?”

“Yes, haven’t you been listening? I saw me but Ithought I was my dad! It’s okay!”

“Harry, I can’t believe it. ... You conjured up aPatronus that drove away all those dementors! That’svery, very advanced magic. ...”

“I knew I could do it this time,” said Harry, “becauseI’d already done it. ... Does that make sense?”

“I don’t know — Harry, look at Snape!”

Together they peered around the bush at the otherbank. Snape had regained consciousness. He wasconjuring stretchers and lifting the limp forms ofHarry, Hermione, and Black onto them. A fourthstretcher, no doubt bearing Ron, was already floatingat his side. Then, wand held out in front of him, hemoved them away toward the castle.

“Right, it’s nearly time,” said Hermione tensely,looking at her watch. “We’ve got about forty-fiveminutes until Dumbledore locks the door to the

Page | 461 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

hospital wing. We’ve got to rescue Sirius and get backinto the ward before anybody realizes we’re missing.

They waited, watching the moving clouds reflected inthe lake, while the bush next to them whispered inthe breeze. Buckbeak, bored, was ferreting for wormsagain.

“D’you reckon he’s up there yet?” said Harry,checking his watch. He looked up at the castle andbegan counting the windows to the right of the WestTower.

“Look!” Hermione whispered. “Who’s that? Someone’scoming back out of the castle!”

Harry stared through the darkness. The man washurrying across the grounds, toward one of theentrances. Something shiny glinted in his belt.

“Macnair!” said Harry. “The executioner! He’s gone toget the dementors! This is it, Hermione —”

Hermione put her hands on Buckbeak’s back andHarry gave her a leg up. Then he placed his foot onone of the lower branches of the bush and climbed upin front of her. He pulled Buckbeak’s rope back overhis neck and tied it to the other side of his collar likereins.

“Ready?” he whispered to Hermione. “You’d betterhold on to me —”

He nudged Buckbeak’s sides with his heels.

Buckbeak soared straight into the dark air. Harrygripped his flanks with his knees, feeling the greatwings rising powerfully beneath them. Hermione was

Page | 462 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

holding Harry very tight around the waist; he couldhear her muttering, “Oh, no — I don’t like this — oh, Ireally don’t like this —”

Harry urged Buckbeak forward. They were glidingquietly toward the upper floors of the castle. ... Harrypulled hard on the left-hand side of the rope, andBuckbeak turned. Harry was trying to count thewindows flashing past —

“Whoa!” he said, pulling backward as hard as hecould.

Buckbeak slowed down and they found themselves ata stop, unless you counted the fact that they keptrising up and down several feet as the hippogriff beathis wings to remain airborne.

“He’s there!” Harry said, spotting Sirius as they roseup beside the window. He reached out, and asBuckbeak’s wings fell, was able to tap sharply on theglass.

Black looked up. Harry saw his jaw drop. He leaptfrom his chair, hurried to the window and tried toopen it, but it was locked.

“Stand back!” Hermione called to him, and she tookout her wand, still gripping the back of Harry’s robeswith her left hand.

“Alohomoral”

The window sprang open.

“How — how — ?” said Black weakly, staring at thehippogriff.

Page | 463 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Get on — there’s not much time,” said Harry,gripping Buckbeak firmly on either side of his sleekneck to hold him steady. “You’ve got to get out of here

— the dementors are coming — Macnair’s gone to getthem.”

Black placed a hand on either side of the windowframe and heaved his head and shoulders out of it. Itwas very lucky he was so thin. In seconds, he hadmanaged to fling one leg over Buckbeak’s back andpull himself onto the hippogriff behind Hermione.

“Okay, Buckbeak, up!” said Harry, shaking the rope.“Up to the tower — come on!”

The hippogriff gave one sweep of its mighty wings andthey were soaring upward again, high as the top ofthe West Tower. Buckbeak landed with a clatter onthe battlements, and Harry and Hermione slid off himat once.

“Sirius, you’d better go, quick,” Harry panted. “They’llreach Flitwick’s office any moment, they’ll find outyou’re gone.”

Buckbeak pawed the ground, tossing his sharp head.

“What happened to the other boy? Ron?” croakedSirius.

“He’s going to be okay. He’s still out of it, but MadamPomfrey says shell be able to make him better. Quick

- go

But Black was still staring down at Harry.

“How can I ever thank —”

“GO!” Harry and Hermione shouted together.

Page | 464 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Black wheeled Buckbeak around, facing the open sky.

“Well see each other again,” he said. “You are — trulyyour father’s son, Harry. ...”

He squeezed Buckbeak’s sides with his heels. Harryand Hermione jumped back as the enormous wingsrose once more. ... The hippogriff took off into the air.

... He and his rider became smaller and smaller asHarry gazed after them ... then a cloud drifted acrossthe moon. ... They were gone.

Page | 465 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling



OWL POST AGAIN

“Harry!”

Hermione was tugging at his sleeve, staring at herwatch. “We’ve got exactly ten minutes to get backdown to the hospital wing without anybody seeing us— before Dumbledore locks the door —”

“Okay,” said Harry, wrenching his gaze from the sky,“let’s go. ...”

They slipped through the doorway behind them anddown a tightly spiraling stone staircase. As theyreached the bottom of it, they heard voices. Theyflattened themselves against the wall and listened. Itsounded like Fudge and Snape. They were walkingquickly along the corridor at the foot of the staircase.

"... only hope Dumbledore’s not going to makedifficulties,” Snape was saying. “The Kiss will beperformed immediately?”

Page | 466 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“As soon as Macnair returns with the dementors. Thiswhole Black affair has been highly embarrassing. Ican’t tell you how much I’m looking forward toinforming the Daily Prophet that we’ve got him at last....I daresay they’ll want to interview you, Snape ...and once young Harry’s back in his right mind, Iexpect he’ll want to tell the Prophet exactly how yousaved him. ...”

Harry clenched his teeth. He caught a glimpse ofSnape’s smirk as he and Fudge passed Harry andHermione’s hiding place. Their footsteps died away.Harry and Hermione waited a few moments to makesure they’d really gone, then started to run in theopposite direction. Down one staircase, then another,along a new corridor — then they heard a cacklingahead.

“Peeves\” Harry muttered, grabbing Hermione’s wrist.“In here!”

They tore into a deserted classroom to their left justin time. Peeves seemed to be bouncing along thecorridor in boisterous good spirits, laughing his headoff.

“Oh, he’s horrible,” whispered Hermione, her ear tothe door. “I bet he’s all excited because the dementorsare going to finish off Sirius. ...” She checked herwatch. “Three minutes, Harry!”

They waited until Peeves’s gloating voice had fadedinto the distance, then slid back out of the room andbroke into a run again.

“Hermione — what’ll happen — if we don’t get backinside — before Dumbledore locks the door?” Harrypanted.

Page | 467 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I don’t want to think about it!” Hermione moaned,checking her watch again. “One minute!”

They had reached the end of the corridor with thehospital wing entrance. “Okay — I can hearDumbledore,” said Hermione tensely. “Come on,Harry!”

They crept along the corridor. The door opened.Dumbledore’s back appeared.

“I am going to lock you in,” they heard him saying. “Itis five minutes to midnight. Miss Granger, three turnsshould do it. Good luck.”

Dumbledore backed out of the room, closed the door,and took out his wand to magically lock it. Panicking,Harry and Hermione ran forward. Dumbledore lookedup, and a wide smile appeared under the long silvermustache. “Well?” he said quietly.

“We did it!” said Harry breathlessly. “Sirius has gone,on Buckbeak. ...”

Dumbledore beamed at them.

“Well done. I think —” He listened intently for anysound within the hospital wing. “Yes, I think you’vegone too — get inside — I’ll lock you in —”

Harry and Hermione slipped back inside thedormitory. It was empty except for Ron, who was stilllying motionless in the end bed. As the lock clickedbehind them, Harry and Hermione crept back to theirown beds, Hermione tucking the Time-Turner backunder her robes. A moment later, Madam Pomfreycame striding back out of her office.

Page | 468 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Did I hear the headmaster leaving? Am I allowed tolook after my patients now?”

She was in a very bad mood. Harry and Hermionethought it best to accept their chocolate quietly.Madam Pomfrey stood over them, making sure theyate it. But Harry could hardly swallow. He andHermione were waiting, listening, their nervesjangling. ... And then, as they both took a fourth pieceof chocolate from Madam Pomfrey, they heard adistant roar of fury echoing from somewhere abovethem. ...

“What was that?” said Madam Pomfrey in alarm.

Now they could hear angry voices, growing louder andlouder. Madam Pomfrey was staring at the door.

“Really — they’ll wake everybody up! What do theythink they’re doing?”

Harry was trying to hear what the voices were saying.They were drawing nearer —

“He must have Disapparated, Severus. We shouldhave left somebody in the room with him. When thisgets out —”

“HE DIDNT DISAPPARATE!” Snape roared, now veryclose at hand. “YOU CANT APPARATE ORDISAPPARATE INSIDE THIS CASTLE! THIS — HAS —SOMETHING — TO — DO — WITH — POTTER!”

“Severus — be reasonable — Harry has been lockedup-”

BAM.

The door of the hospital wing burst open.

Page | 469 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Fudge, Snape, and Dumbledore came striding into theward. Dumbledore alone looked calm. Indeed, helooked as though he was quite enjoying himself.

Fudge appeared angry. But Snape was beside himself.

“OUT WITH IT, POTTER!” he bellowed. “WHAT DIDYOU DO?”

“Professor Snape!” shrieked Madam Pomfrey. “Controlyourself!”

“See here, Snape, be reasonable,” said Fudge. “Thisdoor’s been locked, we just saw —”

“THEY HELPED HIM ESCAPE, I KNOW IT!” Snapehowled, pointing at Harry and Hermione. His face wastwisted; spit was flying from his mouth.

“Calm down, man!” Fudge barked. “You’re talkingnonsense!”

“YOU DONT KNOW POTTER!” shrieked Snape. “HEDID IT, I KNOW HE DID IT —”

“That will do, Severus,” said Dumbledore quietly.“Think about what you are saying. This door has beenlocked since I left the ward ten minutes ago. MadamPomfrey, have these students left their beds?”

“Of course not!” said Madam Pomfrey, bristling. “Iwould have heard them!”

“Well, there you have it, Severus,” said Dumbledorecalmly. “Unless you are suggesting that Harry andHermione are able to be in two places at once, I’mafraid I don’t see any point in troubling them further.”

Snape stood there, seething, staring from Fudge, wholooked thoroughly shocked at his behavior, to

Page | 470 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Dumbledore, whose eyes were twinkling behind hisglasses. Snape whirled about, robes swishing behindhim, and stormed out of the ward.

“Fellow seems quite unbalanced,” said Fudge, staringafter him. “I’d watch out for him if I were you,Dumbledore.”

“Oh, he’s not unbalanced,” said Dumbledore quietly.“He’s just suffered a severe disappointment.”

“He’s not the only one!” puffed Fudge. “The DailyProphet’s going to have a field day! We had Blackcornered and he slipped through our fingers yetagain! All it needs now is for the story of thathippogriff’s escape to get out, and I’ll be alaughingstock! Well ... I’d better go and notify theMinistry. ...”

“And the dementors?” said Dumbledore. “They’ll beremoved from the school, I trust?”

“Oh yes, they’ll have to go,” said Fudge, running hisfingers distractedly through his hair. “Never dreamedthey’d attempt to administer the Kiss on an innocentboy. ... Completely out of control ... no, I’ll have thempacked off back to Azkaban tonight. ... Perhaps weshould think about dragons at the school entrance.

“Hagrid would like that,” said Dumbledore, smiling atHarry and Hermione. As he and Fudge left thedormitory, Madam Pomfrey hurried to the door andlocked it again. Muttering angrily to herself, sheheaded back to her office.

There was a low moan from the other end of the ward.Ron had woken up. They could see him sitting up,rubbing his head, looking around.

Page | 471 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“What — what happened?” he groaned. “Harry? Whyare we in here? Where’s Sirius? Where’s Lupin?

What’s going on?”

Harry and Hermione looked at each other.

“You explain,” said Harry, helping himself to somemore chocolate.

When Harry, Ron, and Hermione left the hospitalwing at noon the next day, it was to find an almostdeserted castle. The sweltering heat and the end ofthe exams meant that everyone was taking fulladvantage of another Hogsmeade visit. Neither Ronnor Hermione felt like going, however, so they andHarry wandered onto the grounds, still talking aboutthe extraordinary events of the previous night andwondering where Sirius and Buckbeak were now.Sitting near the lake, watching the giant squid wavingits tentacles lazily above the water, Harry lost thethread of the conversation as he looked across to theopposite bank. The stag had galloped toward himfrom there just last night. ...

A shadow fell across them and they looked up to see avery bleary-eyed Hagrid, mopping his sweaty face withone of his tablecloth-sized handkerchiefs andbeaming down at them.

“Know I shouldn’ feel happy, after wha’ happened las’night,” he said. “I mean, Black escapin’ again, an’everythin’ — but guess what?”

“What?” they said, pretending to look curious.

“Beaky! He escaped! He’s free! Bin celebratin’ allnight!”

Page | 472 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“That’s wonderful!” said Hermione, giving Ron areproving look because he looked as though he wasclose to laughing.

“Yeah ... can’t’ve tied him up properly,” said Hagrid,gazing happily out over the grounds. “I was worriedthis mornin’, mind ... thought he mighta metProfessor Lupin on the grounds, but Lupin says henever ate anythin’ las’ night. ...”

“What?” said Harry quickly.

“Blimey, haven’ yeh heard?” said Hagrid, his smilefading a little. He lowered his voice, even though therewas nobody in sight. “Er — Snape told all theSlytherins this mornin’. ... Thought everyone’d knowby now ... Professor Lupin’s a werewolf, see. An’ hewas loose on the grounds las’ night. ... He’s packin’now, o’ course.”

“He’s packing?” said Harry, alarmed. “Why?”

“Leavin’, isn’ he?” said Hagrid, looking surprised thatHarry had to ask. “Resigned firs’ thing this mornin’.Says he can’t risk it happenin’ again.”

Harry scrambled to his feet.

“I’m going to see him,” he said to Ron and Hermione.“But if he’s resigned —”

“— doesn’t sound like there’s anything we can do —”

“I don’t care. I still want to see him. I’ll meet you backhere.”

Lupin’s office door was open. He had already packedmost of his things. The grindylow’s empty tank stood

Page | 473 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

next to his battered old suitcase, which was open andnearly full. Lupin was bending over something on hisdesk and looked up only when Harry knocked on thedoor.

“I saw you coming,” said Lupin, smiling. He pointed tothe parchment he had been poring over. It was theMarauder’s Map.

“I just saw Hagrid,” said Harry. “And he said you’dresigned. It’s not true, is it?”

“I’m afraid it is,” said Lupin. He started opening hisdesk drawers and taking out the contents.

“Why?” said Harry. “The Ministry of Magic don’t thinkyou were helping Sirius, do they?”

Lupin crossed to the door and closed it behind Harry.

“No. Professor Dumbledore managed to convinceFudge that I was trying to save your lives.” He sighed.“That was the final straw for Severus. I think the lossof the Order of Merlin hit him hard. So he — er —accidentally let slip that I am a werewolf this morningat breakfast.”

“You’re not leaving just because of that!” said Harry.Lupin smiled wryly.

“This time tomorrow, the owls will start arriving fromparents. ... They will not want a werewolf teachingtheir children, Harry. And after last night, I see theirpoint. I could have bitten any of you. ... That mustnever happen again.”

“You’re the best Defense Against the Dark Artsteacher we’ve ever had!” said Harry. “Don’t go!”

Page | 474 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Lupin shook his head and didn’t speak. He carried onemptying his drawers. Then, while Harry was tryingto think of a good argument to make him stay, Lupinsaid, “From what the headmaster told me thismorning, you saved a lot of lives last night, Harry. IfI’m proud of anything I’ve done this year, it’s howmuch you’ve learned. ... Tell me about yourPatronus.”

“How d’you know about that?” said Harry, distracted.

“What else could have driven the dementors back?”

Harry told Lupin what had happened. When he’dfinished, Lupin was smiling again.

“Yes, your father was always a stag when hetransformed,” he said. “You guessed right ... that’swhy we called him Prongs.”

Lupin threw his last few books into his case, closedthe desk drawers, and turned to look at Harry.

“Here — I brought this from the Shrieking Shack lastnight,” he said, handing Harry back the InvisibilityCloak. “And ...” He hesitated, then held out theMarauder’s Map too. “I am no longer your teacher, soI don’t feel guilty about giving you back this as well.It’s no use to me, and I daresay you, Ron, andHermione will find uses for it.”

Harry took the map and grinned.

“You told me Moony, Wormtail, Padfoot, and Prongswould’ve wanted to lure me out of school ... you saidthey’d have thought it was funny.”

“And so we would have,” said Lupin, now reachingdown to close his case. “I have no hesitation in saying

Page | 475 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

that James would have been highly disappointed ifhis son had never found any of the secret passagesout of the castle.”

There was a knock on the door. Harry hastily stuffedthe Marauder’s Map and the Invisibility Cloak into hispocket.

It was Professor Dumbledore. He didn’t look surprisedto see Harry there.

“Your carriage is at the gates, Remus,” he said.

“Thank you, Headmaster.”

Lupin picked up his old suitcase and the emptygrindylow tank.

“Well — good-bye, Harry,” he said, smiling. “It hasbeen a real pleasure teaching you. I feel sure we’llmeet again sometime. Headmaster, there is no needto see me to the gates, I can manage. ...”

Harry had the impression that Lupin wanted to leaveas quickly as possible.

“Good-bye, then, Remus,” said Dumbledore soberly.Lupin shifted the grindylow tank slightly so that heand Dumbledore could shake hands. Then, with afinal nod to Harry and a swift smile, Lupin left theoffice.

Harry sat down in his vacated chair, staring glumly atthe floor. He heard the door close and looked up.Dumbledore was still there.

“Why so miserable, Harry?” he said quietly. “Youshould be very proud of yourself after last night.”

Page | 476 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“It didn’t make any difference,” said Harry bitterly.“Pettigrew got away.”

“Didn’t make any difference?” said Dumbledorequietly. “It made all the difference in the world, Harry.You helped uncover the truth. You saved an innocentman from a terrible fate.”

Terrible. Something stirred in Harry’s memory.

Greater and more terrible than ever before ... ProfessorTrelawney’s prediction!

“Professor Dumbledore — yesterday, when I washaving my Divination exam, Professor Trelawney wentvery — very strange.”

“Indeed?” said Dumbledore. “Er — stranger thanusual, you mean?”

“Yes ... her voice went all deep and her eyes rolledand she said ... she said Voldemort’s servant wasgoing to set out to return to him before midnight. ...She said the servant would help him come back topower.” Harry stared up at Dumbledore. “And thenshe sort of became normal again, and she couldn’tremember anything she’d said. Was it — was shemaking a real prediction?”

Dumbledore looked mildly impressed.

“Do you know, Harry, I think she might have been,”he said thoughtfully. “Who’d have thought it? Thatbrings her total of real predictions up to two. I shouldoffer her a pay raise. ...”

“But —” Harry looked at him, aghast. How couldDumbledore take this so calmly?

Page | 477 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“But — I stopped Sirius and Professor Lupin fromkilling Pettigrew! That makes it my fault if Voldemortcomes back!”

“It does not,” said Dumbledore quietly. “Hasn’t yourexperience with the Time-Turner taught you anything,Harry? The consequences of our actions are always socomplicated, so diverse, that predicting the future is avery difficult business indeed. ... Professor Trelawney,bless her, is living proof of that. ... You did a verynoble thing, in saving Pettigrew’s life.”

“But if he helps Voldemort back to power — !”

“Pettigrew owes his life to you. You have sentVoldemort a deputy who is in your debt. ... When onewizard saves another wizard’s life, it creates a certainbond between them ... and I’m much mistaken ifVoldemort wants his servant in the debt of HarryPotter.”

“I don’t want a connection with Pettigrew!” said Harry.“He betrayed my parents!”

“This is magic at its deepest, its most impenetrable,Harry. But trust me ... the time may come when youwill be very glad you saved Pettigrew’s life.”

Harry couldn’t imagine when that would be.Dumbledore looked as though he knew what Harrywas thinking.

“I knew your father very well, both at Hogwarts andlater, Harry,” he said gently. “He would have savedPettigrew too, I am sure of it.”

Harry looked up at him. Dumbledore wouldn’t laugh— he could tell Dumbledore ...

Page | 478 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“I thought it was my dad who’d conjured myPatronus. I mean, when I saw myself across the lake...I thought I was seeing him.”

“An easy mistake to make,” said Dumbledore softly. “Iexpect you 11 tire of hearing it, but you do lookextraordinarily like James. Except for the eyes ... youhave your mother’s eyes.”

Harry shook his head.

“It was stupid, thinking it was him,” he muttered. “Imean, I knew he was dead.”

“You think the dead we loved ever truly leave us? Youthink that we don’t recall them more clearly than everin times of great trouble? Your father is alive in you,Harry, and shows himself most plainly when you haveneed of him. How else could you produce thatparticular Patronus? Prongs rode again last night.”

It took a moment for Harry to realize whatDumbledore had said.

“Last night Sirius told me all about how they becameAnimagi,” said Dumbledore, smiling. “Anextraordinary achievement — not least, keeping itquiet from me. And then I remembered the mostunusual form your Patronus took, when it chargedMr. Malfoy down at your Quidditch match againstRavenclaw. You know, Harry, in a way, you did seeyour father last night. ... You found him insideyourself.”

And Dumbledore left the office, leaving Harry to hisvery confused thoughts.

Page | 479 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Nobody at Hogwarts now knew the truth of what hadhappened the night that Sirius, Buckbeak, andPettigrew had vanished except Harry, Ron, Hermione,and Professor Dumbledore. As the end of termapproached, Harry heard many different theoriesabout what had really happened, but none of themcame close to the truth.

Malfoy was furious about Buckbeak. He wasconvinced that Hagrid had found a way of smugglingthe hippogriff to safety, and seemed outraged that heand his father had been outwitted by a gamekeeper.Percy Weasley, meanwhile, had much to say on thesubject of Sirius’s escape.

“If I manage to get into the Ministry, I’ll have a lot ofproposals to make about Magical Law Enforcement!”he told the only person who would listen — hisgirlfriend, Penelope.

Though the weather was perfect, though theatmosphere was so cheerful, though he knew theyhad achieved the near impossible in helping Sirius tofreedom, Harry had never approached the end of aschool year in worse spirits.

He certainly wasn’t the only one who was sorry to seeProfessor Lupin go. The whole of Harry’s DefenseAgainst the Dark Arts class was miserable about hisresignation.

“Wonder what they’ll give us next year?” said SeamusFinnigan gloomily.

“Maybe a vampire,” suggested Dean Thomashopefully.

It wasn’t only Professor Lupin’s departure that wasweighing on Harry’s mind. He couldn’t help thinking a

Page | 480 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

lot about Professor Trelawney’s prediction. He keptwondering where Pettigrew was now, whether he hadsought sanctuary with Voldemort yet. But the thingthat was lowering Harry’s spirits most of all was theprospect of returning to the Dursleys. For maybe halfan hour, a glorious half hour, he had believed hewould be living with Sirius from now on ... hisparents’ best friend. ... It would have been the nextbest thing to having his own father back. And whileno news of Sirius was definitely good news, because itmeant he had successfully gone into hiding, Harrycouldn’t help feeling miserable when he thought ofthe home he might have had, and the fact that it wasnow impossible.

The exam results came out on the last day of term.Harry, Ron, and Hermione had passed every subject.Harry was amazed that he had got through Potions.He had a shrewd suspicion that Dumbledore mighthave stepped in to stop Snape failing him on purpose.Snape’s behavior toward Harry over the past weekhad been quite alarming. Harry wouldn’t havethought it possible that Snape’s dislike for him couldincrease, but it certainly had. A muscle twitchedunpleasantly at the corner of Snape’s thin mouthevery time he looked at Harry, and he was constantlyflexing his fingers, as though itching to place themaround Harry’s throat.

Percy had got his top-grade N.E.W.T.s; Fred andGeorge had scraped a handful of O.W.L.s each.Gryffindor House, meanwhile, largely thanks to theirspectacular performance in the Quidditch Cup, hadwon the House championship for the third yearrunning. This meant that the end of term feast tookplace amid decorations of scarlet and gold, and thatthe Gryffindor table was the noisiest of the lot, aseverybody celebrated. Even Harry managed to forget

Page | 481 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

about the journey back to the Dursleys the next dayas he ate, drank, talked, and laughed with the rest.

As the Hogwarts Express pulled out of the station thenext morning, Hermione gave Harry and Ron somesurprising news.

“I went to see Professor McGonagall this morning, justbefore breakfast. I’ve decided to drop Muggle Studies.”

“But you passed your exam with three hundred andtwenty percent!” said Ron.

“I know,” sighed Hermione, “but I can’t stand anotheryear like this one. That Time-Turner, it was drivingme mad. I’ve handed it in. Without Muggle Studiesand Divination, I’ll be able to have a normal scheduleagain.”

“I still can’t believe you didn’t tell us about it,” saidRon grumpily. “We’re supposed to be your friends.”

“I promised I wouldn’t tell anyone,” said Hermioneseverely. She looked around at Harry, who waswatching Hogwarts disappear from view behind amountain. Two whole months before he’d see it again.

“Oh, cheer up, Harry!” said Hermione sadly.

“I’m okay,” said Harry quickly. “Just thinking aboutthe holidays.”

“Yeah, I’ve been thinking about them too,” said Ron.“Harry, you’ve got to come and stay with us. I’ll fix itup with Mum and Dad, then I’ll call you. I know howto use a fellytone now —”

Page | 482 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“A telephone, Ron,” said Hermione. “Honestly, youshould take Muggle Studies next year. ...”

Ron ignored her.

“It’s the Quidditch World Cup this summer! Howabout it, Harry? Come and stay, and we’ll go and seeit! Dad can usually get tickets from work.”

This proposal had the effect of cheering Harry up agreat deal.

“Yeah ... I bet the Dursleys’d be pleased to let mecome ... especially after what I did to Aunt Marge. ...”

Feeling considerably more cheerful, Harry joined Ronand Hermione in several games of Exploding Snap,and when the witch with the tea cart arrived, hebought himself a very large lunch, though nothingwith chocolate in it.

But it was late in the afternoon before the thing thatmade him truly happy turned up. ...

“Harry,” said Hermione suddenly, peering over hisshoulder. “What’s that thing outside your window?”

Harry turned to look outside. Something very smalland gray was bobbing in and out of sight beyond theglass. He stood up for a better look and saw that itwas a tiny owl, carrying a letter that was much toobig for it. The owl was so small, in fact, that it kepttumbling over in the air, buffeted this way and that inthe train’s slipstream. Harry quickly pulled down thewindow, stretched out his arm, and caught it. It feltlike a very fluffy Snitch. He brought it carefully inside.The owl dropped its letter onto Harry’s seat and beganzooming around their compartment, apparently verypleased with itself for accomplishing its task. HedwigPage | 483 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

clicked her beak with a sort of dignified disapproval.Crookshanks sat up in his seat, following the owl withhis great yellow eyes. Ron, noticing this, snatched theowl safely out of harm’s way.

Harry picked up the letter. It was addressed to him.

He ripped open the letter, and shouted, “It’s fromSirius!”

“What?” said Ron and Hermione excitedly. “Read italoud!”

Dear Harry,

I hope this finds you before you reach your aunt anduncle. I don’t know whether they’re used to owl post

Buckbeak and I are in hiding. I won’t tell you where, incase this owl falls into the wrong hands. I have somedoubt about his reliability, but he is the best I couldfind, and he did seem eager for the job.

I believe the dementors are still searching for me, butthey haven’t a hope of finding me here. I am planningto allow some Muggles to glimpse me soon, a long wayfrom Hogwarts, so that the security on the castle willbe lifted.

There is something I never got around to telling youduring our brief meeting. It was I who sent you theFirebolt —

“Ha!” said Hermione triumphantly. “See! I told you itwas from him!”

“Yes, but he hadn’t jinxed it, had he?” said Ron.“Ouch!” The tiny owl, now hooting happily in hishand, had nibbled one of his fingers in what itseemed to think was an affectionate way.

Page | 484 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

Crookshanks took the order to the Owl Office for me. Iused your name but told them to take the gold from myown Gringotts vault. Please consider it as thirteenbirthdays’ worth of presents from your godfather.

I would also like to apologize for the fright I think Igave you that night last year when you left youruncle’s house. I had only hoped to get a glimpse of youbefore starting my journey north, but I think the sightof me alarmed you.

I am enclosing something else for you, which I thinkwill make your next year at Hogwarts more enjoyable.

If ever you need me, send word. Your owl will find me.

I’ll write again soon.

Sirius

Harry looked eagerly inside the envelope. There wasanother piece of parchment in there. He read itthrough quickly and felt suddenly as warm andcontented as though he’d swallowed a bottle of hotbutterbeer in one gulp.

I, Sirius Black, Harry Potter’s godfather, hereby givehim permission to visit Hogsmeade on weekends.

“That’ll be good enough for Dumbledore!” said Harryhappily. He looked back at Sirius’s letter.

“Hang on, there’s a P.S. ...”

I thought your friend Ron might like to keep this owl,as it’s my fault he no longer has a rat.

Ron’s eyes widened. The minute owl was still hootingexcitedly.

Page | 485 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Keep him?” he said uncertainly. He looked closely atthe owl for a moment; then, to Harry’s andHermione’s great surprise, he held him out forCrookshanks to sniff.

“What do’you reckon?” Ron asked the cat. “Definitelyan owl?”

Crookshanks purred.

“That’s good enough for me,” said Ron happily. “He’smine.”

Harry read and reread the letter from Sirius all theway back into King’s Cross station. It was stillclutched tightly in his hand as he, Ron, andHermione stepped back through the barrier ofplatform nine and three-quarters. Harry spottedUncle Vernon at once. He was standing a gooddistance from Mr. and Mrs. Weasley, eyeing themsuspiciously, and when Mrs. Weasley hugged Harry ingreeting, his worst suspicions about them seemedconfirmed.

“I’ll call about the World Cup!” Ron yelled after Harryas Harry bid him and Hermione good-bye, thenwheeled the trolley bearing his trunk and Hedwig’scage toward Uncle Vernon, who greeted him in hisusual fashion.

“What’s that?” he snarled, staring at the envelopeHarry was still clutching in his hand. “If it’s anotherform for me to sign, you’ve got another —”

“It’s not,” said Harry cheerfully. “It’s a letter from mygodfather.”

“Godfather?” sputtered Uncle Vernon. “You haven’tgot a godfather!”

Page | 486 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling

“Yes, I have,” said Harry brightly. “He was my mumand dad’s best friend. He’s a convicted murderer, buthe’s broken out of wizard prison and he’s on the run.He likes to keep in touch with me, though ... keep upwith my news ... check if I’m happy. ...”

And, grinning broadly at the look of horror on UncleVernon’s face, Harry set off toward the station exit,Hedwig rattling along in front of him, for what lookedlike a much better summer than the last.

Page | 487 Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban - J.K. Rowling





